Sedition Act 1948

The Sedition Act 1948 () in Malaysia is a law prohibiting discourse deemed as seditious. The act was originally enacted by the colonial authorities of British Malaya in 1948 to contain the local communist insurgence. The act criminalises speech with "seditious tendency", including that which would "bring into hatred or contempt or to excite disaffection against" the government or engender "feelings of ill-will and hostility between different races". The meaning of "seditious tendency" is defined in section 3 of the Sedition Act 1948 and in substance it is similar to the English common law definition of sedition, with modifications to suit local circumstances. The Malaysian definition includes the questioning of certain portions of the Constitution of Malaysia, namely those pertaining to the Malaysian social contract, such as Article 153, which deals with special rights for the bumiputra (Malays and other indigenous peoples, who comprise over half the Malaysian population).

The Sedition Act 1948, in its current form (4 June 2015), consists of 11 sections and no schedule (including 6 amendments), without separate Part.

The law was introduced by the British in 1948, the same year that the autonomous Federation of Malaya came into being, with the intent of curbing opposition to colonial rule. The law remained on the statute books through independence in 1957, and the merger with Sabah, Sarawak and Singapore that formed Malaysia.

The Federal Constitution of Malaya and later Malaysia permitted Parliament to impose restrictions on the freedom of speech granted by the Constitution. After the May 13 Incident, when racial riots in the capital of Kuala Lumpur led to at least 200 deaths, the government amended the Constitution to expand the scope of limitations on freedom of speech. The Constitution (Amendment) Act 1971 named Articles 152, 153, and 181, and also Part III of the Constitution as specially protected, permitting Parliament to pass legislation that would limit dissent with regard to these provisions pertaining to the social contract. (The social contract is essentially a "quid pro quo" agreement between the Malay and non-Malay citizens of Peninsular Malaysia; in return for granting the non-Malays citizenship at independence, symbols of Malay authority such as the Malay monarchy became national symbols, and the Malays were granted special economic privileges.) With this new power, Parliament then amended the Sedition Act accordingly. The new restrictions also applied to Members of Parliament, overruling Parliamentary immunity; at the same time, Article 159, which governs Constitutional amendments, was amended to entrench the "sensitive" Constitutional provisions; in addition to the consent of Parliament, any changes to the "sensitive" portions of the Constitution would now have to pass the Conference of Rulers, a body comprising the monarchs of the Malay states.

These later amendments were harshly criticised by the opposition parties in Parliament, who had campaigned for greater political equality for non-Malays in the 1969 general election. Despite their opposition, the ruling Alliance (later Barisan Nasional) coalition government passed the amendments, having maintained the necessary two-thirds Parliamentary majority. In Britain, the laws were condemned, with "The Times" of London stating they would "preserve as immutable the feudal system dominating Malay society" by "giving this archaic body of petty constitutional monarchs incredible blocking power"; the move was cast as hypocritical, given that Deputy Prime Minister Tun Abdul Razak had spoken of "the full realization that important matters must no longer be swept under the carpet..."

There have been several challenges to the constitutionality of the Sedition Act. In 2016, Malaysia's Court of Appeal ruled that the section of the Act which states that the intention of a person charged under the Act is "irrelevant" was unconstitutional.

The Sedition Act would be unconstitutional, as the Constitution guarantees freedom of speech, without Article 10(2) of the Constitution, which permits Parliament to enact "such restrictions as it deems necessary or expedient in the interest of the security of the Federation or any part thereof, friendly relations with other countries, public order or morality and restrictions designed to protect the privileges of Parliament or of any Legislative Assembly or to provide against contempt of court, defamation, or incitement to any offence". Article 10(4) also states that "Parliament may pass law prohibiting the questioning of any matter, right, status, position, privilege, sovereignty or prerogative established or protected by the provisions of Part III, article 152, 153 or 181 otherwise than in relation to the implementation thereof as may be specified in such law".

These portions of the Constitution have been criticised by human rights advocates, who charge that "under the Malaysian Constitution, the test is not whether or not the restriction is necessarily but the much lower standard of whether or not Parliament deems the restrictions necessary or even expedient. There is no objective requirement that the restriction actually is necessary or expedient and the latter standard is much lower than that of necessity."

Section 4 of the Sedition Act specifies that anyone who "does or attempts to do, or makes any preparation to do, or conspires with any person to do" an act with seditious tendency, such as uttering seditious words, or printing, publishing or importing seditious literature, is guilty of sedition. It is also a crime to possess a seditious publication without a "lawful excuse". The act defines sedition itself as anything which "when applied or used in respect of any act, speech, words, publication or other thing qualifies the act, speech, words, publication or other thing as having a seditious tendency".

Under section 3(1), those acts defined as having a seditious tendency are acts with a tendency:

Section 3(2) provides certain exceptions, providing examples of speech which cannot be deemed seditious. It is not seditious to "show that any Ruler has been misled or mistaken in any of his measures", nor is it seditious "to point out errors or defects in the Government or Constitution as by law established". It is also not seditious "to attempt to procure by lawful means the alteration of any matter in the territory of such Government as by law established" or "to point out, with a view to their removal, any matters producing or having a tendency to produce feelings of ill-will and enmity between different races or classes of the population of the Federation". However, the act explicitly states that any matter covered by subsection (1)(f), namely those matters pertaining to the Malaysian social contract, cannot have these exceptions applied to it.

Section 3(3) goes on to state that "the intention of the person charged at the time he did or attempted (a seditious act) ... shall be deemed to be irrelevant if in fact the act had, or would, if done, have had, or the words, publication or thing had a seditious tendency". This latter provision has been criticised for overruling "mens rea", a legal principle stating that a person cannot be guilty of a crime if he did not have the intent to commit a crime.

A person found guilty of sedition may be sentenced to three years in jail, a RM5,000 fine, or both.

In recent times, the law has been invoked to quell the political opposition. Famously in 2000, Marina Yusoff, a former vice president of the National Justice Party (Parti Keadilan Nasional) was charged with sedition for alleging that the United Malays National Organisation (UMNO), had provoked the massacres of the Chinese during the May 13 Incident. The editor for the opposition was also charged with sedition for alleging a government conspiracy against Anwar Ibrahim, a former Deputy Prime Minister, had led to his political downfall. Anwar's lead counsel, Karpal Singh, who was also deputy chairman of the opposition Democratic Action Party (DAP), had also been charged with sedition after claiming Anwar had been poisoned by "people in high places". Lim Guan Eng, a former Member of Parliament from the opposing party DAP, had also been found guilty of sedition in 1998 for accusing the Attorney General of failing to properly handle a case where the Chief Minister of Malacca had been charged with statutory rape of a schoolgirl.

In 2003, the act was also invoked by then Deputy Prime Minister Abdullah Ahmad Badawi (who succeeded Mahathir bin Mohamad as Prime Minister of Malaysia later that year); Abdullah stated that the government would charge people with sedition if they opposed the change in educational policy that puts more emphasis on the teaching of science and mathematics in English. That same year, the online publication "Malaysiakini" was temporarily shut down under the Sedition Act after it published a letter criticising Malay special rights and compared the Youth wing of a government party to the Ku Klux Klan. Previously in 1978, the Sedition Act had been invoked in another case of educational policy, when Mark Koding argued in Parliament that the government ought to close down Chinese and Tamil vernacular schools.

In 2006, the DAP, which had been a vocal opponent of the Sedition Act and the Internal Security Act (ISA), filed a police report against UMNO, whose annual general assembly had been noted for its heated rhetoric, with delegates making statements such as "Umno is willing to risk lives and bathe in blood to defend the race and religion. Don't play with fire. If they (non-Malays) messed with our rights, we will mess with theirs." In response, Information Minister Zainuddin Maidin said that this indicated that the Sedition Act continued to remain relevant to Malaysian society. He also denied that the government intentionally used the act to silence dissent or to advance particular political interests.

In November 2020, a student group at the University of Malaya called the Association of New Youth (UMANY) was investigated under the Sedition Act after posting an article on Facebook titled “Yang di-Pertuan Agong should not intervene in national affairs". Amnesty International Malaysia published an article that described this investigation as "appalling" and claimed that it "violated the students freedom of expression."

Since 2011, former Primer Minister Najib Razak has made several promises to abolish the Sedition Act. However in 2015, he went back on his word and made amendments to the 1948 Act that strengthened it instead. For example, it included an online media ban and mandatory jail following the arrest of a Malaysian cartoonist over a series of tweets. Sharp criticism followed the passing of the law from the top United Nations human rights official Zeid Ra'ad Al Hussein.

The government has said that these amendments were made to prevent malicious individuals from using the Internet to cause racial disharmony and divisions in Malaysian society. Former Minister of Home Affairs, Zahid Hamidi, stated that the "unity of the country remains our topmost priority," and that the Act is not meant to suppress the freedom of speech, but to prevent people from making statements that would "destabilise the country".

Some key amendments to the Act include:

It is still an offence to bring hatred, contempt or to excite disaffection against any Ruler or Government in Malaysia. The amendment has not been fully passed in the Parliament as of 5 October 2023. 

After the word "publishes", the words "or caused to be publish" has now been added under Section 4. It also substituted the word "import" to "propagate" seditious publication under Section 4. The Act does not clearly define what "propagate" means. Some people, including an article published by "The Star", have claimed that these amendments were made with current forms of dissent in mind, such as critical postings on social media. This is because individuals can now be charged with sedition for retweeting or reposting content, without being the original publisher of that content.

The new section 5A gives the court discretion "to prevent a person who is charged under section 4 who is released on bail from leaving Malaysia."

The amended section 10 empowers the court to make a prohibition order to prohibit the making or circulation of any seditious publication if the continued circulation of the publication would likely lead to "bodily injury or damage to property" or "feelings of ill will, hostility or hatred" between the "different races or classes" of Malaysia or between persons on "the grounds of religion".

The new Section 10(1A)(b) allows the court to make a prohibition order to "remove any Seditious publications which is made by electronic means such as online publication" and prohibits the person circulating the prohibited publication from using any electronic devices.

The new section 10A also gives the courts special powers to issue orders involving prohibited publication through electronic means. If the publication is considered to be seditious, "the Sessions Court Judge shall make an order directing an officer authorized under the Communications and Multimedia Act 1998 [Act 588] to prevent access to such publication.” Zahid Hamidi stated that these amendments were made because the changing political landscape where people can easily spread seditious remarks through the Internet - "Last time, there was no Internet and non-verbal communication over social media. Those days, we didn't have groups of people inciting people (in Sabah and Sarawak) to get out of Malaysia.

Human rights advocates such from organizations such as Amnesty International and Article 19 have made consistent claims that the Sedition Act is an attack on the freedom of speech in Malaysia. Critics argue that the definition of sedition in the Act is vague or overly "broad and inflexible", which could "potentially lead to an "overreach" or an "abusive application of the law". In November 2020, Amnesty International Malaysia launched a virtual campaign called "Unsilenced" to urge the Malaysian government to repeal and amend the laws that suppress the freedom of speech in Malaysia. The Sedition Act is one of these laws, other laws include the Communications and Multimedia Act and the Film Censorship Act.



Angustinaripterus

Angustinaripterus was a basal pterosaur, belonging to the breviquartossan family Rhamphorhynchidae (more specifically within the subfamily Rhamphorhynchinae) and discovered at Dashanpu near Zigong in the Sichuan province of China.

"Angustinaripterus" was named in 1983 by He Xinlu. The type species is "Angustinaripterus longicephalus". The genus name is derived from Latin "angustus", "narrow" and "naris", "nostril", combined with Latinized Greek "pteron", "wing". The specific name is derived from Latin "longus", "long", and Greek "kephale", "head".

The holotype, ZDM T8001, is a single skull with lower jaws, found in 1981 by researchers from the Zigong Historical Museum of the Salt Industry, in the Xiashaximiao Formation (Bathonian).

The skull of "Angustinaripterus", of which the left side is severely damaged, is very elongated and flat. The back part is missing; in its preserved state it has a length of ; the total length in a complete state was estimated at . On its top is a low crest, high. The nares are long, slit-like and positioned above and in front of the large skull openings, the "fenestrae antorbitales", with which they are not confluent. Of the jaws, which are very straight, the front part is lacking. There are six pairs of teeth in the maxillae and three pairs in the premaxillae. In the mandible there are at least ten pairs of teeth, perhaps twelve. The back teeth are small, the front teeth are very long, robust and curved, pointing moderately forward. At the front they form a large, intermeshing "prey grab", that may have been used to snatch fish from the water surface. The teeth of "Angustinaripterus" resemble those of "Dorygnathus".

Peter Wellnhofer in 1991, assuming the skull length was , estimated the wingspan at .

Xinlu placed "Angustinaripterus" into the family Rhamphorhynchidae. Because of the derived morphology and the large geographical distance with comparable European forms He also created a special subfamily Angustinaripterinae, of which " Angustinaripterus" itself is the only known member; because of this redundancy the concept is rarely used. He concluded that "Angustinaripterus" was directly related to the Scaphognathinae. David Unwin however, considers it a member of the other rhamphorhynchid subgroup: the Rhamphorhynchinae.

The "cladogram" (family tree) below is a phylogenetic analysis published by the paleontologists Brian Andres & Timothy Myers in 2013. They recovered "Angustinaripterus" as derived rhamphorhynchine, within the tribe Angustinaripterini, sister taxon to "Sericipterus".




Āraiši lake dwelling site

Āraiši lake dwelling site () is a tourist location with original and reconstructed remnants of Latvian prehistory. It is a unique nationally important archaeological site with remains of the 9th–10th centuries Latgalian fortified settlement.

Today the lake dwelling is partially reconstructed and visitors can see rebuilt prehistoric Latgalian wooden buildings.

During the excavations, remains of 151 wooden buildings were discovered, with 3700 artifacts and about a hundred thousand fragments of pottery.

Using collected data, ethnographic parallels and replicas of ancient tools, today there are 14 reconstructed buildings of the first period of the construction of the fortified settlement.

Āraiši archaeological museum park is a member of the EXARC organization of open-air archaeological museums throughout Europe.



Shaun Hampson

Shaun Hampson (born 21 March 1988) is a former Australian rules footballer who played 98 games across a 12-year career with the and Richmond Football Club in the Australian Football League (AFL).

Hampson excelled at sport at school, including athletics, swimming and soccer. He did not begin playing Australian football until 2004. He then joined Mount Gravatt Football Club in 2005, and by the end of the year he was the club's number one ruckman. 

Hampson was drafted in the priority round of the 2006 AFL Draft by the Carlton Football Club (17th pick overall). He made his debut with Carlton in Round 21, 2007 against North Melbourne.

Hampson struggled with short-sightedness early in his career, and had laser eye surgery prior to the 2012 season to correct it.

Hampson played 63 senior games for Carlton from 2007 until the end of the 2013 season. He was traded to Richmond in October 2013, in exchange for pick 28 in the AFL Draft. Hampson made his senior debut for Richmond in round one of the 2014 season, against the Gold Coast Suns.

Hampson was affected by a back injury in 2017 and did not manage to play a match at AFL level. He also managed just six appearances with the club's reserves side in the VFL.

He played in round 1 of the VFL season in 2018 but did not play another match after that due to a re-occurrence of the same back issues. Hampson announced his immediate retirement from AFL football on 26 June 2018, citing the ongoing effects of his two-year back troubles.

! scope="row" style="text-align:center" | 2007
! scope="row" style="text-align:center" | 2008
! scope="row" style="text-align:center" | 2009
! scope="row" style="text-align:center" | 2010
! scope="row" style="text-align:center" | 2011
! scope="row" style="text-align:center" | 2012
! scope="row" style="text-align:center" | 2013
! scope="row" style="text-align:center" | 2014
! scope="row" style="text-align:center" | 2015
! scope="row" style="text-align:center" | 2016
! scope="row" style="text-align:center" | 2017
! scope="row" style="text-align:center" | 2018
! colspan=3| Career
! 98
! 38
! 35
! 332
! 455
! 787
! 262
! 159
! 2035
! 0.4
! 0.4
! 3.4
! 4.6
! 8.0
! 2.7
! 1.6
! 20.8

In January 2011, Hampson began a relationship with Australian model Megan Gale. The pair's first child was born in May 2014. Their daughter Rosie was born in September 2017. Hampson and Gale announced their engagement in July 2017. 

In 2019, Hampson competed in the sixth season of "Australian Survivor", also known as "Australian Survivor: Champions vs Contenders". He was eliminated on day 32, finishing in 11th place. In 2023, he would return to compete on "." He would improve from his original season, but would be eliminated on Day 37, finishing in 8th place and becoming the third member of the jury.


Beszterec

Beszterec is a village in Szabolcs-Szatmár-Bereg county, in the Northern Great Plain region of eastern Hungary.

It covers an area of and has a population of 1132 people (2001).

Peter Lorenz

Peter Lorenz (22 December 1922 – 6 December 1987) was a German politician of the Christian Democratic Union (CDU).

In 1975 Lorenz was a candidate for mayor of West Berlin. He was kidnapped by the 2 June Movement group three days before the elections on 27 February. The group demanded a release of several imprisoned left-wing militants, including 2 June Movement members Verena Becker and Gabriele Kröcher-Tiedemann as well as Horst Mahler, one of the founders of the Red Army Faction (RAF) and Munich Tupamaros member Rolf Heissler.
Although Mahler refused to be exchanged, the other prisoners were set free. 

After the terrorists had been flown out to Aden, South Yemen, Lorenz was set free on 4 March. He had won the plurality (43.9%) of votes while being absent, nevertheless Klaus Schütz, relying on a coalition of Social Democrats and Free Democrats, remained mayor.

One of the freed prisoners, Rolf Heissler, became a member of the group which abducted Hanns-Martin Schleyer in 1977 to exchange him for imprisoned RAF members. After the operation had failed, Schleyer was killed. Heissler was one of his two murderers.


Ligustrum lucidum

Ligustrum lucidum, the broad-leaf privet, Chinese privet, glossy privet, tree privet or wax-leaf privet, is a species of flowering plant in the olive family Oleaceae, native to the southern half of China and naturalized in many places. The name "Chinese privet" is also used for "Ligustrum sinense".

The Latin specific epithet "lucidum" means "bright" or "shiny", referring to the leaves.

"Ligustrum lucidum" is an evergreen tree growing to tall and broad"." The leaves are opposite, glossy dark green, long and broad. The flowers are similar to other privets, white or near white, borne in panicles, and have a strong fragrance, which some people find unpleasant.

Native to southern China, it has been naturalized in Spain, Italy, Algeria, Canary Islands, New Zealand, Lesotho, South Africa, Japan, Korea, Australia, Norfolk Island, Chiapas, Central America, Argentina, Uruguay, and the southern United States (California, Arizona, Maryland, and the southeast from Texas to North Carolina).

"Ligustrum lucidum" is often used as an ornamental tree, sometimes in variegated forms. It is also one of several species of privet used as dense, evergreen hedges, which can be trained to a specific size and shape by regular pruning.

"Ligustrum lucidum" and the variegated cultivar 'Excelsum Superbum' have gained the Royal Horticultural Society's Award of Garden Merit.

It has become an invasive species in some areas where it has been introduced, such as urban areas in the southeastern United States. It is classed as a noxious weed in New South Wales, Australia, and is similarly listed in New Zealand's National Pest Plant Accord.

It is the origin of Chinese insect wax from the "Ericerus pela" used for making candles.

The seeds are known as "nu zhen zi" (female chastity seed/berry) in traditional Chinese medicine and are believed to nourish liver and kidney yin and jing in the treatment of tinnitus (ringing in the ears), vertigo (dizziness), premature graying of the hair, and soreness/weakness of the lower back and knees. Due to the belief in the berries' ability to nourish the liver, they are also used in the treatment of disorders of the eye involving red or dry eyes, blurred vision, and pain.

"Ligustrum" means "binder".

The Latin specific epithet "lucidum" means "bright" or "shiny", referring to the leaves.



Daniel Klewer

Daniel Klewer (born 4 March 1977) is a German former footballer.

Klewer was born in Rostock, East Germany, and joined the youth team of his home team, Hansa Rostock, at the age of six. After going through all of their junior squads, he broke into the first-team squad for the first time in the 1997–98 season sitting on the bench as a substitute goalkeeper for several matches. His first-team debut on the pitch, however, did not come until four seasons later. Before that he had served as a first-choice keeper for Rostock's reserve team and a third-string goalkeeper for the Bundesliga squad.

In March 2002 Klewer played his first Bundesliga game after the first and second-choice keepers were out with injury and suspension respectively. Klewer stayed first-choice for the remaining eight games of the 2001–02 season, which saw Rostock stave off relegation. At the beginning of the following season Klewer stepped back behind regular first-choice keeper Matthias Schober but advanced to a second-string position. He only saw action twice more in 2003–04 season before opting to leave Rostock after twenty-one years of playing for the club.

He joined 1. FC Nürnberg in the summer of 2004 but could not unseat Raphael Schäfer as the starting goalkeeper, playing merely five games in the 2004–05 season when substituting for an injured Schäfer. next season he saw no Bundesliga action at all, playing just twice in DFB-Pokal matches. He reprised his role as replacement goalkeeper once again in the 2006–07 playing in one league game and two cup matches until the end of 2006. In the third round cup match against Unterhaching he saved four penalties in the shoot-out and secured Nürnberg a spot in the quarter-finals. He did a tremendous job in the quarter-final on 27 February 2007 and saved two penalties against Hanover in the shoot-out and brought his team into the semi-finals of the DFB-Pokal.

He work as goalkeeping coach for 1. FC Nürnberg. He started as goalkeeping coach in July 2011 for the reserve team and was there until he was promoted to the first team in July 2014 On 11 November 2014, the day after Valérien Ismaël was sacked, Klewer, along with Markus Zidek, led training for the club.


Fall River Secondary

The Fall River Subdivision is a freight railroad line in the U.S. state of Massachusetts, owned by the Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority, with freight operations handled by the Massachusetts Coastal Railroad; it was formerly owned and operated by CSX Transportation. The line runs from the New Bedford Subdivision at Myricks (in Berkley) south to Fall River along a former New York, New Haven and Hartford Railroad line. At its south end, at the Rhode Island state line in Fall River, it becomes a line of the Providence and Worcester Railroad.

The Fall River Branch Railroad completed the line from Myricks south to Fall River in 1845. The Old Colony and Newport Railway extended the line to Newport, Rhode Island, in 1864. The line later became part of the NYNH&H until 1958. Penn Central then took over in 1968, followed by Conrail, who took over in 1976. The Fall River Subdivision was assigned to CSX in 1999 after the breakup of Conrail.

On October 2, 2008, the state government announced an agreement with CSX Transportation for the purchase and upgrade of several of CSX's freight lines in the state. CSX agreed to sell the Fall River Secondary and New Bedford Secondary for use by the South Coast Rail project, as well as the Grand Junction Branch, the Framingham-to-Worcester section of the Worcester Line, and the South Boston Running Track. Other parts of the agreement included plans for double-stack freights west of Worcester and the abandonment of Beacon Park Yard. The agreement was signed on September 23, 2009. On June 11, 2010, the state and CSX completed the first phase of the agreement, including the transfer of the South Coast Rail lines to MassDOT; the Massachusetts Coastal Railroad assumed freight rights on the two lines. The two lines were sold for $21.5 million.

The line is currently used primarily to transport chemicals to Borden & Remington in Fall River.


Shaun Grigg

Shaun Grigg (born 19 April 1988) is a former professional Australian rules footballer who played 171 games for and 43 games for over a 13-year AFL career. He was a premiership player with Richmond in 2017, an Under 18 All Australian and twice placed in the top five in Richmond club best and fairests.

Grigg grew up in the Victorian country town of Linton, 33 kilometres south-west of Ballarat. He attended high school at St Patrick's College. He was part of the school's First XVIII football side which won the coveted Herald Sun Shield in 2005. He played with Redan in his younger years before joining the North Ballarat Rebels in the TAC Cup. In 2006 he represented the Victorian Country side at the national Under 18 championships where he won All-Australian selection. At the 2006 AFL Draft Combine he recorded a top 10 time in the 20 metre sprint.

Grigg was selected by with the club's second pick and the 19th overall in the 2006 AFL National draft.

He suffered a shoulder injury early in the 2007 season and struggled as a result. He played matches early in the season with Carlton's , the Northern Bullants. Grigg made his AFL debut against in Round 14, 2007 and played a total of 5 games for the season.
Grigg earned a regular position in the Carlton team throughout 2008, playing 20 senior games and receiving a nomination for the NAB Rising Star award in Round 19. He kicked his first career goal in Round 4, 2008 in a match against .

Over the next two seasons however, Grigg struggled to play regularly in the senior side, playing only a combined total of 18 games for the club.

In October 2010 Grigg asked to be traded from the Carlton Football Club with his desired trade destination. He cited a desire for greater on-field opportunities as his key reason for seeking the move. A deal was finalised eight days later, with Grigg involved in a straight swap for Tigers' midfielder Andrew Collins. He had played 43 games for the club over his four-year tenure.

Grigg made his debut for Richmond in Round 1 of the 2011 season in a match against his former club at the MCG.
He finished his first season at Richmond having played 21 games and recording an average of 22 disposals per game. It was a then-career best year in all major statistical categories including total disposals, marks, tackles and goals.

In 2012 Grigg was one of the most improved players in the league. He kicked a career-best three goals in a Round 7 clash with . He played all 22 matches that season and recorded a career best 561 disposals, good for fourth best at the club. He finished in fifth place in the club'sbest & fairest award, receiving the Kevin Bartlett Medal for his efforts. Grigg also polled a career best 11 votes in the Brownlow Medal, placing third at the club that season.

He would again play all possible matches in 2013, including a role in his first final at Richmond; a loss against former club Carlton. He polled 5 votes in the Brownlow medal count that year, placing equal fifth of all Richmond players that season.

2014 saw Grigg's first injury affected season at Richmond. After playing in the club's first 10 matches, he went on to miss the next eight due to a hamstring injury sustained in a Round 11 match-up with .
He again played in the club's finals campaign, kicking a goal in an elimination final defeat at the hands of . Grigg played as a tagger for much of the season. He finished the season having played 15 games, his lowest total in his time at Richmond.

In 2015 Grigg would return to form, playing in all possible matches for the third time in four seasons. As a contested-ball player, he led the club for tackles that year, with a career-best total of 98 across 23 matches. His performance in Round 15 was particularly praiseworthy, with Grigg picking up the second-most coaches votes of any Tiger for his 25 disposal and seven clearance effort. He played his 100th match for Richmond that year, in a Round 20 match against .

Grigg played parts of the 2016 season in a new role as an inside midfielder. In the 2016 pre-season Grigg suffered a fractured left thumb. He defied initial expectations to return to fitness for the club's Round 2 match against Collingwood, missing just one match in the process. Grigg recorded a career-high 38 disposals in Richmond's Round 11 loss to . He went on to play in a total of 20 matches that season. Grigg earned his second Kevin Bartlett Medal in 2016, after placing fourth at the club for disposals, tackles and clearances as well as second in inside 50 entries.

In 2017, Richmond coach Damien Hardwick labelled Grigg the smartest footballer at Richmond, noting his ability to 'read the game' a fraction faster than others. By that season he was the oldest player in Richmond's regular AFL team and the second oldest contracted player at the club behind only Ivan Maric.

Grigg suffered a hamstring strain in the lead-up to round 7, 2018 and missed that match as a result. He was considered a "touch and go" chance to play the following week but ultimately missed his second straight match. He made his return in round 9, called up as a late-replacement for first-year forward Jack Higgins.

On 14 May 2019, Grigg announced his immediate retirement from AFL football, having failed to play a match at any level that season due to persistent knee and hip injures. His decision to retire mid-season allowed Richmond a list spot to use at the 2019 mid-season rookie draft, which was used to recruit eventual 2019 premiership player Marlion Pickett.

He concluded his career having played 214 AFL matches.

In October 2019, Grigg joined the Geelong Football Club coaching panel as a development coach.

! scope="row" style="text-align:center" | 2007
! scope="row" style="text-align:center" | 2008
! scope="row" style="text-align:center" | 2009
! scope="row" style="text-align:center" | 2010
! scope="row" style="text-align:center" | 2011
! scope="row" style="text-align:center" | 2012
! scope="row" style="text-align:center" | 2013
! scope="row" style="text-align:center" | 2014
! scope="row" style="text-align:center" | 2015
! scope="row" style="text-align:center" | 2016
! scope="row" style="text-align:center" | 2017
! scope="row" style="text-align:center" | 2018
! scope="row" style="text-align:center" | 2019
! colspan=3| Career
! 214
! 96
! 84
! 2469
! 2092
! 4561
! 1054
! 638
! 0.4
! 0.4
! 11.5
! 9.8
! 21.3
! 4.9
! 3.0

In 2011 Grigg was a member of the Australian squad for a two match International rules series against Ireland and played two matches.

Team

Individual

Junior

Grigg is married to wife Sarah. The couple had their first child, Sonny, in June 2014. They had a second son, Spencer Leigh, in December 2017.

He is a part-owner in multiple "SpudBar" franchise restaurants.


Listed buildings in Ashford, Kent

There are over 3,000 Listed Buildings in and around Ashford, Kent, which are buildings of architectural historic interest.


Abdelilah Fahmi

Abdelilah Fahmi (; born 3 August 1973) is a Moroccan former footballer who played as a defender.

Fahmi appeared in 11 Turkish Super Lig matches for Gaziantepspor during the 2005–06 season.

He was part of the Moroccan 2000 African Nations Cup team, which finished third in group D in the first round of competition, thus failing to secure qualification for the quarter-finals.

LOSC Lille


RC Strasbourg


TGN Atlantic

TGN Atlantic (TGN-A) previously VSNL Transatlantic and TGN Transatlantic, is a submarine telecommunications cable system transiting the Atlantic Ocean. The cable has been in operation since 2001.

The cable was operated by the American corporation Tyco International until it was acquired for 130 million US$ by India's Videsh Sanchar Nigam Limited (VSNL) in 2005. 
Since 2008 VSNL was rebranded as Tata Communications and the cable was named "TGN-A" for Tata Global Network Atlantic.

The cable system is constructed from two separate cables routed slightly differently, but both cables terminate in the same locality at each end. Each cable is constructed with 4 fibre pairs per cable, and each fibre pair supports 64 10Gbit/s waves at construction, allowing for a total lit capacity (at construction) of 2 cables x 4 fibre pairs x 64 10 Gbit/s waves = 5.120 Tbit/s.

It has landing points in:


Anne van Schuppen

Antje ("Anne") Elisabeth van Schuppen (born 11 October 1960 in Doornspijk, Gelderland) is a former long-distance runner from the Netherlands, who represented her native country at the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta, Georgia. There she finished in 41st place, clocking 2:40:46. She won the Rotterdam Marathon on 18 April 1993 in a time of 2:34:15. She won the City-Pier-City Loop half marathon in the Hague in 1992.

<br>

Stephen Baidoo

Stephen Baidoo (born 25 February 1976, in Sekondi-Takoradi) is a Ghanaian former football player who last played for King Faisal Babes. He previously played domestically for Great Eagles of Tamale and Goldfields Obuasi and in Turkey for MKE Ankaragücü and Samsunspor.

Baidoo was part of the Ghanaian 2000 African Nations Cup team, who exited in the quarter-finals after losing to South Africa. He was also a member of the Ghanaian squad at the 1996 Summer Olympics.


Irving Crane

Irving Crane (November 13, 1913 – November 17, 2001), nicknamed "the Deacon", was an American pool player from Livonia, New York, and ranks among the stellar players in the history of the sport. Widely considered one of the greatest pool players of all time, and a member of the Billiard Congress of America Hall of Fame, he is best known for his mastery in the game of straight pool (14.1 continuous) at which he won numerous championships, including six World Straight Pool Championship titles.

Crane's fascination with billiards started at age 11, sparked by play on a toy pool table his brother received as a Christmas gift. When he showed interest and ability, his father Scott Crane, a trial lawyer and sportsman, and his mother, a high school teacher, soon replaced their dining room table with a 4' by 8' pool table. He soon ventured out of the home to practice a couple days each week at Olympic Billiards, a room that was part of a bowling alley in Scottsville, a suburb of Rochester, New York. Crane stated in 1998: "Other kids, you know they'd play for twenty minutes or half an hour and they'd say, 'let's do something else.' I could play all day and never get enough. I couldn't wait to get home from school to play."

Crane's status as a wunderkind was quickly evident; although he was entirely self-taught, at 14 he ran 89 balls in straight pool at a local pool room, calling each shot in advance, as is mandatory in straight pool. Following this feat, his parents replaced the smaller table with a full size tournament table. Over the next ten years some of the best players of the era, including Willie Hoppe and Andrew Ponzi, came to practice with the promising champion. Despite consistent play throughout his teenage years, Crane did not enter any tournaments until he was 23 years old.

In February 1939, at age 26, Crane 150 balls against his opponent in an exhibition straight pool match on a difficult 5' by 10' table in Layton, Utah. While this was impressive in and of itself, at the crowd's urging, he continued his run, ultimately pocketing 309 consecutive setting an official record at the time.

This coup was soon followed by his first world title in 1942. Over the following three decades, Crane won almost two dozen major championships, including the World Straight Pool Championship in 1942, 1946, 1955, 1968, 1970 and 1972, the Ballantine International Championship in 1965, the International Roundrobin championship in 1968, and the World Series of Pool in 1978. Of these triumphs, his win at the 1966 BCA U.S. Open Straight Pool Championship is one of the most celebrated, him running 150 and out in the finals, never letting his opponent back to the table after an early safety battle; an accomplishment that has never been equalled in the tournament. Crane also holds the record for the most runner-up finishes at the World Straight Pool Championship on 13 occasions.

Despite his mastery and world renown, Crane found it hard to make a living solely playing pool, and in 1957 began working as a Cadillac salesman at Valley Cadillac Inc. 333 East Avenue in Rochester, New York. He continued there for 17 years. According to Crane's daughter, at Rochester's annual auto show his dealership's exhibit featured a pool table at which Crane would run balls while answering questions. "Working" for a living was purely a choice of survival. In an interview with "Sports Illustrated" in 1969, Crane said, "If I had to make a choice between selling cars and playing pool, I'd choose pool... The only time I've ever been really happy is when I was at a pool table."

Described as a "tall, lean man with the imperial bearing of the headmaster of Eton," Crane earned the appellation "the Deacon" because of his gentlemanly ways, his very cautious approach to the game and his impeccable dress, never approaching a pool table except in a conservative suit. "Los Angeles Times" sports columnist Jim Murray once said Crane "would make Henry Fonda look furtive." Highlighting Crane's both cautious approach and mastery, Mike Sigel, one of pool's most illustrious players, reportedly asked Crane to play one day when Sigel was a young player. Crane assented and after Sigel broke, Crane ran 200 balls and then played a .

In an interview with the "Los Angeles Times", Crane's wife of 64 years, Althea, stated, "A lot of people, if it was a hot day and there was no air conditioning, they'd take off their coat to play. But not Irving Crane." Rudolph Wanderone, a/k/a Minnesota Fats, once opined, "Irv Crane would have been the only guy to notice the horse under Lady Godiva," while professional rival Willie Mosconi who had criticized Crane for his cautious style, stated in his 1993 autobiography, "Willie's Game", that "Crane wouldn't take a shot unless his grandmother could make it."

Crane was inducted into the Billiard Congress of America's hall of fame in 1978. In 1999, Crane was ranked as number eight on "Billiard Digest"s fifty greatest players of the century. In his entry there, he is lauded as having been, along with Mosconi, the "best in the world, flat out" between 1941 and 1956.

In 1980, Crane retired from professional play. He stopped playing entirely in about 1996. On November 17, 2001, at age 88, four days after entering a nursing home, Crane died of natural causes. He was survived by his wife Althea, son Irving, daughter Sandra, three grandchildren, and eight great-grandchildren.


Mark Austin (footballer)

Mark Austin (born 24 February 1989) is an Australian rules footballer who played for the Carlton Football Club and Western Bulldogs in the Australian Football League (AFL). Austin played two senior games for the Glenelg Tigers in the 2006 South Australian National Football League (SANFL) season, and was subsequently selected in the 2006 AFL National Draft in the third round (35th pick overall) by Carlton, who also selected school friend and Glenelg teammate Bryce Gibbs in the same draft.

Throughout the first two seasons of his career, Austin played primarily with Carlton's , the Northern Bullants. He made his AFL debut in the final round of the 2007 season. He temporarily became a regular in Carlton's defence during 2009, playing as the third tall defender, although often against taller opponents, as Carlton's defenders were hit by injury in 2009; however, he also succumbed to injury in the latter part of that season, missing the last few rounds of the year and much of the pre-season. In 2010 and 2011, Austin played almost exclusively with the Northern Bullants, and played his 50th game for the VFL club in late 2010; he managed only one game for Carlton over those two years, and was delisted at the end of the 2011 season.

Austin was granted a second chance at AFL level when he was the last player selected by the Western Bulldogs in the 2012 Rookie Draft (76th pick overall).

Austin was delisted at the conclusion of the 2014 AFL season. He will play for Essendon District Football League club Aberfeldie in 2015.


Hadassah: One Night with the King

Hadassah: One Night with the King is a 2004 novel by Tommy Tenney and Mark Andrew Olsen based upon a retelling of the Biblical Book of Esther. It was made into a film released in 2006 in the United States. Tenney is one of the producers of the film.


Ohene Kennedy

Ohene Kennedy (born 28 April 1973) is a retired Ghanaian football striker.

Kennedy's golden days were with Al-Nassr in Saudi Arabia, where he played and scored many goals. He began his professional career at the Mysterious Dwarfs club of Ghana in the 1992–93 season, aged 19.

He joined Al-Nassr in 1993, and soon became one of the team's most valuable players and top scorers. In total, he scored 74 goals for Al-Nassr and won the Saudi league twice; 1994 and 1995, he also was the league's top scorer in 1996 with 14 goals. He had 4 hat-tricks during this period. On 10 November 1996, he scored a hat-trick for Al-Nassr to win 3–2 against Persepolis in the 1996–97 Asian Club Championship quarterfinals.

He later played in Turkey for MKE Ankaragücü and Adanaspor, then in Bangladesh for Dhanmondi Club.

He was part of the Ghanaian 2000 African Nations Cup team, who exited in the quarter-finals after losing to South Africa. He was also a member of the Ghanaian squad at the 1996 Summer Olympics.

Kennedy went to live in Croydon, England after retirement from football, where he worked for a transportation company called Dynamic Parcel Distribution (DPD).

"Statistics accurate as of match played 6 February 2000"

Al-Nassr


Burwood Girls High School

Burwood Girls' High School is a public, comprehensive, secondary school for girls, located in Croydon, an inner western suburb of Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.

Established in 1929, the school enrolled approximately 1,150 students in 2018, from Year 7 to Year 12, of whom one percent identified as Indigenous Australians and 69 percent were from a language background other than English. The school is operated by the NSW Department of Education in accordance with a curriculum developed by the New South Wales Education Standards Authority; the principal is Mia Kumar.

The school's catchment area includes the suburbs of Croydon, Burwood, Croydon Park, Ashfield, Summer Hill, Haberfield, and Five Dock. The school community is diverse in terms of ethnicity, culture and socio-economic mix.

In the 2006 Higher School Certificate, the "National Education Directory of Australia" named Burwood Girls High School the sixth best performing school, and the best non-selective public school in Sydney's Inner-West.

Burwood Girls High School is registered and accredited with the New South Wales Board of Studies, and therefore follows the mandated curriculum for all years. Students may also choose from a select number of Vocational Education and Training (VET) subjects through TAFE NSW and additional languages through The Open High School.

In the 2006 HSC, the "National Education Directory of Australia" named Burwood Girls the sixth best performing school, and the best non-selective public school in Sydney's Inner-West.



Jacob Nettey

Jacob Nettey (born 25 January 1976) is a retired Ghanaian football defender. He is currently the coach of Hearts of Oak reserve team.

Nettey played for Hearts of Oak from 1994 to 2002 and Heart of Lions from 2003 to 2005.

He was part of the Ghanaian 2000 African Nations Cup team, who exited in the quarter-finals after losing to South Africa. He was the captain of the all conquering Accra Hearts of Oak team that won the 2000 African Champions League. He was also a member of the Ghanaian squad at the 1996 Summer Olympics.

Hearts of Oak


FK Alberts

Futbola klubs Alberts is a Latvian football club, that plays in the Latvian Second League (2. līga), the third-highest league of Latvian football. The club was founded in 2001 and named after Alberts Šeibelis, Latvia national football team captain before World War II.
Originally it was from the city of Riga. From 2008 to 2014 the team played its home matches at Carnikava, but from the 2016 season they play at Salaspils.

At the end of 2006 FK Alberts created a joint team with FK Auda, but also retained a team in the Second League Vidzeme zone under the name of "Vecais Alberts". In 2008 a new club JDFS Alberts was created on the basis of club's youth system. In 2009 the club returned to the name of FK Alberts 
continuing to play as an amateur team.

Official Facebook page

Beaconsfield Upper, Victoria

Beaconsfield Upper is a town in Victoria, Australia, 45 km south-east of Melbourne's Central Business District, located within the Shire of Cardinia local government area. Beaconsfield Upper recorded a population of 2,997 at the 2021 census.

Squatters grazed sheep and cattle in Berwick Shire from the 1830s but there was little interest in the difficult terrain and poor soils in the hills. The discovery of gold in 1872 led to the application of Section 49 of the Land Act to the area, which provided attractive terms to small selectors. An early pioneer, William Brisbane, named his guesthouse "Beaconsfield House" after the then British Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli (Lord Beaconsfield). When "Beaconsfield" Post Office opened on 7 October 1878, Brisbane was the first postmaster.

The Melbourne to Sale Railway line opened in 1879 and later that year, a platform built at the Cardinia Creek crossing was named Beaconsfield. The Beaconsfield Post office was renamed Beaconsfield Upper in 1891. Early settlers tended to be small mixed farmers or Melbournites with weekenders. By 1912, there was a school, a hall, a general store and post office plus six guesthouses and the Pinegrove Hotel.
In February 1983, the Ash Wednesday fires swept through the area destroying many houses and claiming lives.

The town can be referred to colloquially as Upper Beac and Upper Beacy. A community newsletter, the "Village Bell", is published quarterly by the Upper Beaconsfield Association. Sport and leisure facilities include a busy community centre, recreation reserve for cricket, football and scouting groups, a pony and riding club, tennis club and a number of parks and reserves. Golfers play at the Beaconhills Country Club on Stoney Creek Road. Community organisations include 3 and 4 year old kindergartens, primary school, St John's Anglican church, hall and meeting room, a nursing home, Country Fire Authority, and a men's shed. The community centre provides crèche, maternal and child health, internet access and a variety of classes and courses. A mobile library visits weekly.



Scolt Head Island

Scolt Head Island is an offshore barrier island between Brancaster and Wells-next-the-Sea in north Norfolk. It is in the parish of Burnham Norton and is accessed by a seasonal ferry from the village of Overy Staithe. The shingle and sand island appears to have originated from a former spit extending from the coast, and longshore drift means that it is slowly moving to the west and inshore.

The island comprises sand dunes, salt marsh, intertidal sand and mud flats, and shingle. It supports internationally important numbers of breeding Sandwich and little terns, and nationally significant populations of common and Arctic terns, as well as wintering waders and wildfowl. It has a number of uncommon plants adapted to its harsh environments. It was bought by the National Trust in 1923, and became a national nature reserve. It was subsumed into the North Norfolk Coast SSSI in 1986. The larger area is now additionally protected through Natura 2000, Special Protection Area (SPA) and Ramsar listings, and is part of the Norfolk Coast Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty. The first resident first "watcher" (warden) on Scolt Head was pioneering ornithologist and photographer Emma Turner.

This isolated island has been largely undisturbed by human activity apart from service as an artillery range in World War II, and it is of international importance because of the extensive research into its geomorphology over nearly a century.

Scolt Head Island is a roughly 6.5 km (4 mi) long shingle and sand island on the Norfolk coast opposite Burnham Norton. Despite its name, it is possible to walk across the mudflats and Norton Creek to the island at low tide. However this route is potentially dangerous due to shifting and deep mud and rapid tidal changes, and is not recommended by the landowner. Its main beach and ridge of sand dunes run approximately east to west, and it has a series of curved shingle "hooks" running south and east on its landward side. The 737 ha (1820 acres) island is composed almost entirely flint pebbles, mostly rounded by wave action, and sand; other minerals make up less than one per cent of the material. It is gradually extending westwards due to wave action and longshore drift. The curved shingle ridges were formed when each in turn was formerly the western end of the island, and salt marshes have developed between each ridge. Some of the shorter side ridges meet the main ridge at a steep angle due to the southward movement of the latter.

Natural England's designation document states that the shingle spits here and at Blakeney Point are of special importance for the study of geophysical processes, and are the best studied and documented in the world. The salt marsh and shingle structures together are of the highest national importance for investigating the recent geological history of this coast. The salt marshes here develop rapidly due to the inflow of silt and increasing plant growth, increasing in height by about 1 cm (0.4 in) annually, and developing a well-defined creek system as they age.

The island is served by a ferry from Burnham Overy Staithe which runs from April to September, and there is a 1 km (1,100 yd) nature trail with information boards.

Norfolk has a long history of human occupation dating back to the Palaeolithic, and including significant archaeology. Both modern and Neanderthal people were present in the area between 100,000 and 10,000 years ago, before the last glaciation, and humans returned as the ice retreated northwards. The archaeological record is poor until about 20,000 years ago, partly because of the then prevailing very cold conditions, but also because the coastline was much further north than at present. As the ice retreated during the Mesolithic (10,000–5,000 BCE), the sea level rose, filling what is now the North Sea. This brought the Norfolk coastline much closer to its present line, so that many ancient sites are now under the sea in an area now known as Doggerland. Early Mesolithic flint tools with characteristic long blades up to long found on the present-day coast at nearby Titchwell Marsh date from a time when it was from the sea. Other flint tools have been found dating from the Upper Paleolithic (50,000–10,000 BCE) to the Neolithic (5,000–2,500 BCE). Deposits of peat between layers of marine or salt marsh sediments date from 1980–1780 BC, indicating that the sea had retreated, leaving this area as dry land during that era. Signs of human use of the island range from early medieval Grimston ware pottery to post-World War II building foundations, and wooden structures in the marshes include posts set for mussel farming, and a wooden structure that was probably a fish trap 

It was originally thought that the island, believed to be 2–3 thousand years old, developed from an offshore shingle ridge, and had thus always been an island, but current thinking is that the island was originally a spit extending west from Holkham dunes. Support for this theory comes from boreholes and from radiocarbon dating of a shell to 837AD, that appeared to indicate the existence of saltmarshes behind the shingle barrier at that time. A 1585 map also appears to show a spit at this location, and a 1630 inventory of the lands of Robert of Brancaster, the local Lord of the Manor, did not list the island as a separate entity.

On the death of Simms Reeve, Lord of Brancaster, in 1922, earlier disputes over the ownership of the island were resolved with his executors retaining the southern part, and the Earl of Orford the northern section. The island was bought by the Earl of Leicester in 1922. He sold most of the island to the National Trust in 1923 for £500 to manage as a nature reserve, retaining only a small area at the eastern end. The first resident first "watcher" (warden) on Scolt Head was Emma Turner, who served for eighteen months in 1923–1924. In 1944, Lord Leicester was asked if he would remove five huts on his part of the island, together with others on the coast opposite. He agreed to do so if the Norfolk Naturalists' Trust (NNT) would take over his part of the island. The island was used as an artillery range during World War II, but the NNT purchase took place in 1945.

The SS "Vina", an 1894 cargo steamer, was anchored near the west end of the island in 1944 for use as an RAF target where the wreck can still be seen at low tide. The remains of a Blenheim bomber were found at the north of the island in 2004. A steel wreck or hulk measuring around 72m long and 15m wide was also brought to the island during World War II for military target practice.

The Nature Conservancy Council took over responsibility for Scolt Head Island's management in 1953 on a 99-year lease, and it became a national nature reserve in 1967, It was subsumed into the newly created 7,700-hectare (19,000-acre) North Norfolk Coast SSSI in 1986. The larger area is now additionally protected through Natura 2000, Special Protection Area (SPA) and Ramsar listings, and is part of the Norfolk Coast Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty.

Internationally important numbers of Sandwich and little terns breed on the island, together with common and Arctic terns The marshes also support wintering wildfowl and waders, including shelduck, wigeon, teal and curlew. brent geese feed on sea lettuce and eelgrass, preferring the former when both are available. The average number of pink-footed geese in the five winters to 2009/10 was 22,764, far exceeding the international importance level of 2,700 birds.

The island's location means that migrants may be found, sometimes in huge numbers when the weather conditions are right. These may include vagrant rarities, such as an isabelline shrike in 2003, a white-billed diver in 2002, and a dusky warbler in 2000.

The rabbit population reached eight to ten thousand individuals before the arrival of myxomatosis in 1954 killed all but 12 animals, although numbers increased afterwards. Further outbreaks of the disease have led to fluctuating numbers of rabbits on the island. Other resident mammals include stoats, common shrews, pygmy shrews, wood mice and short-tailed voles. Three species of deer have travelled over the marshes to reach the island.

Insects include the intertidal ground beetle "Dicheirotrichus gustavi" which emerges from cracks or holes to feed on the salt marshes after dusk. Despite living in a coastal environment, it has no cycle of behaviour linked to the tides, simply scurrying for dry land when caught by the approaching sea. Another intertidal beetle, "Bledius spectabilis", shows very unusual behaviour for an insect in that it actively protects its larvae from the parasitic wasp "Barycnemis blediator" and from the predatory "Dicheirotrichus gustavi".

The saltmarsh and the dunes both hold a notably wide range of plants, including a number of uncommon species. The saltmarsh contains glassworts and common cord grass in the most exposed regions, with a succession of plants following on as the marsh becomes more established: first sea aster, then mainly sea lavender, with sea purslane in the creeks and smaller areas of sea plantain and other common marsh plants. The shingle ridges attract biting stonecrop, sea campion, yellow horned poppy, sea thrift, bird's foot trefoil and sea beet. sea wormwood, sea lavender and scrubby sea-blite also thrive, matted sea lavender and sea heath are international important species found in this habitat.

The sand dunes are initially stabilised by marram grass and sea couch grass, enabling colonisation by sea poa grass, sand couch-grass, lyme-grass and grey hair-grass, which also help to bind the sand. Sea holly, sand sedge, bird’s-foot trefoil and pyramidal orchid are other specialists of this arid habitat.

Outdoor recreation is important to the economy of north Norfolk, and a 2005 survey at six coastal sites found that 39 per cent of visitors gave birdwatching as the main purpose of their visit. The 7.7 million day visitors and 5.5 million who made overnight stays in the area in 1999 are estimated to have spent £122 million, and created the equivalent of 2,325 full-time jobs. The large number of visitors at coastal sites sometimes has negative effects. Wildlife may be disturbed, a frequent difficulty for species that breed in exposed areas such as ringed plovers and little terns, and also for wintering geese. Plants can be trampled, which is a particular problem in sensitive habitats such as sand dunes and vegetated shingle.

The limited access to the island means that it is not subjected to the pressures of heavy or uncontrolled visitor access. The Norfolk Coast Partnership, a grouping of conservation and environmental bodies, divide the coast and its hinterland into three zones for tourism development purposes. Similar dune systems at Blakeney Point, Holme and Holkham are considered to be sensitive habitats already suffering from visitor pressure, and therefore designated as a red-zone area with no development or parking improvements to be recommended, but Scolt is placed in the orange zone, for locations with fragile habitats but less tourism pressure.

Storms in 1931–33 swept away 250 m (250 yd) of the island, and the island was breached in a large storm in 1938 and by the North Sea flood of January 1953, in each case washing the shingle through to the marshes beyond. A wire and brushwood fence erected in the spring of 1953 trapped sand and allowed the breach to heal by August of the same year.



Ana Isabel Alonso

Ana Isabel Alonso Nieto (born 16 August 1963 in Villaherreros, Palencia) is a former long-distance runner from Spain, who represented her native country in three Summer Olympics: 1988, 1996 and 2000. Her best finish came at her Olympic debut in Seoul, South Korea, where Alonso ended up in 25th place in the women's 10.000 metres race. In Atlanta, Georgia and Sydney, Australia she ran the marathon, finishing in 49th (2:44:12) and 30th (2:36.45) place. In 2000, she won the Rotterdam Marathon.

She is a one-time national champion in the women's 5.000 metres and was the winner of the second edition of the Cross Internacional de Soria meeting. She also won the Cross Internacional de Venta de Baños three times, more than any other female athlete.

<br>

Bend of Islands, Victoria

Bend of Islands is a rural locality in Victoria, Australia, 30 km north-east of Melbourne's Central Business District, located within the Shire of Nillumbik local government area. Bend of Islands recorded a population of 267 at the 2021 census.

It is situated on about 635 hectares and is named after a group of small islands at a bend of the Yarra River near Watsons Creek. It is located near the town of Kangaroo Ground. The location was a favourite spot for local anglers in 1939. About 130 allotments range from a half to 12 hectares. Exotic animals, including cats and dogs and vegetation are banned to minimise the spread of weeds, damage to the soil and harm to native fauna.

It was gazetted in 2000 after a petition from local residents, having previously been part of Christmas Hills and Kangaroo Ground.

Jessie and Edward Haughton built Three Bears Cottage which is considered significant as the last built connection with the regionally significant family who were instrumental in shaping the local landscape and subsequent bush lifestyle from the 1930s. The Haughton's used to have swimming parties in the swimming pool on the bend in the river. Other significant residents of Bend of Islands in the 1970s included Neil Douglas and Helen (Abbie) Heathcote whose house at 512 Henley Road is included on the Victorian Heritage Database. Artist and naturalist Neil Douglas and others purchased properties following bushfires in 1962 and further established the area for residents.

The Burns House, known as "Kangaroo", was designed by architect and artist Peter Burns and was built in stages from 1968 on an elevated sloping bush land site. It is considered of architectural and historical significance to the State of Victoria.

The area has been under threat a number of times including in 1980 when the Government of Victoria considered buying it as part of a conservation area while bulldozers began clearing natural bushland at the same time.

The Bend of Islands incorporates the area of the former Environmental Living Zone, now known as Special Use Zone (SUZ) - Environmental Living in the Nillumbik Planning Scheme. The Bend of Islands Conservation Association (BICA) was formed in the 1960s.

Residents Neil Douglas and Abbie Heathcote used to open their home to exhibit their art. This practice became the foundation for the Nillumbik Artists Open studios program. Local artists continue to be part of the program. The Bend of Island Community members, or 'benders', are a thriving and connected community with monthly coffee mornings at the local fire station, weekly BICA events such as bird or flora walks, and a large artistic community.

A mobile library service visits nearby Kangaroo Ground which is managed by Yarra Plenty Regional Library.


Fewston

Fewston is a village and civil parish in the Harrogate 
district of North Yorkshire, England. It is situated north of Otley and close to Swinsty and Fewston reservoirs.

The Church of St Michael and St Lawrence is the village church. The majority of the building was constructed in 1697, although the tower dates from the 14th century. The Washburn Heritage Centre, adjacent to the church, opened in February 2011.

Fewston was an ancient parish in the Forest of Knaresborough in the West Riding of Yorkshire. It covered a wide area, and included the townships of Blubberhouses, Clifton with Norwood, Great Timble, and Thruscross. All these places became separate civil parishes in 1866. Fewston was transferred to the new county of North Yorkshire in 1974.

The poet Edward Fairfax lived at nearby New Hall, now submerged under the waters of Fewston Reservoir, as did Ferdinando Fairfax, 2nd Lord Fairfax of Cameron. Edward's daughters Elizabeth and Anne were baptised in the village church in 1606 and 1621 respectively, while Ferdinando's daughter Mary and son Charles were baptised there in 1606 and 1615.


Johnny Watts (English footballer)

John William Watts (13 April 1931 – March 2006) was an English footballer who made more than 200 appearances in the Football League for Birmingham City playing as a right half.

Watts was born in the Vauxhall district of Birmingham. He joined Birmingham City as a junior in 1948 and turned professional in 1951 after completing his National Service. In a twelve-year professional career with the club he played 248 games in all competitions, scoring three times. In 1964 he joined Nuneaton Borough of the Southern League where he was to spend four years. He played briefly for West Midlands (Regional) League club Bromsgrove Rovers before retiring in 1969.

Watts died in a retirement home in Brownhills, West Midlands, in March 2006.

Birmingham City
Nuneaton Borough

Ars dictaminis

Ars dictaminis (or ars dictandi) is the art of letter-writing, which often intersects with the art of rhetoric.

Early examples of letter-writing theory can be found in C. Julius Victor's "Ars rhetorica" and Cassiodorus Senator's "Variae epistolae." Other examples can be found in the Pseudo-Demetrius' "Typoi epistolikoi," Pseudo-Libanius' "Epistolimaioi kharacteres," Demetrius' "Peri hermeneias," Philostratus of Lemnos' treatise, and Gregory of Nazianus' "Epistle 51."

During the Latin medieval period, the standing assumption was that these writings would be composed in Latin, and according to well worked-out models. This made the arts of composition a subfield of rhetoric.

Medieval letter writing developed for ecclesiastical, government, and business purposes.

Important figures in the early development of Latin letter writing and document composition include Alberic of Monte Cassino ("Dictaminum radii, Breviarium"), his critic Adalbert of Samaria ("Praecepta dictaminum", c. 1120), Hugh of Bologna ("Rationes dictandi prosaice," c.1120), Anonymous' "Aurea gemma" (c.1119), Anonymous' "Rationes dictandi" (1135), Anonymous' "Precepta prosaici dictaminis secundum Tullium" (c. 1140), Bernard of Romagna's "Introductiones prosaici dictaminis" (1145), Anonymous' "Ad plenam scientiam dictaminum" (c.1140)"," and Baldwin's "Liber de dictaminibus" (c.1150). Lawrence of Aquilegia ("Practica sive usus dictaminis", c.1300) is a much later example of the genre.

Letter conventions include some form of address (e.g., “Worshipful master”); salutation (“I greet you well”); notification (“May it please you to know”); exposition (“the wool was shipped”); disposition (“and I want my money”); and valediction (“May God keep you well, at least until my bill is paid”). Clerks and scribes wrote the letters based on those rules.

Renaissance letter writing, inspired by the rediscovery of Cicero's letters, broaden the scope of letter writing instruction.




Westside Bus Company

Westside Bus Company is an Australian operator of bus services in the western suburbs of Brisbane. It operates 16 services under contract to the Government of Queensland under the Translink banner.

In 1998, the Pulitano Group purchased Westside Bus Company from the Doyle family. In January 2000 the Heritage City Sunbus business was purchased from Harry Blundred and in 2002 the Ipswich-based school services of Stagecoach. Westside has been part of the Bus Queensland group since at least 2010. As at February 2019 routes are operated under the Bus Queensland name.

As of September 2021, the fleet consisted of 104 buses.



New Bedford Subdivision

The New Bedford Subdivision is a freight railroad line in the U.S. state of Massachusetts owned by the Massachusetts Bay Transit Authority, with freight operations handled by the Massachusetts Coastal Railroad. The line runs from the end of the CSX Middleboro Subdivision near Weir Village (in Taunton) south to New Bedford along a former New York, New Haven and Hartford Railroad line. It joins the Fall River Subdivision at Myricks (in Berkley).

The New Bedford and Taunton Railroad completed the line from Taunton south to New Bedford in 1840. It became part of the NYNH&H until 1968. Penn Central took over in 1968, Then Conrail took over in 1976. The New Bedford subdivision was assigned to CSX in 1999 after the breakup of Conrail.

On October 2, 2008, the state government announced an agreement with CSX Transportation for the purchase and upgrade of several of CSX's freight lines in the state. CSX agreed to sell the Fall River Secondary and New Bedford Secondary for use by the South Coast Rail project, as well as the Grand Junction Branch, the Framingham-to-Worcester section of the Worcester Line, and the South Boston Running Track. Other parts of the agreement included plans for double-stack freights west of Worcester and the abandonment of Beacon Park Yard. The agreement was signed on September 23, 2009. On June 11, 2010, the state and CSX completed the first phase of the agreement, including the transfer of the South Coast Rail lines to MassDOT; the Massachusetts Coastal Railroad assumed freight rights on the two lines. The two lines were sold for $21.5 million.


Angélique Bullion

Angélique de Bullion was a French benefactress influential in the foundation of Montreal.

Angélique Faure was born in Paris, at the beginning of the seventeenth century; her parents were Guichard Faure and Madeleine Brulart de Sillery. She was the niece of Noël Brûlart de Sillery, who, in 1632, donated twelve thousand livres to fund the foundation of St. Joseph Mission in New France (Canada), as a settlement for indigenous converts to Catholicism. The mission would eventually be named Sillery, in memory of his generosity.

On January 21, 1612, she married Claude de Bullion, Keeper of the Seals and Superintendent of Finances under Louis XIII; Cardinal Richelieu annually rewarded him with a bonus of 100,000 livres.

The Society of Our Lady of Montréal for the conversion of the Indians of New France, (sometimes known as the "Company Our Lady of Montreal") was formed in 1641 by Jean-Jacques Olier de Verneuil and Jérôme Le Royer, Sieur de La Dauversière with the aim of establishing a fortified city in New France in order to teach French settlers and Christian Indians.

Upon the death of her husband in 1640, she inherited a large fortune, including the Château de Brie-Comte-Robert. In 1641, Father Charles Rapine de Boisvert, former Provincial of the Recollects, Director of Saint-Denis and a distant cousin of her husband, introduced her to Jeanne Mance, a nurse from Champagne and member of the Society of Our Lady of Montréal, who planned to accompany Paul Chomedey de Maisonneuve to New France. She and her friend Madame de Villesasin (Isabelle Blondeau) were benefactors of the Hôtel-Dieu de Paris. Having learned that the Duchess d'Aiguillon had funded the establishment of a hospital in Quebec, Madame de Bullion offered Jeanne Mance 1,200 "livres" for a similar undertaking at Ville-Marie.

An agreement between Angélique Faure de Bullion and Jeanne Mance is the oldest letter in the Archives Department of the City of Montréal.

The Hôtel-Dieu was founded in honour of Saint Joseph and confided in 1657–59 to the care of the Religious Hospitallers of St. Joseph, an order instituted at La Flèche by Jérôme le Royer de la Dauversière, one of the founders of Montréal. She also contributed more than 20,000 livres for the defence of the settlement against the Iroquois.

In 1663, shortly after the death of Olier and La Dauversière, the company was dissolved.

She insisted on being mentioned in the deeds ratifying her donations as "An unknown benefactress". Her identity was revealed only after her death, on July 3, 1664. She bequeathed her assets to the Compagnie de Saint-Sulpice, which was active in Montréal.

Formerly Rue Saint-Constant and then Cadieux Street, on May 9, 1927, de Bullion Street, Montreal was named in her honour.

FK Auda

Futbola klubs Auda is a Latvian football club, playing in the highest division of Latvian football (Latvian Higher League). They are based in Ķekava, near the capital, Riga. Auda won their first ever major trophy in 2022, beating RFS 1–0 in the final of the Latvian Cup.

The history of "Auda" started in 1969 when the football team of the kolhoz 9. maijs first appeared in the lower divisions of the Latvian championships. This team played its matches in Vecmīlgrāvis in Alberts Šeibelis Stadium, named after the former Latvia national football team captain Alberts Šeibelis. The club played in the lower divisions of Latvian football, its only seasons in the top league came in 1986–1987 but those also didn't bring good results.

In the late 1980s the name of the kolhoz and the football team was changed to "Auda". In 1991, under the management of Valerijs Leitāns and Juris Docenko, "Auda" made its debut in the top division of the Latvian championships, the "Virslīga". In a competition among 20 teams, Auda finished 15th. The following season, the team RFK was reformed on the basis of the Auda squad. Under this name the team, including many young players, participated in 1. līga (the second division of Latvian football). But results which would correspond to the name of RFK didn't come so in 1995 the team reverted to its former name of "Auda". The following three years it played in the third division, the 2. līga.

In 1996 "Auda" was a completely new team which played in the 2nd division. In 1997 the young Auda players won their third division zone, but in the finals in two games lost to the FK Valmiera reserve team. After several years in this league Auda finished first in 2001 and were promoted to the Virslīga. After playing three seasons, in 2004 Auda was relegated back to the 1st division. 

On 15 October 2005 Auda played its first game in its new stadium in Ķekava.
In 2007 "FK Auda" and "FK Alberts" united as "FK Auda/Alberts", although the merger was gradually reduced with both teams mostly parting ways later. FK Auda/Alberts, the former FK Auda-2 (farmclub), plays in the 2. līga. The latter club has joined with FK Alberts and uses FK Auda second squad players and FK Alberts players.

After a long stint in the First League, Auda achieved promotion once again and returned to the Virslīga in 2022. On 19 October 2022, "Auda" won their first ever major trophy, beating RFS 1–0 in the final of the Latvian Cup, thanks to a goal from Daniils Ulimbaševs. This also secured them European football for the first time in their history, where they are competing in the following season's Europa Conference League.

In the 2023 season under Simo Valakari, Auda finished 3rd place in the league and won the bronze medal, the club's first medal in the top-tier league. Auda also qualified for the 2024–25 UEFA Conference League qualifiers. After the season, Valakari departed for Riga FC, with former SC Corinthians Paulista assistant manager Filipe Almeida from Portugal becoming the new head coach.




Joe Anderson (Australian footballer)

Joseph Daniel Anderson (born 24 December 1988) is an Australian footballer who played for the Carlton Football Club in the Australian Football League (AFL).

Born in Darwin, Northern Territory, Anderson is a fast and durable rebounding defender and occasional midfielder who captained the Northern Territory at Under-18 level and was best and fairest for Northern Territory Football League (NTFL) club Darwin. 

Anderson was selected in the 2006 AFL National Draft by Carlton with their fifth round selection (67th overall pick) and made his AFL debut in Carlton's 2007 Round 4 clash against the West Coast Eagles at Subiaco. Throughout his AFL career, Anderson struggled to hold a regular position, playing twelve games overall, and spending most of his time developing with Carlton's , the Northern Bullants. Anderson was a member of the Bullants' losing 2009 grand final team, and played his 50th game for the VFL club in 2010. He was de-listed by Carlton at the end of the 2010 AFL season.

Anderson moved to South Australia after being delisted, where he played more than 100 games in the South Australian National Football League. He played for Sturt from 2011 until 2012, then moved to North Adelaide in 2013, initially retiring due to injury in 2016, before making a return in 2017. He also played for his former junior team, Darwin, during many of the summer seasons while in the SANFL.

His younger brother Jed, was recruited to during off season trading in October 2012.

Sadia Butt

Sadia Bano Butt (born 2 March 1975) is a Pakistani former cricketer who played primarily as a right-arm medium-fast bowler. She appeared in three Test matches and 24 One Day Internationals for Pakistan between 1997 and 2004. She played domestic cricket for Sialkot.

She captained Pakistan in one One Day International, against Scotland in 2003.


Charles-Félix Cazeau

Charles-Félix Cazeau (24 December 1807 – 26 February 1881) was a French Canadian priest and administrator of the Archdiocese of Quebec who was prominently involved in the relief of victims from the Great Irish Famine (1845-1849).

Cazeau began his classical education in 1819 at Quebec City. He studied at the Collège de Saint-Roch which had been recently founded by Bishop Joseph-Octave Plessis and one of his teachers was a future archbishop of the Archdiocese of Quebec, Charles-François Baillargeon.


Arnold Atienza

Arnold Ilagan Atienza (; born September 29, 1972), also known as Ali Atienza, is a politician, athlete, and newscaster in the Philippines. He was the Presidential Adviser on Youth Affairs from 2005 to 2007 and was concurrently the head of the Manila sports development office and inner city development program from 2001 to 2007. He is the youngest of two sons of former Manila Mayor Lito Atienza, the other being weatherman Kim Atienza.

Atienza first gained fame as a gold medalist for the Philippines taekwondo national team in the 1990s. On March 28, 2007, he formally filed his papers as candidate for Mayor of the City of Manila during the May 14, 2007, mid-term elections. In that election, Sen. Alfredo Lim won the 2007 mayoralty race, and had conceded to Lim.

On February 28, 2021, the Philippine Taekwondo Association conferred upon Atienza with a 5th Dan Blackbelt along with DICT Secretary Gregorio Honasan.

Atienza graduated from De La Salle University with the degree BS in Physics, with specialization in Computer Applications, (1989–1994), and earned from the Pamantasan ng Lungsod ng Maynila his master’s degree in Government Management. He was the lone gold medalist in the 1994 Asian Taekwondo Championships at the age of 21.

In 2001, he became the youngest chairman of the Manila Sports Council (MASCO) which hosted the Manila Youth Games, the MY National Invitational and Manila Marathons. He also became the Chairman of Manila inner city development and Manila employment committee where he was able to light the streets of Manila, employed thousands and was able to provide children from elementary public schools rice subsidy. He is a former anchor of IBC Express Balita from 2004 to 2007.

In 2007, he ran for mayor of Manila but lost to a veteran mayor, Alfredo Lim. On November 30, 2010, he was inaugurated as a barangay captain of a barangay in San Andres, Manila after winning the barangay elections.

In 2013, he became the topnotching councilor in the fifth district of Manila garnering almost 80,000 votes. He is considered a voice of the people with his stand on two major issues. First, with his fight against the Manila Bay reclamation and second for his firm stand against the 300% tax increase that the city council has approved.

In 2016, Atienza ran for Vice Mayor as the running mate of congressman Amado Bagatsing and later of former Mayor Alfredo Lim. However, he lost the race to Honey Lacuna.

Ali graduated in 2016 from National University of Singapore under the School of public policy in their Senior Management Programme. Atienza ran for congressman of the fifth district of Manila in 2019 but lost to incumbent Cristal Bagatsing.

He was appointed on December 4, 2020, as Undersecretary for Government Digital Broadcast Television and the Digitization of the Entertainment Industry Sector in Department of Information and Communications Technology.



Pierre-Paul Margane de Lavaltrie

Pierre-Paul Margane de Lavaltrie (August 13, 1743 – September 10, 1810) was a "seigneur" and political figure in Lower Canada.

He was born in Montreal in 1743, the only son of Pierre-Paul Margane de Lavaltrie, a seigneur and captain in the French army based in New France.

He joined the colonial army at the age of 13, becoming lieutenant and fought at the Battle of the Plains of Abraham in 1759. The following year, he returned with his regiment to France. In 1765, he returned to Quebec at his father's request and inherited the seigneury of Lavaltrie the following year after his father died. Later that year, he married Marie-Angélique, the daughter of "seigneur" Louis de La Corne, dit La Corne l'aîné. In 1775, he took part in the defense of Fort St. Johns (later Saint-Jean-sur-Richelieu) against the invading Americans and continued to aid in the defense of the colony until the Americans withdrew in 1776. Lavaltrie inherited the seigneuries of Terrebonne, Argenteuil and Monnoir but chose to relinquish them to focus on the upkeep of Lavaltrie. In 1788, he was named a justice of the peace. Although he had opposed constitutional change, Lavaltrie was elected to the 1st Parliament of Lower Canada for Warwick in 1792. He did not run in 1796 and his son-in-law, Charles-Gaspard Tarieu de Lanaudière, was elected in Warwick instead. Lavaltrie also served in the local militia, reaching the rank of colonel.

He died at his manor in Lavaltrie in 1810.


Diana Corkhill

Diana Corkhill (also Spence) is a fictional character from the British Channel 4 soap opera "Brookside", played by Paula Frances. The character debuted on-screen during the episode broadcast on 19 November 1990. Diana was introduced as a love interest of the established character Rod Corkhill (Jason Hope) and it was Frances' first television role. Diana is characterised as a kindly soul who is desperate to overcome hardships. Diana works as a sales assistant at a chemist but is hiding a secret about her education. She is the daughter of Freddie Spence (Peter Corey), who disapproves of her relationship with Rod. Writers made their relationship fraught with arguments because of his police career.

Diana does not believe Rod is safe working as an undercover police officer. In one storyline, Diana is jilted on her wedding day because Rod is beaten up and hospitalised by a criminal. Their second attempt at marriage is successful. Writers continued to create problems and Rod is attacked with a knife. Diana forces her husband to quit the police force and change his occupation. Producers entrusted Frances to portray two divisive and controversial stories. The first explored adult learning as Diana reveals she is illiterate. Viewers complained about the story's plausibility because Diana had managed to secure a good job. "Brookside's" executive producer Mal Young defended Diana, stating that the point of the story was to show Diana could still succeed in life. The other storyline profiled the social issue of date rape. When Diana and Rod's marriage ends, Diana seeks comfort from her good friend Peter Harrison (Robert Beck). He misunderstands Diana's intentions and sexually assaults her. Writers played Peter genuinely believing in his innocence. Diana was adamant that she refused consent and reported Peter to the police. Peter was charged and put on trial for sexual assault and he was later found not guilty. Writers filmed two alternate endings and the cast were initially unaware of the outcome. The date rape story received a divided response from viewers and critics. Frances made her final appearance as Diana in the episode broadcast on 12 March 1993.

Frances joined the cast of "Brookside" in 1990 and she made her first appearance that year. Diana was Frances' debut television role having previously following her graduation from the Liverpool Theatre School. When Diana first appeared on-screen, a television journalist used their newspaper column to discuss Frances' breast size and branded her a "heaving bosom". An upset Frances complained to the "Brookside" wardrobe department and told them about her insecurities. They were sympathetic and decided to change Diana's costumes to make them flattering and pledged to use different camera angles while filming. Frances remained unhappy and would often cry onset. On one occasion, a director insulted Frances and accused her of "acting from the neck up". Frances claimed that the director informed her that he had previously worked with actors insecure about their nose size, but Frances should not try and conceal her figure onset. The incident made Frances cry and she later had a breast reduction on the NHS.

Diana is the daughter of Freddie Spence (Peter Corey), her mother had an affair with a police officer and abandoned her family. Diana is characterised as a "kindly soul" and very forgiving of her loved ones. She has courage and determination to overcome hardships she faces in life. In his book, "The Who's Who of Soap Operas", author Anthony Hayward described Diana as "gullible and longing to find a husband". When Diana was introduced into the series she portrayed a sales assistant at a chemist, specifically working behind a perfume counter. In the book, "Phil Redmond's Brookside - Life in the Close", author Geoff Tibballs described Diana as a "pleasant girl" who is illiterate and "slow on the uptake". Throughout her tenure, writers portrayed Diana gaining a newfound confidence and becoming less reliant on men.

Producers introduced Diana as a new love interest for the established character Rod Corkhill (Jason Hope). They meet when Diana goes to her local supermarket and meets Rod where he poses as a trainee manager. Rod is actually a police officer posted at the supermarket, working under cover. He cannot tell Diana his true profession but asks her out on a date. They begin dating and Diana's father, Freddie, is delighted that his daughter has found a boyfriend with a career in management. As they spend more time together, Rod decides to reveal that he is a police officer. Hayward assessed that Diana is "furious" and "hurt" that Rod has lied to her. They break up for a short time before entering a serious relationship.

Diana and Rod become engaged and they set a date for their wedding in December 1991. Writers decided to make their relationship problematic and for the characters to have a failed wedding day. Rod's career in the police force unsettled Diana because of the danger it posed to him. Part of Rod's role in the force is working undercover. As their wedding approaches, Rod investigates a male prostitution ring. He focuses on Craig (Paul McNulty), a young prostitute whom he wants to free and arrest the pimp. Rod is then ordered to abandon the investigation. On the day of his wedding, Rod disobeys his orders and tracks down Craig. Rod follows Craig into the toilets at Liverpool Lime Street railway station where his pimp is waiting and Rod is beaten up. His injuries cause Rod to miss his wedding as he is taken to hospital. Diana breaks up with Rod and he is suspended from the police force. Hope defended Rod jilting Diana because of his job responsibilities. He told Tibballs that Rod has a "strong social conscience" and "he put the problems of Craig the rent boy before his own wedding day." As the story progressed, Rod is reinstated and he and Diana reconcile, eventually setting a new wedding date in July 1992.

Diana and Rod this time opt for a quiet wedding ceremony at a registry office. They attempt to keep it a secret but Rod's grandmother, Julia Brogan (Gladys Ambrose) tells Rod's uncle Jimmy (Dean Sullivan) and aunt Jackie Corkhill (Sue Jenkins). Together they organise a surprise wedding party for Diana and Rod. Frances told a reporter from "TVTimes" that "for once Julia's big mouth turns out to be a blessing!" Frances explained that the ceremony was intentionally different to their cancelled wedding. It was supposed to be a "white wedding" with traditional attire and horses and carriages. Frances explained that Diana and Rod "didn't want to tempt fate, so they planned a short simple one instead." The wedding was filmed in a conference room inside the studio at Mersey TV. Frances was "relieved" to become an official member of the Corkhill family. She added that Diana "is very conventional and marriage is something she's always wanted. She is a home-maker and really loves Rod. I think they will be very happy together." This time Diana and Rod's marriage is successfully with their family in attendance.

Writers had different plans for the couple and hindered their married life with arguments caused by Rod's career. Hope knew that their marriage would be turbulent. He told Tibballs that "So, now he just wants the steady lifestyle, which is what he thinks he's got with Diana. But he's got a nasty shock in store." Diana is shocked when Rod takes part in a raid at the hair salon on Brookside Parade. Rod is slashed with a knife and the ordeal prompts Diana to force Rod to quit the police force. To appease her, Rod secures a new job as a security guard in Warrington. Diana's new found confidence and her friendship with Peter Harrison (Robert Beck) cause yet more problems for the pair. During another argument, Rod loses control of his anger and slaps Diana in the face and subsequently moves out. As the pair break up, Rod puts the Corkhill's home up for sale and Diana moves in with the Farnham family.

Producers created a divisive storyline for Diana, exploring the issue of adult illiteracy. Diana excels at hiding her illiteracy to the extent that her police officer boyfriend fails to notice it. Frances told Geoff Tibballs, author of "Brookside - The First Ten Years", that the illiteracy story showed the difficulties people face completing daily tasks. She noted that illiterate people find it hard to read assembly instructions and fill out forms, and that made her realise the severity of the issue. Frances portrayal of the subject received praise from viewers. She told Tibballs that she received positive fan mail thanking her. She explained that "It made people feel that they're not on their own, even at 20." Frances liked the story because it helped viewers understand Diana better and "it explained why Diana always seemed a bit slow. But now that her confidence has grown, she's becoming more independent of Rod, particularly since they got married."

"Brookside's" executive producer Mal Young told Tibballs that the story divided viewer opinion. He stated that Diana's illiteracy "threw up a lot of feedback from viewers". Many felt it implausible that Diana could be illiterate and have a good job. Young defended the character because illiterate people are good at hiding it. He added "that was the whole point. She had a career, she worked in a pharmacy, and she got through life." In addition pharmacies wrote to the producers to complain that Diana worked in a pharmacy. They felt it portrayed their profession in a negative way because pharmacists need to be accurate when dealing with patient prescriptions. Young had been careful to ensure that Diana only shown working on the make-up counter rather than the medical side of the chemists. Adult education groups praised the soap opera for its portrayal and "taking illiteracy seriously". To coincide with the story, "Brookside" participated in the Adult Learners' Week campaign, which was an organised effort to promote adult participation in learning. On-screen, writers remained committed to solving Diana's illiteracy and portrayed her attending learning classes.

Producers created a controversial storyline for Diana exploring the issue of date rape. The story plays out after Diana has an argument with Rod and she spends time with her friend Peter at his a party in at Farnham residence. Peter invites Diana into a bedroom at the party where they share drinks and he comforts her. Peter then admits he has romantic feelings for Diana and sexually assaults her. Frances told Linda Hawkins from "ME" magazine that the story is realistic. She explained that women like Diana are tempted to remain silent in the situation because blame themselves for willingly entering a man's home to begin with. Frances found it difficult to portray the issue. She told Hawkins that "the problem with this role was to imagine Diana's feelings, when I have never been a victim. I could only imagine her vulnerability because, frankly, everyone in my family knows how to look after themselves." To help portray the story, Frances recalled a time when she auditioned for an equity card. She had to dance in a revealing costume in front of men and noticed them staring at her. Frances had that experience firmly on her mind when filming, which conveyed Diana's realisation of Peter's true intentions. Beck told Hawkins that the storyline was realistic and relevant to issues existing in society, where men have casual and comedic views on sex and consent. He added "with an attitude like that you can see how easily date rape can occur."

Diana is shocked that her friend would rape her and fears that her friends will think she is a liar. Frances told "Inside Soap's" Renee Shaw that it is a "horrific situation" for Diana. She believed that Peter was her trusted friend, but "he took advantage of her." Diana fears that everyone will think she led Peter on because of their friendship and tried to remain quiet. Frances researched the issue thoroughly and was shocked to learn that a high percentage of rapists are already known to their victims. She told Shaw that the fact "amazed" her and learning that this date rape scenario was a common occurrence made her more cautious. Frances also hoped that Diana's story would help rape victims come to terms with their ordeals. She added that the story showed that no man has the right to override a woman's decision when she declines sex.

Diana decides to go to the police and report Peter for raping her. He is arrested, charged with sexual assault and a date is set to take the case to court. Beck told an "Inside Soap" journalist that Peter does not believe he raped Diana, despite her saying no. Beck explained that "Peter doesn't think of himself as a rapist, and so he is very confused by the accusations that he raped Diana against her will." The story was divisive among viewers and Beck believed that Peter had gained viewers' support because Peter genuinely believes he did not rape Diana. He added "he has a kind of naivety about him which stops him from being hated." Beck was unaware that his character would become a rapist when he joined the cast. Beck was "perturbed" when he read the script and producers warned him that he may receive abuse from the viewing public. However, Beck was shocked that some viewers believed "Diana asked for it and lead him on, but I just don't agree. If he got his signals mixed up, that's his problem, not hers." Beck added that Diana telling Peter 'no' once was enough and he should have respected her more.

Writers decided to add suspense to the court case and keep the outcome a secret from the cast members involved in the story. They also ordered that two alternate endings to the trial be filmed, one with a guilty verdict and the other an innocent verdict. Writers also chose the characters involved in portraying the issue to be already acquainted. Beck described the case as not being a "cut and-dry situation". Beck thought it was important that Peter was punished for his treatment of Diana. She and Peter were friends, to which Beck assessed that "it isn't as if he was a total stranger who attacked her in a dark alleyway - but having said that, what he did was wrong, and he shouldn't be allowed to get away scott free."

Writers decided that the outcome of the trial should be a not guilty verdict. The scenes played out with Diana being unable to convince the jury of Peter's guilt. Unlike Diana, Peter gained a witness willing to testify his innocence when the Farham's nanny Anna Wolska (Kazia Pelka). Rod returns for the trial but when he hears the not guilty verdict, he accuses Diana of having an affair with Peter, ends their marriage and leaves once again. Diana is unable to cope with the outcome and tries to commit suicide by cutting her wrists. Diana survives her ordeal and Peter tries to comfort her. She is outraged and tells Peter to leave her alone, informing him that whilst the jury did not find him guilty, she would always know he had raped her. In the episodes leading to Frances' departure from "Brookside", Diana secures a job at the bar La Luz. She is fired from the role after she is harassed by a group of men and retaliates by throwing a drink at them. Diana then stopped appearing in the show, it was later revealed that she remained in Liverpool, living with her father, Freddie. Peter remained in the series but writers continued to portray the issues that arise after an accusation of rape. Diana's uncle Jimmy continues to support Diana's version of events. He blames Peter for Diana leaving with her life in ruins and begins to harass him. Beck told Donna Hay from "What's on TV" that "everyone's sympathies were with Diana. No one stopped to think that Peter might be emotionally scarred by it as well."

Author Geoff Tibballs believed that Diana's illiteracy story was inspiring. He profiled Diana, stating that "she may never set the world alight with her contribution to nuclear physics but her courage and determination in overcoming illiteracy serve as an example to others." A "TVTimes" writer assessed that Diana's marriage to Rod was problematic. They opined, "they've had more than their fair share of problems in the 18 months they've known each other [...] they have weathered a suspected pregnancy, Diana's illiteracy and a temporary split." Referencing Diana's ditzy characterisation, Geoffrey Phillips from the "Evening Standard" branded her a "bubblehead blonde".

Suzanne Moore from "The Guardian" was unsympathetic in regards to Diana's date rape ordeal. She scathed that "whatever the writers' intentions to dramatise the issues of date rape, I would guess that, for many viewers, this would have been the correct verdict. Maybe he went too far but then she did lie down with him." Patrick Hill writing for the "Daily Mirror" branded the date rape plot a "controversial storyline". In response to the date rape story, Linda Hawkins from "Me" stated that "Brookside has never fought shy of dramatising social problems [...] the circumstances and scenes are harrowing." She also opined that "Diana has been an almost perpetual victim for the last two years. Paula's portrayal of Diana is compelling and thoroughly believable." Renee Shaw of "Inside Soap" thought that Diana and Rod's relationship was "rocky to say the least" and her being raped left her "life in tatters". A writer from "Soap" opined that she faced "trauma" and "Diana couldn't face the wagging tongues and accusing stares" so she left "Brookside" for good. Writers from "Inside Soap" included Diana's date rape ordeal in their "Golden moment in soaps" feature. They questioned whether Peter was even guilty because he was Diana's "knight in shining armour" and Diana "had no reservations" about drinking with him. "Inside Soap" ran a feature compiling "The 100 greatest soap stories ever told". They featured Diana's rape story as their 71st choice. In the book "Real Soap: Brookside", author Kay Nicholls branded the character "dippy Diana" and referred to her pursuit of justice against Peter as a "golden" storyline.


Kirkby Malzeard

Kirkby Malzeard () is a village and civil parish in the Harrogate district of North Yorkshire, England.
There has been a creamery in the village making Wensleydale cheese for almost 100 years, first owned by Mrs Mason, then Kit Calvert, of Hawes, subsequently 
the Milk Marketing Board and more recently it was acquired by the Wensleydale Creamery.

Historically part of the West Riding of Yorkshire, the village was mentioned in Domesday Book as "Chirchebi" (meaning "church village"). The suffix Malzeard (another place-name, meaning "bad clearing" in Norman French) was added by the early 12th century. In medieval times the honour of Kirkby Malzeard included large areas to the west of the village in upper Nidderdale, and the parish came to include several townships:
The townships became separate civil parishes in the 19th century.

In mediaeval times there was a castle at Kirkby Malzeard, held by the de Mowbray family. When Roger de Mowbray participated in the Revolt of 1173–74 against King Henry II, the castle was besieged by the Bishop elect of Lincoln, and Mowbray surrendered it, together with Thirsk Castle, to the King: both castles were demolished.

In 1307, King Edward I granted Kirkby Malzeard the right to hold two fairs annually, and a weekly market on Wednesday. These were subsequently abandoned, but revived in 1816. In 1871 the fairs were still held (on Whit Monday and 2 October), but the market had lapsed again.

In 1866 a landowner named Joseph Helliwell demolished the Market Cross. There was an outcry, and after a year of litigation, Helliwell was compelled to remove a cottage and part of his house that were encroaching on the Market Place. A new Market Cross was erected by public subscription, inaugurated on 30 September 1868. Several newspapers and documents relating to the market place and the cross were placed in a sealed bottle when the foundations were laid.

The writer and historian William Grainge was born to a farming family at Dishforth, and grew up at Castiles Farm, near Kirkby Malzeard. He attended Kirkby Malzeard village school, the only formal education that he received; he was otherwise self-educated.

The Highside Playing Fields, which provide facilities for several sports, were created in the 1970s. One of the benefactors was Bing Crosby, who came shooting in the area in 1975. He donated £1,250 towards the playing fields, and visited them during a cricket match in 1976.

There is a convenience store and a butcher in Kirkby Malzeard, as well as one pub, the Queens Head. A second pub, The Henry Jenkins, (named after a man from Ellerton-on-Swale who died in 1670, allegedly aged 169), closed on 29 June 2008, and in 2016 is derelict. The Shoulder of Mutton, a seventeenth century listed private house, was formerly a pub.

An electoral ward in the same name exists. This ward stretches south to Sawley and has a total population taken at the 2011 census of 3,109.


Ben Russell (rugby union, born 1983)

Benjamin T. Russell (born 10 January 1983 in Halifax, West Yorkshire) is a rugby union player who plays at No. 8 or Flanker for London Welsh. He previously played for Saracens and Racing Metro. He has also played internationally for the England Sevens.


Ladder diagram

Ladder diagram may refer to:

National Bank of Slovakia (building)

The National Bank of Slovakia (NBS) building is a skyscraper in Bratislava, Slovakia. Opened on 23 May 2002, it is the headquarters of the National Bank of Slovakia (NBS) .

The NBS building is located in Bratislava I District – the Old Town, At 111 m tall, it is one of the tallest buildings in Bratislava.

The public tender for the NBS building received 24 competitive proposals. A jury of 21 specialists in architecture, construction, and banking assisted NBS in choosing the winner. The project went to Martin Kusý and Pavol Paňák. Construction started in November 1996. 

The lower horizontal part of the building houses the operational facilities of the Bank. The building also includes a congress hall and exhibition premises. This part of the building is built around a central yard with a raised green area. 

The building tower contains administrative offices. 

The design was realised exclusively by Slovak companies. The construction was carried out by the Association H – V – Z (Hydrostav, a.s., Bratislava, Váhostav, a.s., Žilina, ZIPP, s.r.o., Bratislava). Engineering activity was provided by the Association of Engineering (Keramoprojekt, a.s., Trenčín, Keraming, v.o.s., Trenčín, Chempik, a.s., Bratislava).


Anna David (singer)

Anna David (born 2 December 1984) is a Danish R&B and soul singer. At the age of fourteen she got her first recording contract in Germany where she released five singles. Her debut album, "Anna David", was released in Denmark in September 2005 and was certified Gold. The lead single, "Fuck dig", held the number-one position on Danish single chart for 12 weeks and received the 'Payload Prize 2005' for being the most downloaded song of the year in Denmark. In October 2006, David recorded "Fuck dig" in German as "Fick Dich". The German version entered the charts in both Germany and Austria. Simultaneously, she recorded "Fuck You", an English version of the song.

In 2006, she participated in the Danish version of "Dancing with the Stars" ().





2006 Women's World Amateur Boxing Championships

The 2006 Women's World Amateur Boxing Championships was an international women's boxing competition hosted by India from 18 November – 23 November 2006 in New Delhi. It was the 4th championship, which started in 2001 in Scranton, Pennsylvania, US.

The World Championship was contested in thirteen weight disciplines by 180 amateur women boxers from 32 countries, and was conducted in the Talkatora Indoor Stadium.

India won four gold, one silver and three bronze medals, while Russia, last year's champion, finished second with three gold and three bronze medals, followed by North Korea with a tally of 2-0-1. Canadians, the runners-up in 2005 edition, were fourth with one gold and two bronze.

Bronze medals are awarded to both losing semi-finalists.



Francis Schewetta

Francis Schewetta (29 August 1919 – 8 October 2007) was a French track and field athlete, who mainly competed in the men's 400 metres during his career. He was born in Bréhat, Côtes-d'Armor.

He competed for France at the 1948 Summer Olympics held in London, Great Britain, where he won the silver medal in the men's 4 x 400 metre relay with his teammates Jean Kerebel, Robert Chef d’Hotel and Jacques Lunis.

Rheum officinale

Rheum officinale, the Chinese rhubarb, or Indian rhubarb is a rhubarb from the family Polygonaceae native to China. In Chinese it is called "yào yòng dà huáng" (), literally meaning "medicinal rhubarb".

A perennial typically to 2m in height.

"R. officinale" has a chromosome count of 2"n"=44.
This species is endemic to southeast China, where it occurs in the provinces of Guizhou, southwestern Henan, western Hubei, Shaanxi, Sichuan, Yunnan and possibly Fujian.

Leaf petiole said to be edible raw or cooked.

In Indonesia, especially in Java where it is known as "klembak" in Javanese, and it is usually dried, and mixed with tobacco and frankincense to create a "rokok klembak menyan", a traditional Javanese frankincense cigarette.

The roots of "Rheum officinale" are used in traditional Chinese medicine. They are considered as a kind of "cold" herbs, used as a laxative in patients with constipation, sometimes accompanied by fever and even delirium. It is thought that rhubarbs can improve poor circulation, especially being helpful to remove bodily aggregates which result from poor circulation.

In Chinese traditional medicine, "R. officinale", in combination with a large variety of other herbs and modern medicine, has been used for the treatment of hepatitis B, although the results were found to be inconclusive.

Hardy to USDA Zone 7.



Mebeverine

Mebeverine is a drug used to alleviate some of the symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome. It works by relaxing the muscles in and around the gut.

Mebeverine is used to alleviate some of the symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) and related conditions; specifically stomach pain and cramps, persistent diarrhoea, and flatulence.

Data from controlled clinical trials have not found a difference from placebo or statistically significant results in the global improvement of IBS.

It has not been tested in pregnant women nor in pregnant animals so pregnant women should not take it; it is expressed at low levels in breast milk, while no adverse effects have been reported in infants, breastfeeding women should not take this drug.

Adverse effects include hypersensitivity reactions and allergic reactions, immune system disorders, skin disorders including hives, oedema and widespread rashes.

Additionally, the following adverse effects have been reported: heartburn, indigestion, tiredness, diarrhoea, constipation, loss of appetite, general malaise, dizziness, insomnia, headache, and decreased pulse rate.

It does not have systemic anticholinergic side effects.

Mebeverine can, on highly rare occasions, cause drug-induced acute angle closure glaucoma.

In a urine drug-screening test, mebeverine can affect a false positive result for amphetamines.

Mebeverine is an anticholinergic but its mechanism of action is not known; it appears to work directly on smooth muscle within the gastrointestinal tract and may have an anaesthetic effect, may affect calcium channels, and may affect muscarinic receptors.

It is metabolized mostly by esterases, and almost completely. The metabolites are excreted in urine.

Mebeverine exists in two enantiomeric forms. The commercially available product is a racemic mixture of them. A study in rats indicates that the two have different pharmacokinetic profiles.

It is a second generation papaverine analog, and was first synthesized around the same time as verapamil.

It was first registered in 1965.

Mebeverine is a generic drug and is available internationally under many brand names.

Seliwanoff's test

Seliwanoff’s test is a chemical test which distinguishes between aldose and ketose sugars. If the sugar contains a ketone group, it is a ketose. If a sugar contains an aldehyde group, it is an aldose. This test relies on the principle that, when heated, ketoses are more rapidly dehydrated than aldoses. It is named after Theodor Seliwanoff, the chemist who devised the test. When added to a solution containing ketoses, a red color is formed rapidly indicating a positive test. When added to a solution containing aldoses, a slower forming light pink is observed instead. 

The reagents consist of resorcinol and concentrated hydrochloric acid:


Fructose and sucrose are two common sugars which give a positive test. Sucrose gives a positive test as it is a disaccharide consisting of fructose and glucose.

Generally, 6M HCl is used to run this test. Ketoses are dehydrated faster and give stronger colors. Aldoses react very slowly and give faint colors.


Sangsari language

Sangsari or Sangisari is an Iranian language spoken mainly in the Semnan and Tehran provinces of Iran, especially in the Sangesar (Mahdi Shehr) town and in several surrounding villages. Sangsari is included in the Semnani group of Northwestern Iranian languages that also includes Lasgerdi, Semnani, and Sorkhei. There are around 50,000 Sangsari speakers.

Glottolog classifies Sangsari under "Komisenian" languages of Northwestern Iranian branch of Iranian language family. This designation is also adopted by Wiktionary.

The vowels of Sangsari are . The consonants are the same as in Persian.

Sangseri distinguishes two numbers in pronouns—singular and plural—and marks two cases in the singular—the direct (nominative) and the oblique (other cases). Masculine and feminine forms are distinct in the singular third person pronouns.
Pierre Lecoq. 1989. "Les dialectes caspiens et les dialectes du nord-ouest de l'Iran," "Compendium Linguarum Iranicarum". Ed. Rüdiger Schmitt. Wiesbaden: Dr. Ludwig Reichert Verlag. Pages 296–314.

Antonio Innocenti

Antonio Innocenti (23 August 1915 – 6 September 2008) was an Italian cardinal who was a leading figure in the Roman Curia and the Vatican diplomatic service for many years.

He was born at Poppi, Italy. Ordained in 1938 at Florence, Innocenti was studied at the Diocesan Seminary of Fiesole, the Pontifical Gregorian University where he received a doctorate in 1941, the Pontifical Lateran University, where he received a licentiate in dogmatic theology in 1950, and the Pontifical Ecclesiastical Academy, where he studied diplomacy. He served as a priest in northern Italy for the decade following his ordination. His work helping Jews led to his arrest and almost being shot by a firing squad; he was released at the last minute. He was then called to Rome by Pope Pius XII and settled on a career in the Curia. He served for most of the 1950s and 1960s in the Papal Nunciature in Switzerland, where, as he saw it, the major problems were "an opulent society, religious assistance to immigrants and relations with Christian of other denominations".

On 15 December 1967, Pope Paul VI named him Titular Archbishop of Eclano and Apostolic Nuncio to Paraguay. He was appointed Secretary of the Congregation for the Discipline of the Sacraments (now the Congregation for Divine Worship) until 1980, when he became Nuncio to Spain.

In 1985, Pope John Paul II made him a cardinal, and on 9 January 1986 appointed him Prefect of the Congregation for the Clergy, a post he held until his retirement in 1991. During Innocenti's time as Prefect, the Curia was extremely busy dealing with what was perceived as dangerous dissent from papal teaching, and Innocenti was heavily involved with many lay movements designed to restore orthodoxy among the Church's members.

By 1999 he had retired to Piazza della Citta Leonina.


Robert Chef d'Hôtel

Robert Claude Henri Chef d'Hôtel (2 February 1922 – 19 October 2019) was a track and field athlete from France, who competed mainly in the men's 400 metres during his career. He was born in Nouméa, Sud, New Caledonia in February 1922.

Chef d'Hôtel competed for France at the 1948 Summer Olympics held in London, Great Britain where he won the silver medal in the men's 4 × 400 metre relay with his teammates Jean Kerebel, Francis Schewetta and Jacques Lunis.

He died on 19 October 2019, at the age of 97.


Aconitum napellus

Aconitum napellus, monkshood, aconite, Venus' chariot or wolfsbane, is a species of highly toxic flowering plants in the genus "Aconitum" of the family Ranunculaceae, native and endemic to western and central Europe.
It is an herbaceous perennial plant growing to tall, with hairless stems and leaves. The leaves are rounded, diameter, palmately divided into five to seven deeply lobed segments. The flowers are dark purple to bluish-purple, narrow oblong helmet-shaped, tall.
Plants native to Asia and North America formerly listed as "A. napellus" are now regarded as separate species. The plant is extremely poisonous in both ingestion and body contact.

"Aconitum napellus" is grown in gardens in temperate zones for its spiky inflorescences that are showy in mid-autumn, and its attractive foliage. There are white and rose colored forms in cultivation too. 
The cultivar 'Spark's Variety' has gained the Royal Horticultural Society's Award of Garden Merit.

Nine subspecies are accepted by the "Flora Europaea":

"Aconitum napellus" is grown in gardens for its attractive spike-like inflorescences and showy blue flowers. It is a cut flower crop used for fresh cutting material and sometimes used as dried material. The species has a low natural propagation rate under cultivation and is propagated by seed or by removing offsets that are generated each year from the rootstocks. The use of micropropagation protocols has been studied. This species has been crossed with other Aconitums to produce attractive hybrids for garden use, including "Aconitum × cammarum".

Like other species in the genus, "A. napellus" contains several poisonous compounds, including enough cardiac poison that it was used on spears and arrows for hunting and battle in ancient times. Persian physician Avicenna (980–1037) wrote that arrows dipped in the sap were used to kill, and Dr Antonio Guaineri, in one of the first medical dictionaries 'Practica', wrote that arrows that had the poison from roots of the plant were used to kill wild goats in Italy. "A. napellus" has a long history of use as a poison, with cases going back thousands of years. During the ancient Roman period of European history, the plant was often used to eliminate criminals and enemies, and by the end of the period it was banned and anyone growing "A. napellus" could have been legally sentenced to death. Aconites have been used more recently in murder plots; they contain the chemical alkaloids aconitine, mesaconitine, hypaconitine and jesaconitine, which are highly toxic. It was also used in a recent Sherlock Holmes book plot.

Marked symptoms may appear almost immediately, usually not later than one hour, and "with large doses, death is almost instantaneous". Death usually occurs within two to six hours in fatal poisoning (20 to 40 mL of tincture may prove fatal). The initial signs are gastrointestinal including nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. This is followed by a sensation of burning, tingling, and numbness in the mouth and face, and of burning in the abdomen. In severe poisonings pronounced motor weakness occurs and cutaneous sensations of tingling and numbness spread to the limbs. Cardiovascular features include hypotension, sinus bradycardia, and ventricular arrhythmias. Other features may include sweating, dizziness, difficulty in breathing, headache, and confusion. The main causes of death are ventricular arrhythmias and asystole, paralysis of the heart or of the respiratory center. The only post-mortem signs are those of asphyxia.

Treatment of poisoning is mainly supportive. All patients require close monitoring of blood pressure and cardiac rhythm. Gastrointestinal decontamination with activated charcoal can be used if given within one hour of ingestion. The major physiological antidote is atropine, which is used to treat bradycardia. Other drugs used for ventricular arrhythmia include lidocaine, amiodarone, bretylium, flecainide, procainamide, and mexiletine. Cardiopulmonary bypass is used if symptoms are refractory to treatment with these drugs. Successful use of charcoal hemoperfusion has been claimed in patients with severe aconite poisoning.

Poisoning may also occur following picking the leaves without wearing gloves; the aconitine toxin is absorbed easily through the skin. In this event, there will be no gastrointestinal effects. Tingling will start at the point of absorption and extend up the arm to the shoulder, after which the heart will start to be affected. The tingling will be followed by unpleasant numbness. Treatment is similar to poisoning caused by oral ingestion and even handling the plant without gloves has been reported to result in multi-organ failure and death.

The plant's chief toxic component, aconitine, is a potent neurotoxin that opens tetrodotoxin sensitive sodium channels. It increases the influx of sodium through these channels and delays repolarization, thus increasing excitability and promoting ventricular dysrhythmias.

Battle of Mount Hermon

Battle of Mount Hermon may refer to:


Barker's notation

Barker's notation refers to the ERD notation developed by Richard Barker, Ian Palmer, Harry Ellis "et al." whilst working at the British consulting firm CACI around 1981. The notation was adopted by Barker when he joined Oracle and is effectively defined in his book "Entity Relationship Modelling" as part of the CASE Method series of books. This notation was and still is used by the Oracle CASE modelling tools. It is a variation of the "crows foot" style of data modelling that was favoured by many over the original Chen style of ERD modelling because of its readability and efficient use of drawing space.

The notation has features that represent the properties of relationships including cardinality and optionality (the crows foot and dashing of lines), exclusion (the exclusion arc), recursion
(looping structures) and use of abstraction (nested boxes).



Diocese of Cork

The Diocese of Cork was established in the seventh century. The diocese of Cork was one of the twenty-four dioceses established at the Synod of Rathbreasail on an ancient bishopric founded by Saint Finbarr in the sixth-century. On 30 July 1326, Pope John XXII, on the petition of King Edward II of England, issued a papal bull for the union of the bishoprics of Cork and Cloyne, the union to take effect on the death of either bishop. The union should have taken effect on the death of Philip of Slane in 1327, however, bishops were still appointed to each separate bishopric. The union eventually took place with Jordan Purcell appointed bishop of the united see of Cork and Cloyne in 1429.

In the Roman Catholic Church, the diocese was united with that of Ross on 19 April 1958 to form the Roman Catholic Diocese of Cork and Ross. In the Church of Ireland, the diocese is part of the United Dioceses of Cork, Cloyne and Ross.

Bulgarian verbs

Bulgarian verbs are the most complicated part of Bulgarian grammar, especially when compared with other Slavic languages. Bulgarian verbs are inflected for person, number and sometimes gender. They also have lexical aspect (perfective and imperfective), voice, nine tenses, three moods, four evidentials and six non-finite verbal forms. Because the subject of the verb can be inferred from the verb ending, it is often omitted. As there is no infinitive in contemporary Bulgarian, the basic form of a verb is its present simple tense first person singular form.

There are three conjugations. The conjugation of a verb determined by the final vowel of the verb in the third person singular present simple tense. Verbs of the first conjugation end in e, of the second in и and of the third in а or я.

Bulgarian verbs express lexical aspect ("вид"). The verbs are either of imperfective ("глаголи от несвършен вид") or perfective ("глаголи от свършен вид") aspect. The former describe actions in progress (uncompleted actions) and the latter whole completed actions (actions which have a beginning and an end). So in Bulgarian, an English verb is usually translated by two verbs (or sometimes by even three, see below). Perfective verbs can be usually formed from imperfective ones by suffixation or prefixation, but when prefixes (or very rarely suffixes) are used the resultant verb often deviates in meaning from the original. There are not any strict rules and irregularities are very common. Nevertheless many verbs can be grouped according to their stem change:

The verbs from one pair are of different conjugations, for example "кажа" is from the first conjugation and "казвам" from the third.

In the past imperfect and the present tense perfective verbs cannot stand alone in an independent clause, in these tenses such verbs are used only in subordinate clauses.

Very often when a perfective verb is formed from an imperfective one by means of a prefix (or rarely a suffix) this verb can be made again imperfective using a suffix. The resultant verb is called secondary imperfective verb ("вторичен несвършен глагол"). Here are some examples of such verbs:

Verbs from the first type describe uncompleted actions (for example the verb "мета" could be roughly translated in English as "to be sweeping"), verbs from the second describe whole, completed actions. Verbs from the third type are a combination between the first two. Although they are imperfective as the initial ones, they preserve the perfective meaning of the second verbs, they are only grammatically imperfective.

An explanation of the nuances between the three columns follows:

Secondary imperfective verbs are used in cases where it's grammatically incorrect to use perfective verbs (there are tenses, the present tense for example, where perfective verbs cannot stand alone in an independent clause) but one wants to use their meaning, or where the action is complete but repeated over time. See below for examples.


The present tense is used to:

Imperfective and perfective verbs are conjugated in the same way.

Verbs form the present tense according to their conjugation. They take the following personal endings:
See Bulgarian verb paradigm for the full conjugation.

Although verbs of the first and second conjugation in first person singular end in -а/я, and in third person plural in -ат/ят, when the stress falls on these endings, they are not pronounced а/йа and ат/йат but ъ/йъ and ът/йът instead.

The incorrect pronunciation is considered to be an error.

Newly adopted verbs, especially from English, tend to take a –ирам ("–iram") ending, in which case they only have one form (the imperfective). Since this is not a native suffix (loaned from German verbal suffix "-ieren"), recent colloquial formations prefer the native suffixes "–вам" ("-vam") and "–на" ("–na") which do form an imperfective/perfective pair. Examples:
These verbs, especially the latter group, are extremely new and have not yet made it into the dictionaries.

Past Imperfect (Минало несвършено време) is used to talk about a temporary situation that existed at or around a particular time in the past. It also expresses past actions that were frequent, repeated, permanent or always true. Its most common use is in story telling to provide a background to other actions which are usually expressed with verbs in the past aorist. In this use it means that the action had begun and was in progress when the other happened, we do not know whether it stopped or not.

Both imperfective and perfective verbs have past imperfect. They are conjugated in the same way.

Verbs form the past imperfect with the following endings (they are the same for all conjugations):

These endings are added to the past imperfect basis. See Bulgarian verb paradigm for the full conjugation.

Past aorist (Минало свършено време) expresses an action that happened at a specific time in the past. Both imperfective and perfective verbs have such tense (there is no difference in their conjugation).

Similarly, as in past imperfect, verbs have past aorist basis to which the following personal endings are added (they are the same for all conjugations):

See Bulgarian verb paradigm for the full conjugation.

Although imperfective and perfective verbs are conjugated in the same way in the past aorist, there is difference in their meaning. Compare the sentences:

Usually the difference between the two tenses is very clear:
But imperfective verbs both in past imperfect and past aorist can express actions that have long duration and therefore both tenses can be used to say that one action happened at the same time as another. One should always keep in mind that past aorist means that the action began and stopped, and past imperfect that the action was in progress. Compare the sentences (they all contain the imperfective verb играя that expresses an action with some duration, but depending on the tense the sentences have different meaning):

Present perfect (in Bulgarian минало неопределено време, past indefinite tense) expresses an action which happened in the past, but the precise moment when it happened is not specified. It is either not known or not important (in contrast with past aorist). What is important is the result of the action. The tense has a lot in common with the English present perfect.

Present perfect is made up of the verb съм, conjugated in present tense, and the past active aorist participle of the main verb. Not only person (first, second, third) and number, but also gender must be taken into account in the process of conjugating. In other words, the corresponding indefinite forms of the participle (masculine, feminine, neuter, singular, plural) are used according to the gender and number of the subject. For the position of the verb съм see word order.

Example ("чета", to read):

In contrast with English, in Bulgarian (very rarely) the present perfect can be used even if the moment when the action happened is specified. In such cases the importance of the action or its result is emphasized:

Past perfect (in Bulgarian минало предварително време, "past preliminary tense") expresses an action that happened before another past action. It is made up of the past tense of съм and the past active aorist participle of the main verb. Again as in present perfect the participle agrees in number and gender with the subject. For the position of the verb съм see word order.

Example ("чета", to read):
Rarely the past perfect can be used for actions that happened at an indefinite time in the past but very long ago, especially in sentences containing the phrase "someone sometimes said":

The future tense (in Bulgarian бъдеще време) is formed with the particle ще (derived from the verb ща, "to want") and the present simple tense (ще always stands before the present forms). In contrast with the other tenses negation is not expressed with the particle не, but with the construction няма да + the present tense. Forms with не are also possible but they are found mainly in the poetry.

Example ("чета", to read):

The verb съм forms the future in two ways. The first one with its present tense, and the second one with its special future form – бъда. The latter is more common:

Future perfect (in Bulgarian бъдеще предварително време, future preliminary tense) expresses an action which is to take place in the future before another future action. It is made up of the future tense of the verb съм (in this tense the form with бъда is less common than the usual one) and the past active aorist participle of the main verb which agrees in number and gender with the subject.

Example ("чета", to read):

Past future tense or future in the past (in Bulgarian бъдеще време в миналото, future tense in the past) expresses an action which was to be completed in the past but was future as regards another past action. It is made up of the past imperfect of the verb ща "will, want", the particle да "to" and the present tense of the main verb. Negation is expressed with the construction нямаше да + the present tense, although forms with не are also possible but found mainly in the poetry.

Example ("чета", to read):

The verb съм forms the future in the past in two ways. The first one with its present tense, and the second one with бъда ("щях да съм" and "щях да бъда"). The latter is more common.

Past future perfect or future perfect in the past (in Bulgarian бъдеще предварително време в миналото, future preliminary tense in the past) expresses a past action which is prior to a past action which itself is future with respect to another past action. It is made up of the past imperfect of ща "will, want", the particle да "to", the present tense of the verb съм "be" (in other words, the past future tense of съм, but not the form with бъда) and the past active aorist participle of the main verb, which agrees in number and gender with the subject.

Example ("чета", to read):

The voice in Bulgarian adjectives is presented not through the auxiliary verb, as it is in English ("I "have" eaten" – active; "I "was" eaten" – passive), but rather by the ending on the past participle; the auxiliary remains "съм" ("to be"):

Modal distinctions in subordinate clauses are expressed not through verb endings, but through the choice of complementizer – "че (che)" or "да (da)" (which might both be translated with the relative pronoun "that"). The verbs remain unchanged. Thus:

The imperative has its own conjugation – usually by adding "-и" or "-ай" ("-i" or "-ay") to the root of the verb:

The so-called conditional refers to a possible action, which is usually intentional and under the control of a subject. It is formed by a special form of the auxiliary 'съм' (to be), and the aorist active participle of the main verb:

Bulgarian verbs are inflected not only for aspect, tense and modality, but also for evidentiality, that is, the source of the information conveyed by them. There is a four-way distinction between the unmarked (indicative) forms, which imply that the speaker was a witness of the event or knows it as a general fact; the inferential, which signals general non-witness information or one based on inference; the renarrative, which indicates that the information was reported to the speaker by someone else; and the dubitative, which is used for reported information if the speaker doubts its veracity. This can be illustrated with the four possible ways of rendering in Bulgarian the English sentence 'The dog ate the fish' (here denotes the aorist active participle):

Indicative:
Inferential:
Renarrative:
Dubitative:
On a theoretical level, there are alternatives to treating those forms as the four members of a single evidential category. Kutsarov, for example, posits a separate category, which he terms 'type of utterance' ("вид на изказването"), proper to which is only the distinction between forms expressing speaker's own statements (indicative, inferential), and forms that retell statements of another (renarrative, dubitative). The inferential is then viewed as one of the moods, and the dubitative – as a renarrative inferential, whose dubitative meaning, albeit more frequent, is only secondary. Another view is presented by Gerdzhikov – in his treatment there are two distinctive features involved – subjectivity and renarrativity. The indicative is unmarked for both, while the inferential is marked for subjectivity, the renarrative for renarrativity, and the dubitative for both subjectivity and renarrativity.

An evidential for a given tense is formed by taking the past active participle of the verb (or auxiliary, if there is one) of the corresponding indicative tense, and adding a form of the auxiliary verb "съм" (to be). For the inferential and the renarrative it is its present tense form, which, however, is omitted in the 3rd person of the renarrative; hence inferential and renarrative forms are generally not distinguished in the 1st and 2nd person. The dubitative is formed from the renarrative by adding the past active participle of the verb "съм" (to be). An example paradigm is given in the following table. Given for reference are some tenses of the indicative (these are the imperfect, aorist, perfect, future in the past and future perfect in the past). Whenever there are participles involved, they are given in their masculine form, but they have different forms for the three genders in the singular.

Additionally, there are also a few rare forms for some of the future tenses. In some cases, there are less common forms in which the auxiliary "ще" remains impersonal instead of being inflected for person and number; thus for the inferential and renarrative future/future in the past rare forms of the type "ще съм четя̀л" are possible alongside the more common forms of the type "щя̀л съм да чета̀", for the inferential future perfect in the past – "ще съм бѝл чѐл" alongside the usual "щя̀л съм да съм чѐл", and for the dubitative future/ future in the past – rare forms of the type "ще съм бѝл четя̀л" in addition to the more common forms of the type "щя̀л съм бѝл да чета̀". Also, the negative form of the dubitative future perfect/future perfect in the past can be either "ня̀мало било̀ да съм чѐл", or "ня̀мало съм бил да съм чѐл".

Present Inferential is not used.
Present Perfect Inferential is not used.
Future Inferential is not used.

Future Perfect Inferential is not used.

Notice that Present Perfect and Past Perfect Dubitative have the same forms as Aorist Dubitative.

Past active aorist participle (минало свършено деятелно причастие) is used to form the present perfect, in the renarrative and conditional mood and as an adjective. It is formed by adding -л (this is its masculine indefinite form) to the past aorist basis (first person singular past aorist tensе but without the final х), but additional alterations of the basis are also possible. The indefinite feminine, neuter and plural forms take respectively the endings -а, -о and -и after the masculine form. The definite forms are formed from the indefinite by adding the definite articles -ят/я for masculine participles, та for feminine participles, то for neuter participles and те for plural participles
See Bulgarian verb paradigm for the full conjugation.

Can be used only predicatively

Can be formed only from imperfective verbs

Can be formed from both imperfective and perfective verbs

Obsolete; used only as adjective in modern Bulgarian

Obsolete


Charles-Gaspard Tarieu de Lanaudière

Charles-Gaspard Tarieu de Lanaudière (September 9, 1769 – June 7, 1812) was a seigneur and political figure in Lower Canada.

He was born Charles Tarieu de La Naudière in Quebec City in 1769, the son of seigneur Charles-François Tarieu de La Naudière, and studied at London. He inherited the seigneury of Saint-Vallier from his father. He was a lieutenant in the Royal Canadian Volunteer Regiment and also served as lieutenant-colonel in the local militia during the War of 1812. In 1792, he married Suzanne-Antoinette, the daughter of Pierre-Paul Margane de Lavaltrie. Lanaudière was elected to the Legislative Assembly of Lower Canada for Warwick in 1796. In 1804, he was elected in Leinster and he was named to the Legislative Council in 1811. He died at Lavaltrie while still in office in 1812.

His half-brother Charles-Louis also served on the legislative council. His daughter Charlotte married Barthélemy Joliette, and his sister Marie-Anne married François Baby.

Jean Kerebel

Jean-Baptiste Kerebel (2 April 1918, in Paris – 9 March 2010) was a French track and field athlete who mainly competed in the 400 metres.

He competed for France at the 1948 Summer Olympics held in London, Great Britain, where he won the silver medal in the men's 4 x 400 metre relay with his teammates François Schewetta, Robert Chef d’Hotel and Jacques Lunis.


Bulgarian conjugation

Bulgarian conjugation is the creation of derived forms of a Bulgarian verb from its principal parts by inflection. It is affected by person, number, gender, tense, mood and voice. Bulgarian verbs are conventionally divided into three conjugations according to the thematic vowel they use in the present tense:

In a dictionary, Bulgarian verbs are listed with their first-person-singular-present-tense form, due to the lack of an infinitive. This form is called the citation form.

Bulgarian verbs are conjugated using the formula:

formula_1

where thematic vowel and inflection suffix are only optional. The stem of the verb is what is left of the citation form after removing its final letter. Sometimes in the course of conjugation, the stem may undergo some alterations. In this article, any alteration of the stem is coloured in blue, the thematic vowels are coloured in red, and the inflectional endings in green.

Below are the endings for all finite forms:

These are the endings for the non-finite forms:

Below is a table of the thematic vowels. They are inserted between the stem and the ending.

Verbs from the first conjugation use the thematic vowel е (/ɛ/) between the stem and the personal endings, except in first person singular and third person plural, where the endings are added directly to the stem.

All verbs with citation forms ending in а use the endings -а and -ат in first person singular and third person plural respectively.

<nowiki>*</nowiki> Notice that the endings -а and -ат when stressed are pronounced /ɤ/ and /ɤt̪/, not /a/, /at̪/.

All verbs with stems ending in a vowel use the endings -я and -ят in first person singular and third person plural respectively.

All verbs with citation forms ending in я also use the endings -я and -ят in first person singular and third person plural.

All verbs with stems ending in -к (/k/) or -г (/g/) change to -ч (/tʃ/) and -ж (/ʒ/) respectively, before the thematic vowel е. This change is not limited solely to the present tense and happens always before /i/, /ɛ/ and the yat vowel.

Verbs from the second conjugation use the thematic vowel и (/i/) between the stem and the personal endings, except in first person singular and third person plural, where the endings are added directly to the stem.

All verbs with stems not ending in -ж (/ʒ/), -ч (/tʃ/) or -ш (/ʃ/) use the endings -я and -ят in first person singular and third person plural.

<nowiki>*</nowiki> Notice that the endings -я and -ят when stressed are pronounced /jɤ/ and /jɤt̪/, not /ja/, /jat̪/.

All verbs with stems ending in -ж (/ʒ/), -ч (/tʃ/) or -ш (/ʃ/) use the endings -а and -ат in first person singular and third person plural.

<nowiki>*</nowiki> Notice that the endings -а and -ат when stressed are pronounced /ɤ/ and /ɤt̪/, not /a/, /at̪/.

Strictly speaking, verbs from the third conjugation are athematic, because the personal endings are added directly to the stem with no thematic vowel in between. It may seem that the vowel а (/ə/) is inserted between them, but that vowel is actually part of the stem. All verbs have stems ending in either а or я.

The past imperfect always follows the stress patterns of the present tense.

These verbs use the old yat vowel between the stem and the personal endings. When stressed, it is pronounced as /ja/ (written я) or /a/ (written а) after /ʒ/, /tʃ/ and /ʃ/. When unstressed, it is pronounced as /ɛ/ (written е). In second and third person singular it is always pronounced as /ɛ/.

<nowiki>*</nowiki> The consonants к (/k/) and г (/g/) change to ч (/tʃ/) and ж (/ʒ/) before the front vowels е (/ɛ/) and и (/i/).

Additionally, after ж (/ʒ/), ч (/tʃ/) and ш (/ʃ/) the stressed yat vowel can be pronounced either as /a/ (as above) or as /ɛ/. The latter forms have fallen largely into disuse.

Verbs from the third conjugation use no thematic vowel, the endings are added directly to the stem.

In the first and second conjugation, verbs are additionally divided into classes according to the thematic vowel they use. In the third conjugation, verbs are divided into classes according to the final vowel of the stem.

Verbs with stress on the stem can keep it there or move it to the thematic vowel (or the final vowel of the stem in the case of the athematic third conjugation verbs). However, this shift can only happen if the verb is unprefixed or if it is imperfective. Forms with unshifted stress are usually typical for the eastern dialects and forms with shifted stress for the western dialects. However, the latter forms have become stylistically marked as dialectal and should be avoided and used only to distinguish otherwise homonymous forms.

Prefixed perfective verbs with stress on the stem do not change it.

Verbs with stress on the thematic vowel keep it there with the exception of first conjugation verbs of the first class and a few others.

These verbs have the vowel о (/o̝/) or е (/ɛ/) in second and third person singular between the stem and the personal endings. The stems of these verbs end in д (/d̪/), т (/t̪/), с (/s/), з (/z/) and к (/k/). This class contains only 23 main verbs, which, however, are some of the most frequently used and there are hundreds of prefixed verbs formed from them:

<nowiki>*</nowiki>These verbs are irregular but are considered part of the first class because in the aorist they behave just like the regular ones.

Although the stem of the verb тъка ends in к (/k/), it is not part of this class, it belongs to the next one.

An important feature of regular verbs from the first class is that the stress always moves on the last syllable of the stem (unless it is already there). This stress position is kept in the past active aorist participle, the past passive participle and the verbal noun.

<nowiki>*</nowiki> The consonant к (/k/) changes to ч (/tʃ/) before the front vowel е (/ɛ/).

The verbs (съ-)блекá, влекá, (в-)ля́за and секá have the old yat vowel in the stem, which alternates between я (/ja/) and е (/ɛ/) according to the pronunciation in the eastern dialects.

These verbs use the thematic vowel а (/a/ or /ə/) between the stem and the personal endings. The stems of these verbs end in a consonant different from ж /ʒ/, ч /tʃ/, ш /ʃ/, д (/d̪/), т (/t̪/), с (/s/), з (/z/) or к (/k/), and their citation forms end in а. This class contains over 400 main verbs.

<nowiki>*</nowiki> Notice the stress shift as mentioned above.

Stems ending in -ер (/ɛr/), such as "бера", "пера" and "дера", lose the е (/ɛ/):

In the verbs греба and гриза the stress moves to the stem. This is so because they used to belong to the first class.

These verbs also use the thematic vowel а (/a/ or /ə/). This class is almost identical to the previous one, the only difference is that the citation form ends in я. It contains 23 main verbs:


<nowiki>*</nowiki> These verbs have moved to the first class of the second conjugation due to analogy. First-conjugation forms can still be found, but are considered old-fashioned.

<nowiki>*</nowiki> Notice the stress shift as mentioned above.

The verb дремя contains the yat vowel which alternates between я (/ja/) and е (/ɛ/):

These verbs use the vowel а (/a/ or /ə/) between the stem and the personal endings. The stems of these verbs end in one of the consonants ж /ʒ/, ч /tʃ/ or ш /ʃ/, which in the aorist change to з/г (/z,g/), k (/k/) and с (/s/) respectively. This class contains 27 main verbs:

<nowiki>*</nowiki> реша also belongs to the second conjugation.

<nowiki>*</nowiki> Notice the stress shift as mentioned above.

The verb режа has the yat vowel, which alternates between я (/ja/) and е (/ɛ/).

The verbs глождя (глозгах), дращя (драсках) and пощя (посках) used to belong to this class but now have completely migrated to the second conjugation.

This class uses the yat vowel between the stem and the personal endings. It is consistently pronounced as я (/ja/) in all forms. The stems of these verbs end in a consonant + р (/r/), except for the defective verb ща. This is the smallest class, containing only 6 main verbs:


This class uses the thematic vowel я (/ja/ or /jə/). The class contains a small number of verbs, whose stems end in the vowels а (/a/) or е (/ɛ/):


<nowiki>*</nowiki> Verbs derived from зная by prefixation belong to the seventh class.

Some verbs belong both to this and to the next class. Some examples are: вея, блея, рея, шляя се, etc.

<nowiki>*</nowiki> Notice the stress shift as mentioned above.

These verbs do not use any thematic vowel. The personal endings are added directly to the stem, which almost always ends in a vowel, either а (/a/), я (/ja/), е (/ɛ/), и (/i/), у (/u/) or ю (/ju/). This class contains over 250 main verbs, some of which are:

All stems ending in /ɛ/ actually end in the old yat vowel which is pronounced as я (/ja/) or а (/a/) after /ʒ/, /tʃ/ and /ʃ/ in all aorist forms.

Stems ending in -ем (/ɛm/) are also considered to belong in this class since they do not use a thematic vowel. They are a special case because the stem loses the м (/m/) before adding the personal endings.

These verbs use the vowel и (/i/) between the stem and the personal endings. There are both stems ending in a consonant and stems ending in a vowel. The vast majority of the verbs from second conjugation belong to this class.

<nowiki>*</nowiki> Notice the double stress pattern as mentioned above.

These verbs use the old yat vowel between the stem and the personal endings. It is consistently pronounces as я (/ja/) in all forms. The majority of the stems end in a consonant (different from ж /ʒ/, ч /tʃ/ or ш /ʃ/) but there a few ending in a vowel. These verbs are characterized by the fact that the stress always falls on the thematic vowel across all forms, not exclusively in the aorist. This class contains 76 main verbs.

These verbs use the vowel а (/a/) between the personal endings and the stem, which always ends in ж /ʒ/ or ч /tʃ/. The stress is always on the thematic vowel in all forms, just as in the previous class. The class contains 27 main verbs:

All verbs conjugate in the same fashion (without a thematic vowel, simply by adding the personal endings directly to the stem), nevertheless, Bulgarian grammar books divide them into two classes, depending on the final vowel of the stem.

These are stems ending in а (/a/). The vast majority of third conjugation verbs belong to this class.

<nowiki>*</nowiki> Notice the stress shift as explained above.

The stems of these verbs end in я (/ja/). This class is much smaller compared to the first one.

<nowiki>*</nowiki> Notice the stress shift as explained above.

Inflected imperative forms exist only for the second person. The other persons use periphrastic constructions. All regular verbs, regardless of conjugation, form the imperative mood in the same way:

Some verbs, most notably stems ending in з (/z/) from the first class of the first conjugation, and a few other frequently used ones, use only the bare stem without a thematic vowel:

<nowiki>*</nowiki> The yat vowel changes to е (/ɛ/).

Only imperfective verbs have a present active participle. It is formed from the first-person-singular-past-imperfect form of the verb by removing the final х (/x/) and adding щ (/ʃt̪/). It is inflected as a regular adjective (see the endings).

<nowiki>*</nowiki> Although the yat vowel is followed by a syllable containing и (/i/), it is not pronounced as е (/ɛ/).

It is formed from the first-person-singular-past-aorist form of the verb by removing the final х (/x/) and adding л (/ɫ/), after that it is inflected as an adjective (see the endings). Only verbs from the first class of the first conjugation form it somewhat differently: the thematic vowel о (/o̝/) is removed and the л (/ɫ/) is added directly to the stem with some additional changes, namely:

The past active aorist participle keeps the stress of the past aorist, either shifted or not.

It is formed from the first-person-singular-past-imperfect form of the verb by removing the final х (/x/) and adding л (/ɫ/). It is inflected as a regular adjective, but without definite forms, since it is never used as an actual adjective, but only in certain verbal constructions (see the endings).

Only transitive verbs have a past passive participle. It is formed from the first-person-singular-past-aorist form of the verb by removing the final х (/x/) and adding н (/n/) or т (/t̪/), after that it is inflected as an adjective (see the endings). Verbs from the first class of the first conjugation and the first class of the second conjugation change the thematic vowel of the past aorist to е (/ɛ/).

The vast majority of the verbs use the ending н (/n/), only some verbs from the first conjugation use т (/t̪/), namely all verbs with stems ending in н (/n/) from the second class, and a few verbs from the seventh class (all stems ending in /i/, /u/, /ju/, /ɛm/ and a few others). Some verbs from the seventh class can use both endings.

Although the past passive participle is formed from the past aorist, it does not have a stress shift, it always keeps the stress of the present tense, except for first conjugation verbs from the first class, and the verbs греба and гриза which used to belong to the first class.

Only imperfective verbs have an adverbial participle. Verbs from the first and second conjugation use the thematic vowel е (/ɛ/) between the stem and the ending -йки (/jkʲi/). Verbs from the third conjugation just add the ending without using a thematic vowel. This participle is immutable.

The adverbial participle keeps the stress of the present tense.

Only imperfective verbs have a verbal noun. It is formed either from the first-person-singular-past-imperfect or -past aorist form of the verb (or from both). The final х (/x/) is removed and the ending не (/nɛ/) is added. After that it is inflected as neuter noun (see the endings). If the thematic vowel is о (/o̝/), и (/i/) or the yat vowel, it is changed to е (/ɛ/) before adding the ending.

Stems ending in н (/n/) from the second class of the first conjugation, and stems ending in е (/ɛ/), и (/i/), у (/u/) and ю (/ju/) from the seventh class use only the past imperfect to form the verbal noun. All verbs from the first class of the second conjugation use only the past aorist. The remaining verbs may use only the past aorist, only the past imperfect or both. This is not determined by which conjugation or class a verb belongs to, it is an inherent characteristic of each verb.

When the verbal noun is formed from the past aorist, it does not have a stress shift, it usually keeps the stress of the present tense, except for first-conjugation verbs from the first class, and a few other verbs which move the stress further back on the ending.


Marco Rossi (footballer, born 1987)

Marco Rossi (; born 30 September 1987) is an Italian footballer who plays as a defender for Serie D club Akragas.

In July 2009, Parma exchanged Rossi with Antonio Mirante of Sampdoria, signing a season-long loan. On 24 June 2011, he was signed by Cesena in a co-ownership deal for €2 million after he spent a year with Bari. After the deal, Alberto Galuppo returned to Parma in July 2011 for €1 million.

In June 2012 the co-ownership was renewed. However, due to Rossi's involvement in the 2011 Italian football scandal, Parma gave up the remaining 50% registration rights for free. Rossi was banned for one year and eight months, thus Cesena terminated his contract.

On 31 March 2014, Rossi was signed by Perugia. In January 2015, he was signed by Varese in a temporary deal.

On 9 August 2016, it was announced that Rossi signed for the A-League club Wellington Phoenix. After playing for the Phoenix for two seasons for 38 games including 37 starts, Rossi left the club at the end of his contract.

In July 2018, Rossi moved to Robur Siena in Serie C.

On 16 July 2019, he signed with Reggina.

ON 31 August 2021, he was transferred to Seregno.


Men's Irish Senior Cup (field hockey)

The Men's Irish Senior Cup is the senior field hockey cup competition organised by Hockey Ireland, featuring men's teams from the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland. The competition was first established in 1893, making it the oldest field hockey cup competition in the world. Lisnagarvey are the competition's most successful team.

The 2018–19 format saw the Men's Irish Hockey League Division 1 teams receive a bye into Round 3, the last sixteen. Rounds 1 and 2 feature teams from the Munster, Leinster and the Ulster Senior Leagues.




Liebermann–Burchard test

The Liebermann–Burchard or acetic anhydride test is used for the detection of cholesterol. The formation of a green or green-blue colour after a few minutes is positive.

Lieberman–Burchard is a reagent used in a colourimetric test to detect cholesterol, which gives a deep green colour. This colour begins as a purplish, pink colour and progresses through to a light green then very dark green colour. The colour is due to the hydroxyl group (-OH) of cholesterol reacting with the reagents and increasing the conjugation of the un-saturation in the adjacent fused ring. Since this test uses acetic anhydride and sulfuric acid as reagents, caution must be exercised so as not to receive severe burns.

Method: Dissolve one or two crystals of cholesterol in dry chloroform in a dry test tube. Add several drops of acetic anhydride and then 2 drops of concentrated HSO and mix carefully.
After the reaction is finished, the concentration of cholesterol can be measured using spectrophotometry.


Rock the Spot

Rock the Spot, sometimes referred as RTS, is an annual b-boying event held in London, Ontario, Canada. The event attracts spectators and dancers from around Ontario as well as nearby areas such as Quebec, Michigan and New York. The main feature of the event is a breakdance competition between crews however, there are often performances by specially invited dance groups which showcase funk or choreographed hip hop dance acts before or between rounds of the competition. Winners of the competition are chosen by a panel of special guest judges and prizes are awarded.

Rock the Spot first took place on June 2, 2001, and was organized by Kyler Ayim (Bboy Ka Boom) and Matthew Kang (Bboy 12-Step). The original Rock the Spot was a success however there was no event the following years until it was reinstated by main organizer Joseph Chen-Fu Hsieh (Bboy FoOL-Fu) and executive members of the UWO Breakers, a breakdancing club at the University of Western Ontario, in 2005. The original organizers no longer have a major role in organizing the now yearly event, however they have remained a part of RTS as the Master of Ceremonies (Ayim) and as a judge (Kang). Rock the Spot 2 and Rock the Spot 3 took place on March 25, 2005, and February 18, 2006, respectively, both at Huron University College at the University of Western Ontario. Rock the Spot 4 took place in February 2007.













VSNL Western Europe

VSNL Western Europe (previously TGN Western Europe) is a telecommunications cable system with both submarine and terrestrial parts linking several counties in western Europe.

The cable system is constructed from cables with 4 fibre pairs per cable, and each fibre pair supports 96 10Gbit/s waves at construction, allowing for a total lit capacity (at construction) of 4 fibre pairs x 96 10 Gbit/s waves = 3,840 Gbit/s.

It has two submarine cables, one with landing points in:

and the other with landing points in

The Seixal and Bilbao landing points are interconnected terrestrially via Lisbon, Portugal and Madrid, Spain. Highbridge is connected via a pair of cables to London, United Kingdom

Tepid Baths

The Tepid Baths is a public indoor pool complex in Auckland, New Zealand. The baths opened in 1914 on a site that had previously been occupied by a small drydock and were very well-received by the public, with the new baths attracting 30,000 visitors in the first two months after opening. In 2010 the baths closed for a major refurbishment, re-opening in mid-2012 after a two year re-build.

The main pool is 1.1m in the shallowest end, and 2.1m in the deepest end.

The Tepid Baths was originally leased from the Auckland Harbour Board, and contain two separate pools, a "male" (25 m, 6 lanes) and "female" (18 m, 4 lane). The "male" pool was the largest in New Zealand at the time. The pools were heated with hot water from the nearby tramways power plant, the system being considered an engineering masterpiece of its time.

The pools were not only extensively used for both recreational and competitive swimming, but also for some other activities – in one event in the early 1930s, a pentecostal minister baptised a hundred new faithful in the pools. Two local athletes were employed as custodians of the baths, swimmer Malcolm Champion (who frequently swam across the harbour to and from his North Shore home) and runner Billy Savidan.

In 1974, the salt water pools (previously fed from the Waitematā Harbour) were transformed into fresh water pools, primarily for maintenance reasons. The facility was refurbished in 1986 and again after the YMCA received the management lease in 1997 from Auckland City Council. Renovations included new sauna and steam rooms, and a gym on the upper level (YMCA club members only). Nowadays, a large part of the Tepid Baths' customers are people working in the Auckland CBD who swim here before or after work.

In November 2009 it was announced that the Tepid Baths would close for a period of up to four years for a $12 million restoration project to address structural issues exacerbated by saltwater effects. It was hoped the pool would reopen in time for its 100th anniversary in 2014. The baths closed in April 2010, with the Y-Fitness Centre having already moved to a new purpose-built facility at the ANZ Centre on Albert Street. While the restoration costs rose later to approximately $16 million, the pools were closed only until mid-2012 when they reopened.

In late 2012, the restored building won the New Zealand Project Management Institute's (PMINZ) Public Sector Project of the Year award.


Community education

Community education, also known as community-based education or community learning & development, is an organization's programs to promote learning and social development work with individuals and groups in their communities using a range of formal and informal methods. A common defining feature is that programmes and activities are developed in dialogue with communities and participants. The purpose of community learning and development is to develop the capacity of individuals and groups of all ages through their actions, the capacity of communities, to improve their quality of life. Central to this is their ability to participate in democratic processes.

Community education encompasses all those occupations and approaches that are concerned with running education and development programmes within local communities, rather than within educational institutions such as schools, colleges and universities. The latter is known as the formal education system, whereas community education is sometimes called informal education. It has long been critical of aspects of the formal education system for failing large sections of the population in all countries and had a particular concern for taking learning and development opportunities out to poorer areas, although it can be provided more broadly.

There are a myriad of job titles and employers include public authorities and voluntary or non-governmental organisations, funded by the state and by independent grant making bodies. Schools, colleges and universities may also support community learning and development through outreach work within communities. The community schools movement has been a strong proponent of this since the sixties. Some universities and colleges have run outreach adult education programmes within local communities for decades. Since the seventies the prefix word ‘community’ has also been adopted by several other occupations from youth workers and health workers to planners and architects, who work with more disadvantaged groups and communities and have been influenced by community education and community development approaches.

Community educators have over many years developed a range of skills and approaches for working within local communities and in particular with disadvantaged people. These include less formal educational methods, community organising and group work skills. Since the nineteen sixties and seventies through the various anti poverty programmes in both developed and developing countries, practitioners have been influenced by structural analyses as to the causes of disadvantage and poverty i.e. inequalities in the distribution of wealth, income, land etc. and especially political power and the need to mobilise people power to effect social change. Thus the influence of such educators as Paulo Friere and his focus upon this work also being about politicising the poor.

In the history of community education and community learning and development, the UK has played a significant role in hosting the two main international bodies representing community education and community development. These being the International Community Education Association, which was for many years based at the Community Education Development Centre based in Coventry UK. ICEA and CEDC have now closed, and the International Association for Community Development, which still has its HQ in Scotland. In the 1990s there was some thought as to whether these two bodies might merge. The term community learning and development has not taken off widely in other countries. Although community learning and development approaches are recognised internationally. These methods and approaches have been acknowledged as significant for local social, economic, cultural, environmental and political development by such organisations as the UN, WHO, OECD, World Bank, Council of Europe and EU.

In the UK, the term community learning and development has now been widely adopted as describing a discrete employment sector of occupations concerned with outreach education and development work in local communities. In 1999, a UK-wide organisation responsible for setting professional training standards for education and development practitioners working within local communities was established. This organisation was called PAULO – the National Training Organisation for Community Learning and Development. (It was named after Paulo Freire.) It was formally recognised by David Blunket, the Secretary of State for Education and Employment in the New Labour Government in January 1999. It brought together a range of occupational interests under a single national training standards body, these being, adult education, youth work, community development and development education. The inclusion of community development was significant as it was initially uncertain as to whether it would join the NTO for Social Care.

The Community Learning and Development NTO represented all the main employers, trades unions, professional associations and national development agencies working in this area across the four nations of the UK. This was the first time that the informal education occupations across the UK had ever come together with the common purpose of creating a publicly recognised occupational sector, in the way that school teachers or college lecturers had long been publicly and officially recognised.

The term 'community learning and development' was adopted to acknowledge that all of these occupations worked primarily within local communities, and that this work encompassed not just providing less formal learning support but also a concern for the wider holistic development of those communities – socio-economically, environmentally, culturally and politically. In effect this brought together for the first time two traditions. The former group of occupations – adult educators, youth workers and community education workers had tended to focus upon the provision of informal education support for individuals and groups within communities. They had always seen their work as being educational. The latter group – community workers, community development workers and development educators had tended to focus upon the socio-economic and environmental development of those communities. Both sets of occupations recognised that they shared very similar values, knowledge base and skill sets and that what brought them together was a common commitment to supporting learning and social action.

By bringing together these occupational groups this created for the first time a single recognised employment sector of nearly 300,000 full and part-time paid staff within the UK, approximately 10% of these staff being full-time. The NTO continued to recognise the range of different occupations within it, for example specialists who work primarily with young people, but all agreed that they shared a core set of professional approaches to their work.

In 2002 the New Labour Government announced that it wished to cluster NTOs, of which there were over 50 covering a wide range of occupations across the UK labour market, under a smaller number of what they called Sector Skills Councils. A Sector Skills Council was formed called the Lifelong Learning UK Sector Skills Council. PAULO became one of five discrete pillars within LLUK, the others being the former NTOs for Further Education, for Universities, for Library and information Services and for Work Based Education. Over nearly a decade LLUK did a large amount of labour market mapping, as well as setting standards for the professional training of people working in the CLD area and generally promoted the identity of this sector across wider UK public policies and the public, non governmental and private sector employers.

All Sector Skills Councils in the UK including LLUK were abolished by the Conservative/Liberal coalition Government in 2011 and at the time of writing it is uncertain as to whether a single body representing the professional community learning and development sector will be sustained. The Community and Youth Workers Union which is part of the Unite Union in the UK played the lead role in improving employee's conditions across the sector but never succeeded in representing all employees within the CLD sector and is not widely represented across all parts of the UK.

The Scottish Government has continued to recognise community learning and development as a discrete employment sector, and has for over a decade supported CLD training for people wishing to work professionally in this area. There is a team of HMI (Her Majesties Inspectors) to inspect the quality of delivery by employers. In 2007 the Scottish Government established a Scottish Standards Council for Community Learning and Development. This organisation oversees quality standards in the professional training of staff working in this field, including the validation and endorsement of professional training courses and is introducing a professional registration scheme for such qualified practitioners. It has continued much of the work of the former LLUK as it operated in Scotland.

At the present time similar CLD Standards Councils have not been set up in other parts of the UK and it does appear that the sector outside Scotland is once again becoming more fragmented. Unlike the formal education sector there is virtually no legislation in the UK underpinning the need to provide and fund community learning and development. Consequently, it has been vulnerable to cuts in public expenditure due to the recession, particularly projects that were seen as too radical.

Three national priorities have been developed for community learning and development in Scotland:

Raising standards of achievement in learning for adults through community-based lifelong learning opportunities incorporating the core skills of literacy, numeracy, communications, working with others, problem solving and information communications technology (ICT).

Engaging with young people to facilitate their personal, social and educational development and enable them to gain a voice, influence and place in society.

Building community capacity and influence by enabling people to develop the confidence, understanding and skills required to influence decision making and service delivery.

Competent CLD workers will ensure that their work supports social change and social justice and is based on the values of CLD. Their approach is collaborative, anti-discriminatory and equalities-focused and they work with diverse individuals, communities of place or interest when this is or is not appropriate. Central to their practice is challenging discrimination and its consequences and working with individuals and communities to shape learning and development activities that enhance quality of life and sphere of influence. They have good interpersonal and listening skills and their practice demonstrates that they value and respect the knowledge, experience and aspirations of those involved.

The Scottish Government have introduced the following set of principles of which community learning and development related activities should be based on:


A philosophical base for developing Community Education programs is provided through the five components of the Wisconsin Model of Community Education. The model provides a process framework for local school districts to implement or strengthen community education. A set of Community Education Principles was developed by Larry Horyna and Larry Decker for the National Coalition for Community Education in 1991


The role of a community learning and development professional depends somewhat on the career path followed. For example, someone working with young people may have different priorities than someone working with adults; however, the outcomes are very similar in a sense that both will be aiming to promote a more socially just and equal society. Community learning and development is a vast field of work and the range of job categories is wide and may include the following: Youth Information Worker, Detached Youth Worker, Community Arts Worker, Community Capacity Worker, Local Authority Community Planning Officer, etc.

Community learning and development workers should see themselves as working with people, rather than for them. Empathy is crucial to understanding the issues faced by those they work with and it is important that they engage in a way that does not intimidate people or place the worker in a position of looking down on those they work with.

The role of a Community learning and development worker is largely different from the role of a formal educator such as a teacher. Community learning and development workers do not follow a curriculum, as they allow the people they work with to form their own way of learning and each individual is believed to have the ability to reach their full potential in life. A community learning and development approach is arguably a more effective way of learning as every individual has their own unique way to learn and community learning and development workers look for the best possible method that suits the individual. Community learning and development approaches are gradually being adopted in schools to some extent and many other agencies and using a community learning and development approach in their work.

In Canada, a university in Alberta has created a Community-based Bachelor of Education program to prepare teachers for rural community education, making it the first university program in Canada that aims at preparing teachers for rural community education.

Professional community educators or community learning and development workers usually hold a professional degree in community education or community learning and development, depending on the course offered at the university from which they graduate. In Scotland, qualifications may be Approved by the Standards Council for Community Learning and Development. This means that the course has been assessed by a group of peers - an Approval Panel. The course must have a practice element totalling 40% of the course to gain Approval. More details on the Approval Process and a list of Approved qualifications are available on the Standards Council website www.cldstandardscouncil.org.uk In order to gain entrance to this course, a history of voluntary work is usually desirable.

Many of those working in the field of community learning and development will be doing so voluntarily. These people are usually encouraged to complete a work-place based alternative to the full-time degree course. Others in paid positions may hold qualifications relevant to the field. These people will also be encouraged to study for a degree in community education.

Some university institutions offer post-graduate degrees in community education such as MA, MSc, PGDip, PGCert, etc.

In countries where democratic governments exist, people are encouraged to vote for someone to represent them. In today's society there is a dwindling interest in politics from our younger generation and this could have a negative effect on our democracy and political system in years to come. Community learning and development has the potential to encourage young people to become more interested in politics and helping them influence decisions that affect their lives.

In many parts of the world, youth parliament-style organisations have been set up to allow young people to debate issues that affect them and others in their community. Young people engage with these organisations voluntarily and are sometimes elected using a democratic system of voting. Young people are at the heart of these organisations and are usually involved in the management and development. The majority of these organisations are facilitated and staffed by workers trained in community learning and development; however, staff role is mainly to facilitate and be supportive but not intrusive.

These organisations allow young people to gain a voice, influence decision makers who affect their lives and provide them with a sense of self-worth and a place in society.

In the United Kingdom, examples of these organisations include the United Kingdom Youth Parliament (UKYP); in Scotland, the Scottish Youth Parliament (SYP); in Wales the Children & Young People's Assembly for Wales; and in Northern Ireland, the Northern Ireland Youth Forum. In Canada, examples include Youth Parliament of Manitoba (YPM), Saskatchewan Youth Parliament (SYP), TUXIS Parliament of Alberta (TUXIS), and British Columbia Youth Parliament (BCYP).

Cultural divides and deficit thinking creates mutual distrust between marginalized parents and schools which in turn creates barriers to active parental involvement of marginalized parents in the education of their children. Researches also show that parents of high socio-economic status play active and direct role in the education of their children and are more likely to influence school policies that affects their children's schooling whereas parents of low socio-economic status play indirect roles in the education of their children and are less likely to influence school policies that affects their children's schooling. The gap between parents' educational involvement among parents from higher socio-economic status and parents from lower socio-economic status results in a more personalized education that caters for the needs of children from higher socio-economic backgrounds and more alienating and generic education systems/policies for students from low socio-economic backgrounds.

The following practices are necessary for parent and community participation in the education of their wards to be effective; students come to school healthy and ready to learn, parents assist schools with financial and or material support, there are frequent communications between parents and school authorities, parents have meaningful authorities in the schools and they also assist in the teaching of their children. Parents' home based educational involvement such as creating an enabling learning environment at home, helping their children with their assignments, helping their children develop cognitive skills and other school skills and motivating their children to do well in school supports student success. Researches show that multimodal and effective migrant parental involvement in the education of their children increases the test scores of such students and also shows strong student success even after academic abilities and socio-economic status are taken into consideration.

School officials' racial stereotypes, class stereotypes, biases and attitudes regarding parental involvement in the education of their children hinders school officials from involving parents as partners in the education of their children. Also, bureaucracies in the public education systems hinders parents from advocating for changes that would benefit their children. Formally organized parental associations in schools that seeks to increase parental involvement, ignore the cultural and socio-economic needs of minorities, thereby contributing to the barriers of parental involvement, especially for marginalized parents. Research shows that high number of marginalized parents do not actively engage in their children's schooling. There is also a wide gap between the rhetoric of best parental involvement practices and actual parental involvement practices. Effective parental Involvement in the education of their children involves; parenting, communication, volunteering, home tutoring, involvement in decision-making, and collaboration with the community. Effective Parental Involvement treats and or makes school officials and parents partners in the education of their children.




Erik Elmsäter

Fritz Erik Elmsäter (7 October 1919 – 9 March 2006) was the first Swedish athlete to compete in both the Summer and Winter Olympics. In 1948 he won a silver medal in the 3000 m steeplechase race, and finished 19th in the 18 km cross-country skiing and 9th in the Nordic combined event. At the 1952 Winter Olympics, he was the flag bearer for Sweden, and finished 56th in the 18 km skiing race and 13th in the Nordic combined.

He was born Erik Pettersson and changed his name to Fritz Erik Elmsäter in 1939. A multitalented athlete, he played as a football goalkeeper in the 1930s, and competed in modern pentathlon, military relays and gymnastics. He had his best results in the 3000 m steeplechase. In this event he won four national titles in 1943–1946 and set two world records, becoming in 1944 the first person to run the steeplechase within nine minutes. He won silver medals at the 1946 European Championships and at the 1948 Olympics.

Elmsäter was a career military officer, retiring in 1959 to accept a position at the Swedish Sports Federation. In the 1960s he worked for the Swedish radio and TV network, and between 1968 and 1985 held various managerial position at the Sveriges Television. His daughter is a prominent journalist.


Stupid Stupid Stupid

Stupid Stupid Stupid is the second studio album by British rock band Black Grape, released on 10 November 1997 through Radioactive Records. While touring in support of their debut studio album "It's Great When You're Straight...Yeah" (1995), vocalist Paul "Kermit" Leveridge was diagnosed with sepsis. Carl "Psycho" McCarthy temporarily filled in Kermit's role, before being added to the line-up permanently. Though he was too ill to tour, Kermit joined the band in Hollywood to work on songs for their next album, which continued throughout 1996. They recorded their second album at Real World Studios in Bath, and Westlake Audio in Los Angeles, California, over eight weeks with Danny Saber, John X Volaitis and frontman Shaun Ryder as producers. "Stupid Stupid Stupid" is a dance-rock album that continues the party atmosphere of "It's Great When You're Straight...Yeah" while toning down that album's religious references.

"Stupid Stupid Stupid" received mixed reviews from music critics, some of whom saw it as a continuation of "It's Great When You're Straight...Yeah", while others found it to be an inferior version of that album. It peaked at number 11 in the UK, as well as charting highly in Scotland and Sweden. It would be certified gold in the UK within a few months of release. With an appearance at Phoenix Festival, Saber was made a member of Black Grape. "Get Higher" was released as the lead single from "Stupid Stupid Stupid" on 20 October 1997, reaching number 12 in Scotland and number 24 in the UK. It was followed by the European-only second single "Dadi Waz a Badi". Following a fight prior to a show, Ryder fired the rest of the band; future touring plans were subsequently cancelled. "Marbles" was released as the album's third single on 23 February 1998, sitting outside of the top 40 in Scotland and the UK. By July 1998, Ryder said he would no longer be recording under the Black Grape name.

Black Grape released their debut studio album "It's Great When You're Straight...Yeah" in August 1995. It topped the UK Album Chart for two months, and was eventually certified platinum. All three of its singles – "Reverend Black Grape", "In the Name of the Father" and "Kelly's Heroes" – reached the top 20 in the UK, with "In the Name of the Father" peaking the highest at number eight. After flying back to the United Kingdom after a show, vocalist Paul "Kermit" Leveridge fell ill, and was subsequently diagnosed with sepsis. In early 1996, the band embarked on a UK tour, with Carl "Psycho" McCarthy covering Kermit's role. At the tour's conclusion, he joined the band on a permanent basis. Dancer Bez left the band over disagreements with finances with the band's label Radioactive Records. Kermit was in a stable condition to help record "England's Irie", a song intended to promote the Euro 1996 football league. Black Grape then toured across the United States and South America with Psycho; Kermit had to miss the trek as a result of a lung infection.

Despite Kermit being too ill to tour, he flew to the US in May 1996; him, frontman Shaun Ryder and producer Danny Saber worked on some new songs in a rented house in Hollywood. The band released the non-album single "Fat Neck" in May 1996, which peaked at number ten in the UK. Around it, they supported Oasis for two shows, and headlined Tribal Gathering. The following month, Ryder fired their management team Nicholl and Dime on the grounds that they were trying to extort money out of him. He tried to find a new manager, being in contact with Nirvana-associate Danny Goldberg and Henry Rollins contactee Richard Bishop, eventually going with Bishop's management company 3AM. Kermit and Psycho meanwhile hired the company Hot Soup, which consisted of their touring manager Tony Murray and Ryder's father to manage the pair. "England's Irie" was released as another non-album single that same month, peaking at number six in the UK. They headlined the Saturday date of Reading Festival. Throughout the year, the band had spent three separate fortnight-long sessions at the rented Hollywood residence to write material for their next album, with the last occurring in December 1996. They demoed 15 tracks in total while there.

Ryder did not want to rush into recording their next album, preferring to take a slow-pace approach to it. In the meantime, Saber occupied himself working on "Bridges to Babylon" (1997) by the Rolling Stones, as well as remix tracks by the likes of David Bowie and U2. Ryder decided to take a break, purchasing a house outside of Cork, Ireland. Black Grape recorded their new album over the course of eight weeks in July and August 1997. In the midst of recording, Ryder was busy filming scenes for "The Avengers" (1998); they were accompanied by live member and keyboardist Martin Slattery. Sessions were held at Real World Studios in Bath, and Westlake Audio in Los Angeles, California, with Saber, John X Volaitis and Ryder as producers. "Dadi Waz a Badi" had the extra credit of also being produced by "It's Great When You're Straight...Yeah" producer Stephen Lironi.

Around this time, Kermit and Pyscho were focused on trying to get their side project Manmade started; Ryder theorised that people had told the pair that they did not need him to be successful. Ryder and Saber would often be sitting in the studio waiting for Kermit and Pyscho to show up, who were recording for Manmade instead of for Black Grape. Ryder's frustration about the situation extended to Murray, saying he had a conflict of interest with the pair. Ryder wanted to continue the party atmosphere from their debut, but felt this was unattainable as the collaborative nature of that album was not present while making the new one. He went as far as to compare it to the making of his previous band Happy Mondays' fourth studio album "Yes Please!" (1992): "The band was splintering and the music really suffered because of it". Volaitis served as the main engineer, with assistance from Marco Milgliari, who was an additional engineer alongside, Phil Ault, Ewan Davis and Saber. Saber claimed that Ryder would recorded as many as 20 tracks of his vocals for every song on the album. Tom Lord-Alge, with assistance from Mauricio Iragorri, mixed the recordings at South Beach Studios in Miami, Florida and Encore Studios in Los Angeles. Ted Jensen then mastered the album at Sterling Sound in New York.

Musically, the sound of "Stupid Stupid Stupid" has been described as dance-rock, with influence from soul. Author Lisa Verrico in her book "High Life 'N' Low Down Dirty: The Thrills and Spills of Shaun Ryder" wrote that the album melded together "P-funk, soul, hip hop, rock and drum'n'bass beats with a buoyant brass section, bongos, scratching and the usual smattering of musical steals". It retained the party atmosphere of "It's Great When You're Straight...Yeah"; it lacked the religious references of that album, with Ryder claiming he put more effort into the lyrics for "Stupid Stupid Stupid". The title was taken from an occasion where the band was performing "Reverend Black Grape" on TV and had to change the lyric "talking bullshit... bullshit... bullshit" to "talking stupid... stupid... stupid". All of the tracks were credited to Ryder, Saber, Manmade, except "Lonely" by Posie Knight and Jerry Weaver.

"Get Higher" is about Ryder's drug consumption; its intro consists of spliced speeches of former US president Ronald Reagan, making him sound like he is discussing drug use. It was taken from "Just Say No", a TV campaign from the 1980s where Reagan and his wife Nancy warned against marijuana usage. Ryder said he had "ripped [off] a bit" of "Reach for Love" (1984) by Marcel King for "Get Higher" in the hopes that listeners would "go back and discover the original". "Squeaky" is about safe sex; its music is a cross between the sound of Led Zeppelin and baggy, with record scratches and duck noises. "Marbles" is a trip hop and electronic house track that was compared to the work of Happy Mondays, and continued the vocal sparring found on Black Grape's debut. "Dadi Waz a Badi" is about having bad parents as role models, and Ryder pondering on whether he is a good father. Both it and "Marbles" recalled the sound of Happy Mondays third studio album "Pills 'n' Thrills and Bellyaches" (1990).

"Rubberband" is an guitar-focused rock song with heavy bass parts, topped by Ryder's distorted voice being run through a flange pedal. It channelled the sound of "Devils Haircut" (1996) by Beck and lifts the guitar part from the "Pills 'n' Thrills and Bellyaches" opening track "Kinky Afro". "Spotlight" includes a musical tribute to Phil Lynott, and is the only track on the album not to feature vocals from Kermit. "Tell Me Something" is a drum and bass track with Latin music flourishes, and borrows elements of "Fools Gold" (1989) by the Stone Roses and the psychedelic work of the Byrds. "Money Back Guaranteed" is a series of toilet jokes. "Lonely" is a cover of the Frederick Knight track "I've Been Lonely for So Long (1972); Black Grape's version of the track was compared to "Exile on Main St." (1972)-era Rolling Stones. They decided to do a version of it after listening to its respective album "I've Been Lonely for So Long" (1972) while in the studio. The album concludes with the Latin funk of "Words".

Black Grape played their first show of 1997 performing at Phoenix Festival, which marked the introduction of Saber as a member of the band. In August 1997, the band's documentary – "The Grape Tapes" – premiered at the Edinburgh Film Festival. It was directed by Tom Bruggen, who originally wanted to make a documentary on Happy Mondays; as that band broke-up, Bruggen filmed the formation of Black Grape. "Get Higher" was released as the album's lead single on 20 October 1997; this version omitted the audio clip of Reagan. Two versions were released on CD: the first with remixes of "Get Higher" and a live version of "Rubberband", while the second included remixes of "Rubberband" and the music video for "Get Higher". "Stupid Stupid Stupid" was released on 10 November 1997, after initially being scheduled for October 1997. Ryder said the album's artwork received criticism from some people in the US as the golliwog doll depicted with googly eyes came across as a racist stereotype, to which he responded: "We had two black kids in the band, Kermit and Psycho, who hadn't even thought anything of it".

In November and December 1997, Black Grape embarked on a UK tour, titled The Get Higher Tour, with support from Dust Junkys. "Dadi Waz a Badi" was released as a single exclusively in Europe, with a live version of "Rubberband" as its B-side. Prior to a concert in Doncaster on 7 December 1997, Ryder reportedly fired the rest of the band. It came after a fight between the members, and resulted in a previously scheduled New Year's Eve show at Alexandra Palace in London. Representatives on behalf of the band said Ryder was dealing with "nervous exhaustion" as a result of filming "The Avengers". They added that they were attempting to have a meeting for the members to sort out their issues. Plans for a music video for their next single, as well as tours of Australia and Japan in early 1998, were cancelled due to the uncertainty of the band's status. In late December 1997, it was confirmed that Kermit departed to focus on Manmade; by January 1998, Psycho was also confirmed to have left Black Grape. Ryder claimed a "power play" between Murray and 3AM was the reason for Kermit and Psycho leaving. Ryder also mentioned that Psycho had developed an ego due to the success of Black Grape.

"Marbles" was released as the album's third single on 23 February 1998. Two versions were released on CD: the first with a radio edit, remixes and a demo of "Marbles", while the second featured "Harry the Dog", a remix of "Marbles" and an uncensored music video for "Get Higher". After initially being planned for release on 27 January 1998, "Stupid Stupid Stupid" was eventually released in the US on 24 February 1998. Additional tours of Europe and the US were in the planning stages, though these were also cancelled, including an appearance at Glastonbury Festival. A representative for Ryder said these cancellations were due to Ryder wanting to make a feature film with Bruggen. In July 1998, Ryder said he would no longer be performing shows or recording new music under the Black Grape moniker.

"Stupid Stupid Stupid" was met with mixed reviews from music critics. It is often considered to be similar to the band's debut album, but without that album's "infectious beats, mammoth hooks, and surreal humour". "The Daily News" Michael Mehle wrote that it went "a long way toward streamlining [the sound of their debut] for American audiences", highlighting the "rap influences" and "thick, high-impact dance tracks". Author Dave Thompson, in his book "Alternative Rock" (2000), wrote that it was "more focused" than the first time, with band "refin[ing] their sound down into a powerful funkadelic hybrid ..." MTV reviewer Lily Moayeri said it followed their debut with the "[w]ell-rounded grooves, funky hip-hop rhythms, and soulful vocal offerings with an inherent sense of humor". Ed Masley of "Pittsburgh Post-Gazette" saw it as a "musical trainwreck of breakbeats, samples, loops and sky-high Wonderwalls of rock guitar". "CMJ New Music Monthly" writer Andrew Beaujon called it "one hell of a funky document", adding that the "party-in-the-studio patina" that Ryder has been attempting since Happy Mondays was "now fully realized".

Silvio Essinger of "Jornal do Brasil" considered it "mind-numbing – it has [a] hypnotic swing" that is fronted by "damaged soul, drunken funk and a lot of psychedelicism, all in one puff". Richard T. Thurston for "Ink 19" saw it akin to Oasis' works, and call it a "ballsy hybrid of dance and rock that is ripe for young ears". Brent DiCrescenzo of "Pitchfork" described it as "[l]oud, obnoxious, and perfect for the setting". "Entertainment Weekly" contributed Mark Bautz
saw it as a "lackadaisical effort that verges on dullness", since the majority of the tracks are "so indistinguishable that the disc rapidly descends from a lively groove into a familiar rut". "NME" Steve Sutherland called it "a calculatedly offensive gesture almost beautiful in the perfection of its simplicity". "The Independent" writer Andy Gill thought that it "simply doesn't move like it should", with "no twitch to its funk". He summarised it as being "more dumbed-down than drugged-up."

Eric Weisbard of "Spin" thought that the "tunes are almost an afterthought this time", signalling that "Dadi Waz a Badi" and "Tell Me Something" were the only songs that "capture the manic pop thrill" of their debut. Wall of Sound's Daniel Durchholz echoed a similar statement, calling it "disconcertingly unfocused and pleasing only in dribs and drabs". Johnny Walker of MTV felt that Saber's "ace production and arsenal of instrumental touches" are not able to hide that the album "doesn't pack the punch of the band's debut". He added that the "insistence here on repeating simplistic choruses ad infinitum start to grate after a while". In a review for "Rolling Stone", journalist Greg Kot said that the band "don't quite squeeze out the same head-spinning elixir" as their debut. In a dismissive review from "E! Online", the staff there remarked that despite the band's lack of songwriting it "doesn't stop 'em from making CDs", referring to it as "boring and repetitive".

"Stupid Stupid Stupid" peaked at number 11 in the UK, and was certified gold by the British Phonographic Industry within a few months. It also charted at number ten in Scotland and number 40 in Sweden. "Get Higher" reached number 12 in Scotland and number 24 in the UK. "Marbles" reached number 44 in Scotland and number 46 in the UK. "Pittsburgh Post-Gazette" ranked "Stupid Stupid Stupid" as the 8th best album of 1998.

All songs written by Shaun Ryder, Danny Saber and Manmade, except "Lonely" by Posie Knight and Jerry Weaver. All tracks produced by Saber, John X Volaitis and Ryder, except "Dadi Waz a Badi" by those three and Stephen Lironi.


Personnel per booklet.
Black Grape

Additional musicians

Production and design


Citations
Sources


Roman Catholic Diocese of Amiens

The Diocese of Amiens (Latin: "Dioecesis Ambianensis"; French: "Diocèse d'Amiens") is a Latin Church diocese of the Catholic Church in France. The diocese comprises the department of Somme, of which the city of Amiens is the capital.

The diocese of Amiens was a suffragan of the Archdiocese of Reims during the old regime; it was made subordinate to the diocese of Paris under the Concordat of 1801, from 1802 to 1822; and then in 1822 it became a suffragan of Reims again.

Louis Duchesne denies any value to the legend of two Saints Firmin, honoured on the first and twenty-fifth of September, as the first and third Bishops of Amiens. The legend is of the 8th century and incoherent. Regardless of whether a St. Firmin, native of Pampeluna, was martyred during the Diocletianic Persecution, it is certain that the first bishop known to history is St. Eulogius, who defended the divinity of Christ in the councils held during the middle of the 4th century.

The cathedral (13th century) is a Gothic building. It was the subject of careful study by John Ruskin in his "Bible of Amiens". The nave of this cathedral is considered a type of the ideal Gothic.

The Cathedral of Notre Dame d'Amiens was served by a Chapter composed of eight dignities and forty-six Canons. The dignities were: the Dean, the Provost, the Chancellor, the Archdeacon of Amiens, the Archdeacon of Ponthieu, the Cantor, the Master of the Schola, and the Penitentiary. The Dean was elected by the Chapter.

The city of Amiens also had a Collegiate Church of Saint-Firmin, whose Chapter was composed of a Dean and six prebendaries. All were elected by the Chapter and installed by the bishop. Saint-Nicolas-au-Cloître d'Amiens also had a Chapter, composed of a Dean and eight prebendaries, all elected by the Chapter and installed by the bishop.

The church of St. Acheul, near Amiens, and formerly its cathedral, was, in the 19th century, the home of a major Jesuit novitiate. The beautiful churches of St. Ricquier and Corbie perpetuate the memory of the great Benedictine abbeys and homes of learning founded in these places in 570 and 662.

In 859 the Normans invaded the valley of the Somme, and sacked the abbey of Saint-Riquier. They pillaged Amiens and held it for more than a year, until the city was ransomed by Charles the Bald.

There is a medieval list of the Bishops of Amiens, but it first appears in the work of Robert of Torigni in the second half of the 12th century, and its names before the 8th century are very uncertain.







London Underground engineering stock

Over the years, London Underground has acquired various types of engineering stock to help with the construction of new lines and maintenance of existing lines. Some of these wagons were inherited from its predecessors, many were built new and some were acquired second-hand from the main-line railways. Several types of specialist wagons have been used, which are described below.

London Underground uses a numbering system comprising the wagon number prefixed with a letter which designates the wagon's type. These are summarised below.

The London Underground has used various designs of brake van. They were used for the guard's accommodation and for braking purposes (when wagons in the train were not fitted with automatic brakes).

Two brake vans of interest were numbers FB578 and FB579. These were 'flat' brake vans, converted from flat wagons. The conversion consisted of building a small guard's compartment on one end of the flat wagon. Therefore, these wagons could be used for carrying small items, such as sleepers, in addition to their role as a brake van.

Six brake vans numbered B580–5 were built for London Transport by British Railways (BR) at the latter's Ashford Works in the early 1960s. They were built to a design which had been produced for BR since 1950 (BR Diagram 1/506 and 1/507), totalling 3588 units, and were the final examples of that design to be constructed.

All data from "London Underground Rolling Stock", 1st through 15th editions.

Matteo Mandorlini

Matteo Mandorlini (born 22 October 1988) is a former Italian footballer who played as midfielder.

He is the son of football coach Andrea Mandorlini, who also played as a footballer with Inter Milan in the 1980s. His brother Davide is also a footballer.

Matteo born Mandorlini in Como, Lombardy, when his father Andrea playing for Internazionale. He started his career with Emilia–Romagna side Parma. Mandorlini has made one Serie A appearance for Parma, that being Parma's 1–0 loss to S.S. Lazio on 14 May 2006 during the 2005–06 season. That match was the last round of the season and Mandorlini substituted Damiano Ferronetti in the 84th minute.

In July 2007, he was loaned to Pavia and sold to Foligno in co-ownership deal in August 2008. He started both legs of the relegation playoffs as a midfielder in 4321/433 formation.

In June 2009, Parma bought him back and loaned to Viareggio.

In 2010–11 season, he returned to Parma and awarded no.27 shirt, which he also own that number in 2005–06 season. But on 31 August he was loaned to Serie B club Piacenza. He started his first start of the 2010–11 Serie B season on 16 October 2010, as right midfielder (ahead Alessandro Marchi) in 4321/433 formation. The match Piacenza defeated Crotone 1–0. In the next match he moved to left midfielder ahead Tommaso Bianchi.

In June 2011, the last few days of 2010–11 financial year, he moved to Brescia in co-ownership deal. Parma signed Cristian Pedrinelli in exchange also in co-ownership deal. Both players 50% registration rights were valued €1.5 million. Mandorlini played 22 times in 2011–12 Serie B. In June 2012 Mandorlini left for Serie B newcomer Spezia along with Parma team-mate Raffaele Schiavi. On 31 January 2013 he was signed by Grosseto. However Grosseto still relegated to Lega Pro Prima Divisione.

In June 2013 Parma gave up the remain 50% registration rights of Mandorlini to Brescia for free; Pedrinelli also moved to Parma outright for another €80,000.

On 18 July 2014 he was signed by Serie C club Pisa.

On 22 August 2015 he was signed by Pordenone in a 2-year deal.

On 2 September 2021, he joined Serie C club Seregno.

Mandorlini was a member of the Italy U17 squad at the 2005 FIFA U-17 World Championship. He was also capped for the Italy U19 team during the team's 2007 UEFA European Under-19 Football Championship elite qualification campaign, and wore the number nine shirt. 

After the tournament he never received a call-up from neither the U20 nor the U21 team. Instead, he received a call-up from the C team: Italy under-20 Lega Pro representative team, played for the team at 2008–09 Mirop Cup, but sometimes as a defender.

Padova


Roman Catholic Diocese of Aversa

The Diocese of Aversa () is a Latin diocese of the Catholic Church in Campania, southern Italy, created in 1053. It is situated in the "Terra di Lavoro" (Liburia), seven miles north of Naples, and eight miles south of Capua. It is suffragan of the Archdiocese of Naples.

The city of Atella was destroyed in the Lombard invasions. The city of Aversa arose in the 11th century, near the destroyed Atella, and became the seat of the Norman invader Rainulf, who became a vassal of Duke Sergius of Naples. The Norman Duke Robert Guiscard built a fortification which in time became an urban centre. Duke Robert, becoming a vassal of the pope and supporting him in his struggle with the Holy Roman Emperor, obtained permission from Pope Leo IX to have the extinct diocese of Atella revived at Aversa. In 1058, Count Richard of Aversa became Prince of Capua. This led to an immediate and continual confrontation between Norman Capua and Lombard Naples, both politically and ecclesiastically. The archbishops of Naples claimed metropolitan status over Aversa, with the right to consecrate its bishops and receive oaths of loyalty from them. At the same time the Princes of Capua claimed that Aversa was a new foundation, thanks to their work for the Church, and in no case did the Norman Prince intend to recognize the jurisdiction of the Lombards over his principality.

In 1088, Pope Urban II consecrated the monk Guidmund, who had been an agent of the Holy See, as Bishop of Aversa. An immediate protest was lodged by the Archbishop of Naples through his Archdeacon, and by the Prince of Salerno and Amalfi through his legate, humbly requesting that possession of the Church of Aversa be returned to them ("ut sibi tandem Aversane ecclesie possessio redderetur"). In his reply to the Archbishop, Pope Urban stated that he had consecrated Bishop Guitmund neither out of anger or hatred, but for the sake of equity and compelled by necessity, lest the Church of Aversa lose such a man as he had appointed. In a letter to Bishop Guitmund, Pope Urban stated that he and his advisors and the Roman leaders had debated the issue of the possession of the Church of Aversa for some time ("diu causam eventilavimus"), the unanimous decision was that the investiture of the possession of the Church of Aversa should be returned to the Archbishop and the Prince.

On 24 September 1120, Bishop Robertus (attested 1118–1226) obtained from Pope Calixtus II the bull "Sicut ex Fratrum", in which the Church of Aversa was recognized as being directly subordinate (a suffragan) of the Roman See, rather than the Archdiocese of Capua or the Archdiocese of Naples.

In a letter of reply ("rescriptum") to the bishop of Aversa on 8 November 1298, Pope Innocent III remarked that the bishop and his predecessors had thus far ("hactenus") been accustomed to obtain confirmation of their election and episcopal consecration from the archbishops of Naples, notwithstanding that Innocent's predecessor, Celestine III (1191–1198), had consecrated one "L" as bishop of Aversa himself "without prejudice to the Church of Naples", ordering that the new bishop should show reverence and obedience to the archbishop. If the bishop of Aversa wished to litigate the matter, the Pope would give him a hearing.

On 10 May 1298, Pope Boniface VIII issued a bull, confirming the privileges granted by Pope Calixtus II to the Church of Aversa, making the diocese directly subject to the Holy See.

The cathedral was begun thanks to the munificence of Duke Robert Guiscard, was carried forward and completed by his son Jordanus. It was dedicated to S. Paul of Tarsus. The high altar was dedicated by Pope Alexander IV on 3 June 1255.

The cathedral was served and administered by a corporate body, the Chapter, which was composed of four dignities (the Dean, the Cantor, the Archdeacon, and the Subcantor) and thirty Canons. Two dignities were later added, in accordance with the decrees of the Council of Trent, designated the Theologus and the Penitentiarius. Pope Celestine III (1191–1198) granted the Chapter the right of electing their Dean. The cathedral was one of the nine parishes inside the city, the care of which was assigned to the Canons prebendary. Attached to the cathedral were twelve beneficed clerics, whose duty it was to sing the Gregorian chant; two acolytes and six clerics for the sanctuary; and thirty chaplains. The members of the Chapter were paid out of a general fund ("mensa canonicata"), which was the subject of frequent complaint and litigation. In 1600, it was agreed that the procurator of the Chapter would divide the income into eight portions, six of which would go to each of the six prebendary dignities.

A diocesan synod was an irregularly held, but important, meeting of the bishop of a diocese and his clergy. Its purpose was (1) to proclaim generally the various decrees already issued by the bishop; (2) to discuss and ratify measures on which the bishop chose to consult with his clergy; (3) to publish statutes and decrees of the diocesan synod, of the provincial synod, and of the Holy See.

Bishop Pietro Orsini (1591–1598) presided over a diocesan synod at Aversa in 1594, and published its decrees. Bishop Carlo Carafa (1616–1644) held a diocesan synod on 19 June 1619, and published the decrees of the synod. A diocesan synod was held by Bishop Innico Caracciolo (1697–1730) on 4—6 November 1702.

In 1727, Cardinal Innico Caracciolo (1697–1730) issued a new set of Constitutions for the diocesan seminary of Aversa.

Following the Second Vatican Council, and in accordance with the norms laid out in the council's decree, "Christus Dominus" chapter 40, major changes were made in the ecclesiastical administrative structure of southern Italy. Wide consultations had taken place with the bishops and other prelates who would be affected. Action, however, was deferred, first by the death of Pope Paul VI on 6 August 1978, then the death of Pope John Paul I on 28 September 1978, and the election of Pope John Paul II on 16 October 1978. Pope John Paul II issued a decree, "Quamquam Ecclesia," on 30 April 1979, ordering the changes. Three ecclesiastical provinces were abolished entirely: those of Conza, Capua, and Sorrento. A new ecclesiastical province was created, to be called the Regio Campana, whose Metropolitan was the Archbishop of Naples. The diocese of Aversa became a suffragan of Naples.

On January 15, 2011, Pope Benedict XVI appointed Bishop Angelo Spinillo, Bishop of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Teggiano-Policastro, as Bishop of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Aversa. He succeeded Archbishop-Bishop Mario Milano, whose resignation was accepted by the Pope on the grounds that he had reached the canonical age of retirement of 75.





Rossiya Airlines

Rossiya Airlines (), sometimes branded as "Rossiya—Russian Airlines" (), is one of the oldest and largest air carriers of Russia. It was founded on 7 May 1934. It is a part of Aeroflot Group. Rossiya is the largest and the base carrier of Pulkovo Airport (Saint Petersburg).

In November 2006, it was announced that the merger had been completed and Rossiya Airlines was registered in Saint Petersburg on 9 October 2006 and has a branch in Moscow and 54 offices in Russia and abroad.

In February 2010, the Russian government announced that all state-owned regional airlines managed by holding company Rostec would be consolidated into flag carrier Aeroflot to increase financial viability.

On 16 November 2011, 75% minus 1 share of Rossiya Airlines JSC was transferred to Aeroflot. In December, 25% plus 1 share were donated to the Government of Saint Petersburg. In accordance with the decree of the city government of 23 December 2011, the main purpose of the transfer is to ensure the implementation of the powers of the Executive bodies of Saint Petersburg to organize the development of the city's transport complex.

In December 2011, a decree was signed by the Government of Saint Petersburg on accepting a gift of 25% of the airline's shares from Rostec. 229,726 ordinary registered non-documentary shares were transferred to the city. The nominal value of one security is 1 thousand rubles. In total, Saint Petersburg has now become the owner of a blocking stake — 25% plus one voting share.

In 2014, the commercial management of Rossiya Airlines JSC was transferred to the parent company Aeroflot. Since the spring-summer schedule, flights of Rossiya Airlines have been operated under a single code for the Aeroflot Group of companies. Rossiya Airlines became a participant in the Aeroflot Bonus frequent-flyer programme.

In December 2015, Aeroflot Group announced the unification of its regional airline affiliates Rossiya, Donavia (based at Rostov-on-Don Airport) and Orenair (with hubs at Orenburg Tsentralny Airport and Moscow's Domodedovo International Airport) under the name Rossiya (the name of the largest of the three). The consolidation excluded Aurora, a small airline headquartered in Yuzhno-Sakhalinsk. Rossiya, Donavia and Orenair served 48 domestic and 42 international destinations; the new Rossiya will add some destinations served by Transaero Airlines prior to its collapse in October. As of the end of February 2016, the merger of the three airlines was completed and joined flights of three airlines started on 27 March of the same year.
On 27 March 2016, Rossiya Airlines Donavia and Orenair, which are other subsidiaries of Aeroflot, were integrated under the brand of Rossiya.

Simultaneously with the presentation of the updated company, the air carrier started the process of rebranding.

An element that looks like a blade is the basis of the corporate pattern of the aircraft livery. Its plastic and shape complement the company's logo. The element consists of modules that graphically repeat the image of the turbine. The pattern changes its density from the nose of the aircraft to its tail – it becomes more saturated, as if following the flow of air. This technique helps to convey the feeling of flight, movement, even when the plane is on the ground. The name of the airline is printed on the lower part of the fuselage in corporate font.

In April 2016, the airline introduced the first Boeing 747-400 in a new livery, named after Saint Petersburg.

On 8 April 2022, the US Department of Commerce restricted flights on aircraft manufactured in the US for Aeroflot, Aviastar, Azur Air, Belavia, Rossiya and Utair. On 16 June the US broadened its restrictions on the six airlines after violations of the sanctions were detected. The effect of the restrictions is to ground the US-manufactured part of its fleet.

As of July 2022, Rossiya Airlines took over all Sukhoi Superjet 100 operations from parent Aeroflot.

The total route network of Rossiya Airlines is 53 destinations in the summer of 2020, including significant and highly demanded destinations to cities of the Far East and South of the country.

, Rossiya operates the following aircraft:
On 7 July 2014, Rossiya Airlines became the official carrier of Zenit Saint Petersburg football club. The solemn ceremony in connection was held at the Petrovsky Stadium – the home arena of Zenit. The airline has prepared a group of flight attendants to work on flights with the team. In addition, together with doctors and nutritionists, a special sports onboard food has been developed.

In addition to transporting football club players, the plane operates regular flights.

In July 2014, Rossiya Airlines became the official carrier of Zenit Saint Petersburg football club. On October 29, 2014, the aircraft was delivered to the Netherlands for painting. On November 11 of the same year, the liner was presented at Pulkovo International Airport.

In September 2016, Rossiya Airlines together with the Amur Tiger Center presented a Boeing 747-400 (EI-XLD, Ex.Japan Airlines JA8914) aircraft named after Yuzhno-Sakhalinsk in a special tiger livery. The goal of the project is to attract public attention to the conservation of populations of rare species of wild animals. The airliner operates the most popular routes to the cities of the Far East and popular resort destinations within Russia. The aircraft made its first flight on September 11 to Vladivostok.

In February 2017, Rossiya Airlines unveiled Boeing 777-300 (EI-UNP, Ex.Singapore Airlines 9V-SYB) named after the city of Ussuriysk, featuring the muzzle of the Far Eastern (Amur) leopard, the rarest of all leopard subspecies. The aircraft performs flights on the most popular and socially significant routes to the cities of the Far East and popular domestic and international resorts.

On 29 May 2018, the airline received an Airbus A319 VQ-BCP Rostov-on-Don in a new exclusive livery dedicated to Russian sports. In June 2018, a competition to choose a name for the airliner in a new unique sports livery was announced on the airline's social network. During the week, the contestants offered more than 130 different names. The most popular was Sportolet.

In April 2022, Rossiya Airlines unveiled Sukhoi Superjet 100-95B (RA-89022) named after the city of Velsk in a new exclusive livery «Troika», which was timed to coincide with the Year of Cultural Heritage of the Peoples of Russia. The graphic element in the form of three racing harnessed horses is a tribute to the unique phenomenon of Russian culture and visually enhances the effect of flight.

In October 2023, Rossiya Airlines together with the State Hermitage Museum presented a new livery. The fuselage of the Superjet 100 (RA-89171) "Kaluga" carries a depiction of the figurine of a deer – a Scythian work of decorative and applied art and one of the symbols of the State Hermitage Museum. Efforts to promote the iconic objects of the Motherland will help in spreading knowledge about culture, art, and especially about the Hermitage's richest encyclopedic collection.

The Superjet 100 Hermitage aircraft is presented in a mono configuration (the total number of seats on board is 100).

In February 2024, Rossiya Airlines together with Saint Petersburg State University introduced a new livery. The anniversary logo of Saint Petersburg State University was applied to the fuselage of the Superjet 100 (RA-89142) ”Gatchina”. The exclusive livery is dedicated to the 300th anniversary of one of the oldest and leading universities in Russia. It is designed to draw attention to the University’s rich history, educational and scientific achievements, technologies and innovations. The project reminds us that education is the embodiment of strength and power and can take us to incredible, never-before-seen heights.

Myrtle Maclagan

Myrtle Ethel Maclagan (2 April 1911 – 11 March 1993) was an English cricketer who played as a right-handed batter and right-arm off break bowler. She appeared in 14 Test matches for England between 1934 and 1951. She played in the first-ever women's Test match, as well as captaining for England for two matches in 1951. She played domestic cricket for Surrey.

Maclagan attended the Royal School, Bath, where she was in the cricket team for six years, once taking five wickets in five balls in an inter-school match.

She played in the first women's Test match in 1934, and was one of the best-known women cricketers of her day, famous for making high scores against Australia. She scored the first Test century in women's cricket on 4 January 1935, when she made 119 for England against Australia at Sydney Cricket Ground. In that same Test, she also become the first woman to open the batting and bowling in the same Test match. The English men's team had lost the Ashes a few months earlier, and "The Morning Post" praised Maclagan's batting prowess with the quatrain:

After the 1934–35 tour to Australia and New Zealand, Maclagan also played against Australia in England in 1937. After the war, she returned to cricket, touring Australia and New Zealand again in 1948–49 and then appearing against Australia in England in 1951.

Maclagan served as an officer in the Auxiliary Territorial Service during World War II. She rejoined the Army in 1951, serving as Inspector PT in the Women's Royal Army Corps. In 1966 she was awarded an MBE for Army services.



Mississippi Army National Guard

The Mississippi Army National Guard is the Army National Guard component of the Mississippi National Guard. It was originally formed in 1798. It is a component of the United States Army and the United States National Guard. It is managed by the Mississippi Military Department.

The Mississippi Army National Guard maintains 97 armories in 93 communities. Mississippi Army National Guard units are trained and equipped as part of the United States Army. The same ranks and insignia are used and National Guardsmen are eligible to receive all United States military awards. The Mississippi Guard also bestows a number of state awards for local services rendered in or to the state of Mississippi.

The Mississippi Army National Guard came into existence under Winthrop Sargent, the first Governor of the Mississippi Territory, with the issuance of an order on 8 September 1798 organizing the Militia of the Territory. On 28 February 1799, Governor Sargent was able to get his legislative body together and the first law was passed for the permanent establishment of the Militia in Mississippi. This law constituted the beginning of the lineage of the 155th Infantry Regiment in Mississippi.

The 155th Infantry Regiment is one of only nineteen Army National Guard units with campaign credit for the War of 1812, and the only one from west of the Appalachians.

Through the years the laws governing the Militia changed in various ways. Establishment of units varied from year to year, and ways of obtaining strength for the units also varied. There were periods of lack and little Militia at all. At other times the Militia forces were well organized.

Although the Mississippi Militia participated in every war and fight of any consequence from the Sabine Expedition of 1806 through the Korean War in 1953, it was not until 1916 the Mississippi National Guard was called for active duty. In 1916 the War Department called three infantry battalions for service on the Mexican Border. These battalions formed the First Infantry Regiment which went on active duty on 24 June 1916. In September 1917 this unit was redesignated the 155th Infantry Regiment and served in the 39th Division in France. Also created during World War I, largely from Arkansas Army National Guard units, was the 154th Infantry Regiment, which continued its service after the war with the Mississippi Army National Guard.

Again in 1940 all units of the Mississippi National Guard were inducted into Federal service. Between 1950 and 1951, 77 of 81 units were called into service during the Korean War. A total of 6,515 Mississippi Guardsmen served during this period. Around the early 1960s, the Mississippi Army National Guard had 151 units located throughout the State. 51 of these units were part of the 31st (Dixie) Division and the remainder were non-divisional units.

Among units formed within the MS ARNG since World War II are the 108th Armored Cavalry Regiment, the 198th Armor Regiment, the
114th Field Artillery Regiment, the 185th Aviation Regiment, and the 204th Air Defense Artillery Regiment.

For much of the final decades of the twentieth century, National Guard personnel typically served "One weekend a month, two weeks a year", with a portion working for the Guard in a full-time capacity. The current forces formation plans of the US Army call for the typical National Guard unit (or National Guardsman) to serve one year of active duty for every three years of service. More specifically, current Department of Defense policy is that no Guardsman will be involuntarily activated for a total of more than 24 months (cumulative) in one six-year enlistment period (this policy is due to change 1 August 2007, the new policy states that soldiers will be given 24 months between deployments of no more than 24 months, individual states have differing policies).

The 1st Battalion, 198th Armor Regiment (HQ Senatobia) used to serve as part of the 155th Armoured Brigade, but was disbanded as part of the c.2010 modular ('Army Transformation') reorganization.

In 2016, the Mississippi Army National Guard included the following units:



Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Benevento

The Archdiocese of Benevento () is a Latin archdiocese of the Catholic Church. It currently has five suffragan dioceses: the diocese of Ariano Irpino-Lacedonia, the diocese of Avellino, the diocese of Cerreto Sannita-Telese-Sant'Agata de' Goti, the Territorial Abbey of Montevergine, and the archdiocese of Sant'Angelo dei Lombardi-Conza-Nusco-Bisaccia.

The Roman Catholic Diocese of Benevento was, according to an 11th-century episcopal list, founded in the first century. During the persecution of Diocletian there is a reference to a person named Januarius, who together with Proculus his deacon and two laymen was imprisoned and beheaded at Pozzuoli in 305. He is said to have been the first bishop of Benevento before becoming Bishop of Naples.

The See of Benevento was elevated in status to an archdiocese on 26 May 969, during a synod held at the Vatican Basilica by Pope John XIII. The promotion of the See and of Archbishop Landolfo took place in the presence of, and at the request of, the Emperor Otto I and Prince Pandulph of Benevento and Capua, and his son Landulph. The new metropolitanate had ten suffragan dioceses: Saint Agatha, Avellino, Alife, Ariana, Ascoli, Bibino (Bovinum), Larino, Quintodecimum (earlier at Aeculanum, then at Frigento), Telese, and Volturara.

The ultimate fate of some of these dioceses can be seen through the Provincial Synod of May 1698. When Bishop Francesco Scannagatta of Avellino attended the synod, he signed his name "Franciscus Episcopus Abellinensis, Frequintinensis, Aquae-putridae seu Mirabellae, et Quintodecimi," giving clear evidence of the incorporation of three ancient dioceses into the diocese of Avellino. Avellino was still a suffragan of Benevento.

The area of Benevento was struck by a severe earthquake on 11 October 1125, and it was followed immediately by four aftershocks. At midday on 12 October yet another severe shock hit. Nearly all the towers of the fortifications fell, as well as the walls, and the palaces and other edifices. The monastery of San Felice in the diocese of Benevento was completely destroyed. At Termoli the entire façade of the cathedral collapsed. Aftershocks continued for another fifteen days.

On 5 December 1456, Campania and the former duchy of Benevento were hit with a major earthquake, with over 40,000 dead. It may have been the largest on record for all of southern Italy. It was followed by another on 30 December. Benevento was for the most part destroyed, suffering between 350 and 500 dead. Brindisi, with nearly all of its inhabitants, was destroyed. Apice, in the diocese of Benevento, was completely destroyed, as was Casalduni. Two thousand died at Ariano in the territory of Avellino, and the town was in ruins. Lacedonia was reduced to dust and abandoned completely. Sant' Agata dei Goti was "assai conquassata" ('practically crushed').

In August 1059 Pope Nicholas II held a synod at Benevento in the church of S. Peter outside the walls.

On 13 June 1061 a synod was held in the cathedral at Benevento by Archbishop Udalricus. It settled a conflict between Abbot Amico of Santa Sofia and Abbot Leone of Draconaria. In 1075 another synod, held by Archbishop Milo, addressed another conflict between the monastery of Santa Sofia and the Bishop of Draconaria (which was later absorbed into the diocese of San Severo) over the issue of being subject to two bishops.

Pope Victor III held a synod at Benevento in August 1087, at which he excommunicated the antipope Wibert, excommunicated Archbishop Hugh of Lyon and Richard of Marseille, and ordered the deposition of any bishop or abbot who accepted lay investiture.

Pope Urban II held a general synod at Benevento from 28–31 August 1091. At the synod the Pope excommunicated the Emperor Henry IV and his antipope Wibert of Ravenna (called Clement III). It was also decreed that no one should be made a bishop unless he was already in holy orders. The synod also forbade the celebration of matrimony during Advent to the end of the Octave of the Epiphany (6 January).

In 1102 and 1108 Pope Paschal II held synods at Benevento. In the synod of 1108 he repeated his objections to lay investiture, and he forbade clerics from wearing expensive secular clothes. He also consecrated Landolfo as Archbishop of Benevento. Between 16 March and 24 April 1117, Pope Paschal was resident in Benevento. In the synod of April 1117, he excommunicated Maurice Burdinus, Archbishop of Braga, the antipope (1118–1121) of Emperor Henry V, who called himself Gregory VIII.

On 10 March 1119, Archbishop Landolfo held a provincial synod at Benevento, in which anathemas were threatened against persons who committed theft against church property or merchants.

In 1374, Archbishop Hugo stated at a provincial council that the Church of Benevento had twenty-three suffragans, and that documents indicated that at one time it had had thirty-two.

In 1599 Archbishop Massimiliano Palumbara held a diocesan synod, attended by seven of his suffragan bishops. The synod legislated against the practice of clerics removing relics from their containers so that they could be handled by the laity.

During his episcopate, Cardinal Pietro Francesco Orsini de Gravina, O.P. (1686–1730) held two diocesan synods, one in April 1693, and another in May 1698.

During his term of office Archbishop Gianbattista Colombini, O.F.M. Conv. (1763–1774) held eight diocesan synods. Between 1755 and 1762, Cardinal Francesco Pacca held eight diocesan synods. Cardinal Giovanni Battista Pacca held another fourteen, between 1825 and 1838.

The cathedral of Maria SS. Assunta in Cielo was founded in Lombard times, but was destroyed by Allied bombings in World War II; it has kept the medieval Romanesque façade and bell tower, and the 8th century crypt.

In 839 the alleged remains of Saint Bartholomew the Apostle were transferred to the Cathedral, to a chapel which had been built at the order of Prince Siccard of Benevento (d. 839). In 1338 Archbishop Arnaldus de Brussac moved the remains to a reconstructed chapel next to the cathedral.

In 1316 the Cathedral Chapter had eighty-six Canons. In 1364, Archbishop Hugo reduced the number to thirty. The dignities ("not" dignitaries) included the Archdeacon, the Archpriest, the Primiceralis Major, the Primiceralis Minor, the Treasurer, and Bibliothecarius. In 1674 the Cathedral Chapter contained six dignities and twenty-five Canons. In 1752 there were six dignities and twenty-seven Canons.

There were two other Collegiate Churches in Benevento: that of Saint Bartholomew (founded c. 1137) and that of Santo Spirito (founded in 1350). Each had twelve Canons, headed by a mitred abbot.




Middleboro Secondary

The Middleboro Secondary (also called Middleborough Secondary and Middleboro Subdivision) is a railroad line owned by MassDOT in the U.S. state of Massachusetts. The line runs from Attleboro to Middleborough via Taunton.

The line diverges from Amtrak's Northeast Corridor just north of Attleboro station. From there, it runs east through Norton then southeast through downtown Taunton. At Cotley Junction (near Weir Village), it separates from the New Bedford Subdivision and turns east. The line ends with a wye to the MBTA Commuter Rail Middleborough/Lakeville Line just south of downtown Middleborough.

The current Middleborough Subdivision is formed from sections of four different railroads built in the 19th century. The oldest section is from northwestern Taunton into downtown Taunton, opened in April 1836 as part of the Mansfield-Taunton Taunton Branch Railroad - one of the first railroad lines in New England. The New Bedford and Taunton Railroad completed an extension from Taunton south to New Bedford in 1840, including the current Middleboro Subdivision southeast of downtown Taunton. The Middleboro and Taunton Railroad opened a line from southeastern Taunton east to Middleborough in July 1856. In August 1871, the New Bedford and Taunton Railroad built a branch from Attleboro Junction in northwest Taunton to Attleboro.

The Old Colony acquired the Middleborough and Taunton Railroad in 1874. The same year, the New Bedford and Taunton Railroad became the New Bedford Railroad. It joined the Boston, Clinton, Fitchburg and New Bedford Railroad in 1876. The Old Colony acquired that system in 1879, and was itself merged into the New York, New Haven and Hartford Railroad in 1893. Year-round New York–Cape Cod and Boston–Fall River/New Bedford passenger service ended in 1958, and local service on the Attleboro–Taunton and Cotley Junction–Middleborough segments somewhat before then. However, summer-only trains from New York to Hyannis used the line from Attleboro to Middleborough from 1960 to 1964, as did Boston–Hyannis service on the Taunton–Middleborough section briefly in 1961.

The New Haven Railroad folded into Penn Central in 1969, and the line became part of Conrail in 1976. The station purchased the line from Conrail, along with several other branch lines in Southeastern Massachusetts, for $1.2 million in December 1982. The Attleboro–Middleborough route was used by Amtrak's seasonal "Cape Codder" service from 1986 to 1996, and by the Cape Cod and Hyannis Railroad in 1988, both with a stop at . Freight service on the line was assigned to CSX in the 1999 breakup of Conrail.

Portions of the Middleborough Secondary are planned for passenger use as part of the South Coast Rail project. Phase 1 in 2023 will run along the line from Pilgrim Junction to Cotley Junction, extending Middleborough/Lakeville Line commuter service to Fall River and New Bedford. A new Middleborough station will be constructed on the east end of the line. The MBTA issued a $403.5 million contract for the Middleborough Secondary and New Bedford Main Line portions of the project on August 24, 2020; construction was expected to begin later in 2020 and take 37 months. The work will upgrade Middleborough Secondary tracks for passenger service and construct the new Middleborough station. Phase 2, planned for 2030, will extend passenger service from the Providence/Stoughton Line to New Bedford and Fall River, and will involve the construction of new track connecting Stoughton to the Dighton and Somerset Railroad; trains will run along this new track, down the Dighton and Somerset Railroad, and then along the Middleborough Secondary from Weir Junction to Cotley Junction. When Phase 2 is completed, service from Middleborough to New Bedford and Fall River will be eliminated (but will kept as a backup option in the event of service/delays cancellation along the old Dighton and Somerset line), and Middleborough/Lakeville Line will terminate at Pilgrim Junction; the section of the Middleborough Secondary east of Cotley Junction will return to being used only for freight service.


Dönhoff

The House of Dönhoff (Polish: Denhoff, sometimes also Doenhoff) was an old and influential German noble family, which later also became part of the Polish nobility.

It was first mentioned in 1282, in the County of Mark in Westphalia. Their original seat was "Dönhof" near Witten which remained in the family until 1463. From 1303 until the 16th century a property called "Dönhoff" near Wetter (Ruhr) was also owned by the family.

Younger sons of the family served as knights of the Teutonic Order and acquired property in the Baltic State of the Teutonic Order: In 1410 Godecke von Dönhoff (d. before 1444) owned the estate of Allo in Estonia, in 1478 Hermann von Dönhof was granted land in Livonia. In the 16th century, a branch became recognized as "szlachta" (Polish nobility) in the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth.

After the secularization of the State of the Teutonic Order during the Protestant Reformation in 1525, the East Prussian branch served the House of Hohenzollern in its newly acquired Duchy of Prussia. This branch owned Friedrichstein Palace from 1666 until 1945. 

In 1633 all branches of the family were created imperial counts. In 1637 one of the Polish "Denhoff" branches was granted the title of Imperial Prince, which was later extinguished.



Tamar Valley National Landscape

Tamar Valley National Landscape is a legally designated Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty in Devon and Cornwall in England.

There has been mining in the area for hundreds of years, in 1844 a copper seam was discovered that was so big it led to a 50-year mining boom and the creation of Europe's biggest mine, Devon Great Consols. The copper ran low during the 1890s leading to mass unemployment and the emigration of surplus workers.

The valley is incorporated inside the Cornwall and West Devon Mining Landscape which is a World Heritage Site. The site was added to the World Heritage List during the 30th session of the UNESCO World Heritage Committee in Vilnius, July 2006.

The AONB straddles the administrative border between Cornwall and Devon and covers around 75 square miles of the lower River Tamar below Launceston. There are four ancient towns: Launceston in the North with a steam railway and Norman castle; Tavistock to the East and adjacent to Dartmoor; Callington in the West with a mural trail, and Saltash with the Royal Albert Bridge.

There are numerous landmarks and listed buildings including Devon Great Consols, the Tamar Valley Line and the National Trust's Cotehele and Buckland Abbey.

Tamar Trails is a collection of trails in the Tamar Valley, created by West Devon Borough Council and The Tamar Valley Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty with funding from a number of organisations including the Heritage Lottery Fund, the South West Regional Development Agency and Devon County Council. The Tamar Trails were built to allow access to the heritage and natural features of the valley via a series of new cycling and footpaths. The trails stretch 25 km across the Tamar Valley, taking in historic mines and woodland. The building work started in 2007 and finished in 2013 with a total investment of £7 million. A partnership of organisations own the trails which are managed by Tamar Community Trust. The trail passes wooded copses and disused mine workings and is used for walking, cycling, mountain biking, jogging or segway.

The Valley was designated due to the natural beauty of its hills, valleys, forests, meadows and associated landscapes. The water has created good farmland and provides otters with a natural habitat. The birdlife includes avocets and wigeons.

There is canoeing, walking, horse riding, cycling, archery, a visitor centre with a cafe and tree surfing Tamar Trails Parkrun takes place each week starting at the Tamar Trails visitor centre. There is a heritage train service on the scenic Tamar Valley Line, boat trips on the Tamar Passenger Ferry or river cruises from Plymouth.

Gavin Kerr

Gavin Kerr (born 3 April 1977) is a retired rugby union footballer who played prop on either side of the scrum. He played club rugby for Leeds Tykes (now Leeds Carnegie), the defunct Border Reivers, Edinburgh and Sale Sharks, and at international level for Scotland. During his time at Leeds, he helped them win the 2004–05 Powergen Cup, the final of which he started.

He debuted for Scotland in the February 2003 game against Ireland but became a regular starter for Scotland after his solid performance against New Zealand in the Autumn Test series, replacing Tom Smith after his retirement.

In April 2009 it was announced that Kerr will play for English club Sale Sharks in the Guinness Premiership. He signed a two-year deal keeping him at the Stockport based club for the 2009–10 and 2010–11 seasons. On 18 August 2010, Kerr announced he would retire from rugby due to a neck injury. Kerr currently works as a Chartered Building Surveyor.




William Alanson White

William Alanson White (24 January 1870 – 7 March 1937) was an American neurologist and psychiatrist.
He was born in Brooklyn, New York to parents Alanson White and Harriet Augusta Hawley White. He attended public school in Brooklyn. A young White was influenced by philosopher Herbert Spencer; After White's death, one writer recalled that White "was never seriously shaken from Spencer's hopeful evolutionary catechism, which at the age of 13 he had accepted as the key to all knowledge".

At 15, White entered Cornell, studying there from 1885 to 1889. In 1891, White graduated with an M.D. from the Long Island College Hospital. After serving as an intern for a year, for nine years he was an assistant physician at the Binghamton (New York) State Hospital. There he collaborated with Boris Sidis.

On October 1, 1903, White became superintendent of the "Government Hospital for the Insane", later named St. Elizabeths Hospital, in Washington, D.C. There he spent the rest of his career. Also in 1903, he accepted the post of professor of nervous and mental diseases at Georgetown University, and in 1904 a similar chair at George Washington University, lecturing besides at the Army Medical School.

In 1913, White co-founded "The Psychoanalytic Review". From 1915 to 1917, White was president of the American Psychoanalytical Society; he returned to role from 1927 to 1929. In 1917, the hospital was formally renamed St. Elizabeth's.

In March 1918, White married Lola Thurston, the widow of Senator John Mellen Thurston.
White was president of the American Psychopathological Society in 1922, of the American Psychiatric Association in 1924–25. He took an interest in forensic psychology, and worked for better cooperation between the American Psychiatric Association and the American Bar Association. He testified for the defense in the Leopold and Loeb trial.

In December 1922, St. Elizabeth's became the first hospital in the US to employ pyrotherapy for the treatment of late-state syphilis. White approved the use of insulin shock therapy at St. Elizabeth's.

In 1930, St. Elizabeth's was the only mental hospital in the United States with an American Medical Association-accredited internship. 
St Elizabeth's was investigated by Congress three different times: first in 1906, again in 1917-18, and finally in 1926.

In 1934, he was the main speaker at the American Association for the Advancement of Science. Papers summarized: "Man's future lays in a new understanding of the meaning of heredity and environment in the application of new scientific discoveries in physics, chemistry and biology to the fields of psychology, and in the sinificant way in which man's 'very highly developed self-regard functions'". He was followed by a speech by Albert Einstein. 

Lola (Purman) Thurston, whom he married in 1918, and a stepdaughter survived him when he died in Washington in March 1937.

During White's tenure as superintendent, St. Elizabeths, which served Federal employees, military personnel, and residents of the District of Columbia, underwent significant reforms. What previously had operated as a warehouse for the insane came to provide occupational therapy and psychotherapy. White did away with straitjackets for restraint and opened a beauty parlor for the female patients. For two years in the 1920s, White opened the doors of St. Elizabeths to Alfred Korzybski, enabling Korzybski to directly study mental illness, research that contributed heavily to Korzybski's 1933 "Science and Sanity: An Introduction to Non-Aristotelian Systems and General Semantics." Korzybski characterized White as "extremely brilliant, very [well] read, very creative, very human, very warm, and very much interested in the future of psychiatry altogether." 

White is the namesake of the William Alanson White Institute psychoanalytic clinic in New York City.



Roman Catholic Diocese of Cahors

The Diocese of Cahors (Latin: "Dioecesis Cadurcensis"; French: "Diocèse de Cahors") is a Latin Church diocese of the Catholic Church in France. The diocese comprises the whole of the department of Lot.

In the beginning it was a suffragan of the Archdiocese of Bourges, and later, from 1676 to the time of the French Revolution, it was a suffragan of the Archdiocese of Albi. From 1802 to 1822 Cahors was under the Archbishop of Toulouse, and combined the former Diocese of Rodez with a great part of the former Diocese of Vabres and the Diocese of Montauban. However, in 1822 it was restored almost to its pristine limits and again made suffragan to Albi.

In the Diocese of Cahors in 2013 there was one priest for every 2,295 Catholics.

According to a tradition connected with the legend of St. Martial, this saint, deputed by St. Peter, came to Cahors in the first century and there dedicated a church to St. Stephen, while his disciple, St. Amadour (Amator), the Zaccheus of the Gospel and husband of St. Veronica, evangelized the diocese. In the seventeenth century these traditions were closely examined by the Abbé Antoine Raymond de Fouillac, a friend of Fénelon, and, according to him, the bones discovered at Rocamadour in 1166, and looked upon as the relics of Zaccheus, were in reality the bones of St. Amator, Bishop of Auxerre.

A legend written about the year 1000 by the monks of Saint-Genou Abbey (in the Diocese of Bourges) relates that Genitus and his son Genulfus were sent to Gaul by Pope Sixtus II (257-59), and that Genulfus (Genou) was the first Bishop of Cahors. But Louis Duchesne repudiated this as legend.

The first historically known Bishop of Cahors is St. Florentius, correspondent of Paulinus of Nola (ca. 354–431). The Diocese of Cahors counted among its bishops Hugues Géraud (1312–16), who was implicated in the conspiracy against John XXII and sentenced to be burned alive; 
and Alain de Solminihac (1636–59), a reformer of the clergy.

The Cathedral of Saint-Étienne de Cahors was served by a Chapter composed of fourteen individuals. The Bishop was considered a member of the Chapter, as were the Archdeacons of Cahors and Tournus; in addition there was a Precentor and a Treasurer, as well as nine other Canons. In addition there were four "hebdomadarii", fourteen prebendaries, and twelve chaplains. In 1251, Bishop Bartholomaeus secularized the Chapter, and in 1253 issued new Statutes for them.

The diocese was divided into districts, each headed by an Archpriest. It is attested that by 1526 there were fourteen Archpriests, though a number of them are far older, being mentioned already in the 12th century. Six archpriests are named in the 13th century. The archpriests were supervised by the Archdeacons, of which there were six by 1252: Montpezat, Tournès, Figeac, Cahors, Saint-Céré, and Vaux. In 1418, however, Bishop Guillaume (VI.) d'Arpajon decided to suppress superfluous offices and reduced the number of archdeacons to two: Cahors and Tournès; these two continued to exist down to the Revolution.

The city of Cahors was visited by Pope Callistus II (1119–24) in 1119, where, on 26 August 1119 he dedicated the high altar of the Cathedral. It was also the birthplace of Jacques d'Euse (1244–1334), who became pope in 1316 under the title of John XXII. The tower of his palace is still to be seen in Cahors. He provided a charter for a university there, dated 7 June 1331, its law faculty being so celebrated as to boast at times of 1200 pupils. There were three colleges at Cahors: Pélegry (1358), Rodez (1371), and San Michel (1473). Fénelon studied at this institution, which, in 1751, was dissolved as a separate institution and annexed to the University of Toulouse. In the sixteenth century the Diocese of Cahors was severely tried by religious wars, and the Collège de Pélegry, which provided for a certain number of university students without cost, became noted for the way in which these young men defended Cahors against the Huguenots. The War of the Spanish Succession in its turn took a heavy toll on the good order of the university. In 1707 King Louis XIV found it necessary to reform the Collège de Pélegry and provide it with new statutes.

In 1680 the town of Cahors is reckoned as having some 12,000 inhabitants. By 1766 the population is estimated to have grown to 15,000 persons.

The Cathedral of Saint-Étienne, built at the end of the eleventh and restored in the fourteenth century, has a beautiful Gothic cloister. Recent archival and archaeological discoveries have demonstrated, however, that the westwork of the cathedral, once thought to be of the 14th century, was actually completed by 1288. Plans were already under way by the mid-1240s, when Pope Innocent IV granted indulgences to those who contributed financially to the project; these were renewed by Pope Alexander IV in 1255, and yet another grant was made in 1289 by Nicholas III. The great builders were Bishop Bartholomeus de Roux and Bishop Raimond de Cornil. In 1285 Bishop Raimond persuaded the Chapter to join with him in a commitment to donate half of the first year of income of every newly granted benefice in the diocese to the building fund. When, in the Middle Ages, the bishops officiated in this church they had the privilege, as barons and counts of Cahors, of depositing their sword and armour on the altar. In the diocese local honors are given to St. Sacerdos, Bishop of Limoges, and his mother, Mundana (seventh century); Esperie (Speria), virgin and martyr (eighth century); St. Géraud, Count of Aurillac (beginning of the eleventh century); Blessed Christopher, companion of St. Francis of Assisi and founder of a Franciscan convent at Cahors in 1216, and Blessed Jean-Gabriel Perboyre, born in the village of Mongesty, 1802, and martyred in China, 1840.

The city of Figeac owed its origin to a Benedictine abbey founded by Pepin in 755. The principal places of pilgrimage are: Notre-Dame de Rocamadour, visited by St. Louis (1245), Charles the Fair (1324), and Louis XI (1463); Notre-Dame de Félines and Notre-Dame de Verdale, both dating back to the eleventh century; Saint-Hilaire Lalbenque, where relics of St. Benedict Joseph Labre are preserved.

During the French Revolution the Diocese of Cahors was abolished and its territory subsumed into a new diocese, coterminous with the new 'Departement de Lot' and a suffragan of the 'Metropole du Sud' in the departement of Haute-Garonne, with its seat at Toulouse. The clergy were required to swear and oath to the Constitution, and under the terms of the Civil Constitution of the Clergy a new bishop was to be elected by all the voters of the departement, who were not even required to be Catholics. This placed them in schism with the Roman Catholic Church and the Pope. The electors of the Diocese of Lot duly met, but found no obvious candidate in the department of Lot; they therefore chose an outsider, Abbé Jean-Louis Gouttes as their new Constitutional Bishop. He has also been chosen by the electors of Seine-et Loire, which he preferred. The electors of Lot then, on 27 February 1791, elected Jean d'Anglars, the Archpriest of Cajarc. He was consecrated at Tulle on 29 April by Jean-Jacques Brival.

The legitimate Bishop Louis Maria de Nicolai died in 1791, leaving the diocese vacant. On 11 November 1791 Pope Pius VI appointed Charles-Nicolas de Bécave to be the Vicar-Apostolic of the Diocese of Cahors in the absence of a bishop; he served until the appointment of a new bishop in 1802. Both the Constitutional Church and the Roman Catholic Church were severely stressed in 1793 and 1794 by the Terror, and the discovery that Reason was to replace Faith as the governing principle in France.

In 1801 First Consul Napoleon Bonaparte ordered all the Constitutional Bishops to resign. He was striking a Concordat with Pope Pius VII, which included the liquidation of the Constitutional Church. In accordance with the Concordat, the Pope revived the Diocese of Cahors and placed it in the hands of Guillaume-Balthasar Cousin de Grainville of Montpellier. D'Anglars was made an honorary Canon of the Cathedral of Cahors.










Cymbopogon nardus

Cymbopogon nardus, common name citronella grass, is a species of perennial aromatic plant from the family Poaceae, originating in tropical Asia. "C. nardus" cannot be eaten because of its unpalatable nature and is an invasive species that renders pastureland useless, since cattle will starve even in its abundance.

It is the source of an essential oil known as citronella oil, which is widely used for its natural insect-repelling properties. Essential oils are extracted from the aerial parts and applied topically or slowly burned (e.g. in a "citronella candle") as an insect repellent, particularly to deter haematophagous insects such as mosquitoes.


https://biofertilize.com/citronella-plant-care-and-grow-guide

Roman Catholic Diocese of Caiazzo

The Diocese of Caiazzo is a former Roman Catholic ecclesiastical territory in the province of Caserta, southern Italy, abolished in 1986, when it was united into the Diocese of Alife-Caiazzo. It was a suffragan of the archdiocese of Capua.

According to legend, Christianity was introduced into Caiazzo by Priscus, one of the seventy-two disciples of Jesus, first Bishop of Capua. The story is universally rejected. The first known bishop of Caiazzo was said to have been Arigisus, the exact time of whose episcopate is uncertain; however, as the name indicates, it could not have been before the beginning of the seventh century, when the Lombards settled in that region, since his name appears to be Lombard. The first documentary evidence for the Church of Caiazzo comes in a privilege granted by the Archbishop John of Capua to Bishop Urso; Archbishop John was consecrated in 967.

The cathedral of Caiazzo was dedicated to the Virgin Mary and to Saint Stephen of Macerata, the eleventh century Bishop of Caiazzo. The cathedral was consecrated on 23 July 1284, by Cardinal Gerardo Bianchi, Bishop of Sabina and papal Legate in Sicily.

The cathedral was staffed and administered by a corporate body, the Chapter, composed of three dignities (the Archdeacon, and two Primicerii) and twenty Canons (two of whom are designated Theologus and Primicerius, in accordance with the decrees of the Council of Trent). In 1696, there were twenty-two Canons.

There was also a Collegiate Church, Santissima Annunziata, served by a college of eight chaplains.

The diocesan seminary of Cajazzo was founded by Bishop Fabio Mirto Frangipani, who had been one of the secretaries of the Council of Trent. It had space for seventy resident students, from grade school through high school.

Following the extinction of the Napoleonic Kingdom of Italy, the Congress of Vienna authorized the restoration of the Papal States and the Kingdom of Naples. Since the French occupation had seen the abolition of many Church institutions in the Kingdom, as well as the confiscation of most Church property and resources, it was imperative that Pope Pius VII and King Ferdinand IV reach agreement on restoration and restitution. Ferdinand, however, was not prepared to accept the pre-Napoleonic situation, in which Naples was a feudal subject of the papacy. Lengthy, detailed, and acrimonious negotiations ensued.

In 1818, a new concordat with the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies committed the pope to the suppression of more than fifty small dioceses in the kingdom. The ecclesiastical province of Naples was spared from any suppressions, but the province of Capua was affected. Pope Pius VII, in the bull "De Utiliori" of 27 June 1818, chose to unite the two dioceses of Calvi and Teano under the leadership of one bishop, "aeque principaliter". He also suppressed the diocese of Venafro completely, and assigned its people and territory to the diocese of Isernia. Similarly, Carinola was suppressed and assigned to Suessa. Caiazzo was suppressed, and assigned to the diocese of Caserta. The cathedral of Caiazzo was reduced to the status of a collegiate church. In the same concordat, the King was confirmed in the right to nominate candidates for vacant bishoprics, subject to the approval of the pope. That situation persisted down until the final overthrow of the Bourbon monarchy in 1860.

The diocese of Caiazzo was revived, however, and a new bishop was appointed on 15 March 1852. Caserta lost the territory which it had gained in 1818.

On 18 February 1984, the Vatican and the Italian State signed a new and revised concordat, which was accompanied in the next year by enabling legislation. According to the agreement, the practice of having one bishop govern two separate dioceses at the same time, "aeque personaliter", was abolished. Otherwise Caiazzo and Alise, who shared a bishop, might have become the diocese of Alise e Caiazzo. Instead, the Vatican continued consultations which had begun under Pope John XXIII for the merging of small dioceses, especially those with personnel and financial problems, into one combined diocese. On 30 September 1986, Pope John Paul II ordered that the dioceses of Caiazzo and Alise be merged into one diocese with one bishop, with the Latin title "Dioecesis ". The seat of the diocese was to be in Alise, and the cathedral of Alise was to serve as the cathedral of the merged diocese. The cathedral in Caiazzo was to become a co-cathedral, and the cathedral Chapter was to be a "Capitulum Concathedralis". There was to be only one diocesan Tribunal, in Alise, and likewise one seminary, one College of Consultors, and one Priests' Council. The territory of the new diocese was to include the territory of the former dioceses of Caiazzo and Alise.

"Erected: 9th Century"<br>
"Metropolitan: Archdiocese of Capua"


"United: 30 September 1986 with the Diocese of Alife"<br>
"Latin Name: Aliphanus-Caiacensis o Caiatinus"





The Gatehaus

The Gatehaus is an eleven floor residential glass building located in Bradford, West Yorkshire in England. Developed by Asquith Properties, construction began in 2005 and was completed in May 2007. The total cost of the project was £22 million. The building won a number of awards in 2008, including ""Building of the Year"" at the Bradford District Design Awards, ""Best City Centre Development"" at the Resi Props Awards, and the ""Design Excellence Award"" at the Insider Property Awards.

The Gatehaus was originally proposed as a 17-storey building, however, due to proximity to the historic Little Germany area of Bradford, the original scheme was considered too overbearing and was reduced in height to match the Victorian structures. It now stands at 35m. There are 142 apartments with a range of one to three bedrooms.


Clarks Logan City Bus Service

Clarks Logan City Bus Service is an Australian operator of bus services in the southern suburbs of Brisbane. It operates 28 services under contract to the Government of Queensland under the Translink banner.

In 2008, Graham Davis became the CEO of Clarks Logan City Bus Service.

In April 2016, the operator celebrated its 40th anniversary.

Clark's Bus Service was formed in 1976 when couple Yvonne and Reg Clark started a local school bus service in Logan City. In 1987, Clark's Bus Service purchased Greenline Bus Service in an effort to expand services to Brisbane City. In September 1995, Rochedale Bus Service was purchased. In 2003, it was rebranded as Clarks Logan City Bus Service.

As of May 2021, the fleet consists of 127 highly standardised vehicles. These consist mostly of the Volvo B12BLE chassis mounted with a VST body manufactured by Bustech.

In July 2017, Clarks Logan City Bus Service launched the new 567 route, servicing between the suburbs of Holmview and Beenleigh. This route is served by the first operational Hino Poncho outside Japan.


Clan MacGillivray

Clan MacGillivray is a Highland Scottish clan and is a member of the Clan Chattan Confederation. The clan does not currently have a clan chief, but following a petition to the Lord Lyon a family convention was held at Culloden on 15 April 2016. Submissions from four applicants for the role of commander were heard and Iain Donald MacGillivray was nominated and subsequently received his commission from the Lord Lyon. The role subsists for an initial period of five years but can be renewed for a further five years, and thereafter the commander can petition to be chief.

The clan MacGillivray was an important clan even before the Norsemen were driven out of the Outer Hebrides by King Somerled, who was Lord of the Isles in the 12th century. In 1222, Alexander II of Scotland subdued Argyll, and the "clan Mhic Gillebrath" became dispersed. Some of the clan remained on the Isle of Mull, while others stayed in Morvern. There is a tradition that asserts that the chief of the clan placed himself under the protection of the chiefs of clan Mackintosh, who were also chiefs of the Chattan Confederation. Thereafter the clan MacGillivray belonged to the clan Chattan.

The MacGillivray clan was first accurately recorded in Dunmaglass in 1549. In 1609, there was a great gathering of the Chattan Confederation, at which loyalties were given to the Mackintosh chief, and the "haill kin and race of MacGillivray" was represented by Malcolm MacGillivray of Dalcrombie and Duncan MacGillivray of Dunmaglass. The MacGillivrays were persecuted by their Calvinist and Presbyterian neighbors owing to their support of Episcopal polity of the church.

Along with most of the other clans of the Chattan Confederation, the MacGillivrays were staunch Jacobites in both the Jacobite rising of 1715 and the Jacobite rising of 1745. During the 1745 rising, the chief of Mackintoshes and clan Chattan was however a serving officer in the Black Watch regiment of the British Army, but his wife, Lady Anne Mackintosh (née Farquharson), rallied the Chattan Confederation in support of the Jacobites and placed chief Alexander MacGillivray in command of the clan Chattan regiment. Alexander MacGillivray was killed leading his clan at the Battle of Culloden in 1746 along with many of his followers. A graveyard at Dunlichity commemorates the many MacGillivrays who fell in the battle. After Culloden, many MacGillivrays emigrated across the Atlantic, where many of them were successful, particularly as traders.

The last chief to live at Dunmaglass was the 13th laird, Capt. John William MacGillivray, who had to sell his estate and died without an heir in 1914. The chiefship then passed to a cousin of his, John Farquhar MacGillivray, who lived in Toronto, Ontario, Canada. John Farquhar MacGillivray was chief for 32 years when he died in 1942 without an heir, and the last chief of clan MacGillivray. A Dr Angus MacGillivary [d.1947] tried to claim the chieftainship but was unable to prove his lineage—although he was awarded a variation of the MacGillivray coat of arms in 1914. Another Canadian, Col. George B. MacGillivray, later petitioned Lord Lyon King of Arms three times between 1953 and 1989 to be recognised as chief. Lord Lyon, not satisfied with the proofs MacGillivray submitted, denied him status of chief, but commissioned him as commander of the clan. MacGillivray served as Commander for five years before dying in 1994, and to this day the clan remains without a Chief, but does once again have a Commander to lead it.
In 2016, the Clan MacGillivray International Association organised a derbhfine or Family Convention with members of that Association and the clan MacGillivary Societies of America, Australia Canada and the Netherlands nominated Iain MacGillivray for the role of Clan Commander. The Lord Lyon accepted the nomination and presented him with his Commission, appointing and confirming him in this important leadership role for Clan MacGillivray.

Dunmaglas, which is about six miles east of Inverfarigaig in Inverness-shire, was held by the MacGillivrays from at least the sixteenth century, if not earlier. Dalcrombie, which is nearby, was also held by the clan.

Clan MacGillivray does not have any septs, though common variations of the names "MacGillivray" and "McGillivray", associated with the clan, are listed as follows. Note that the prefix "Mac"/"Mc" are interchangeable, as well as the capitalisation of the second syllable.


A playable character inspired by Scottish culture in the video game "For Honor" from the French publisher Ubisoft can be heard shouting "Dunmaghlas!", the historic war cry of the Clan. One of the character and story writers for the game was Ariadne MacGillivray, a member of the Clan.



Massimo Paci

Massimo Paci (born 9 May 1978) is an Italian football coach and a former player.

Paci started his career at Ancona. He made his Serie A debut for Lecce on 18 September 2004 against Brescia. In July 2005, he was signed by Genoa, but after Genoa Serie A place was cancelled due to match-fixing, he was loaned to Ascoli which replace Genoa in Serie A.

Paci moved to Parma in 2006 for €1.8 million in a 4-year contract. He made 124 appearances in 5 years before his 2011 departure to Novara for free. On 20 July 2012 he was signed by A.C. Siena, with Lorenzo Del Prete moved to opposite direction.

On 4 July 2014 Paci was signed by Serie B club Brescia in a 1-year contract.

On 28 July 2014 he was signed by Lega Pro club Pisa.

After retiring, he became a part of Marco Schenardi's coaching staff at Civitanovese. In September 2015, he then moved to The United States to participate in master courses reserved for coaches. He returned to Italy in 2016 and became manager of Civitanovese on 8 February 2016. He was in charge until the end of the season.

In July 2017, he became manager of Montegiorgio Calcio. He left the club on 8 May 2019. Paci was later announced as manager of Forlì FC for the 2019/20 season.

On 21 August 2020, he was hired by Serie C club Teramo. After guiding Teramo to the promotion playoff, which ended in a first-round loss to Palermo, he was hired by Serie B club Pordenone on a two-year deal. He was dismissed on 30 August 2021 following three defeats in the first three official games of the season.

On 1 July 2022, Paci was announced as the new head coach of Serie C club Pro Vercelli. He was dismissed on 20 February 2023 together with his assistant Roberto Guana.

On 23 January 2024, Paci returned to management as the new head coach of struggling Serie C club Pro Sesto until the end of the season. However, he resigned just a month later, on 25 February, after failing to improve the team's results.


Montana Army National Guard

The Montana Army National Guard is a component of the United States Army and the United States National Guard. Nationwide, the Army National Guard comprises approximately one half of the US Army's available combat forces and approximately one third of its support organization. National coordination of various state National Guard units are maintained through the National Guard Bureau.

Montana Army National Guard units are trained and equipped as part of the United States Army. The same ranks and insignia are used and National Guardsmen are eligible to receive all United States military awards. The Montana Guard also bestows a number of state awards for local services rendered in or to the state of Montana.

The Montana Army National Guard maintains facilities in 28 communities.

The Montana Army National Guard was originally formed in 1867. The 163d Infantry dates its history to independent companies grouped together around 1900. The Militia Act of 1903 organized the various state militias into the present National Guard system.

The 163rd Infantry Regiment of the Montana Guard formed part of the 41st Infantry Division, which fought through the Pacific during World War II. The Regiment was inducted into the Regular Army in September 1940, and were sent to Camp Murray at Fort Lewis, Washington. They participated in large-scale military exercises in California in 1941. On 7 Dec. 1941 small units were detailed to guard the Washington coastline from Japanese saboteurs. In March 1942 they were sent to Australia. Their engagements included the Battle of Buna-Gona in 1942–1943, the Salamaua-Lae campaign in 1943, Operations Reckless and Persecution and the Battle of Biak in 1944, and the liberation of the Philippines in 1945. In September 1945 the Regiment went ashore at Hiro, Japan as part of the occupation of that country. By this time most of the original Montanan troops had been discharged.

The Montana ARNG maintained the 163rd Armored Cavalry Regiment (whose roots date back to 1884), until 1988. In 1985 its units included the 1/163 Cavalry, the 2/163 Cavalry, the 3/163 Cavalry (based in Texas), an Air Troop, an Attack Helicopter Troop (based in Utah), and the 1063rd Engineer Company. The Montana units of the 163rd Armored Cavalry Regiment were converted and expanded into the 163rd Armored Brigade on 1 September 1988. The 3rd Battalion, 49th Field Artillery of the Wyoming Army National Guard became the brigade direct support artillery battalion. The 163rd Armored Brigade inactivated in 1997 due to budget cuts.

On the disbandment of the 163rd Armored Brigade, the 1st Battalion, 163rd Infantry was reassigned to the 116th Cavalry Brigade headquartered in Idaho. 'Commonly referred to as the Griz Battalion, the 1-163rd at first was designated as a Cavalry Regiment in 1953, named the 163rd Cavalry Regiment. The unit was renamed the 1-163rd Infantry Battalion during the 2006 reorganization of the Montana Army National Guard, and was re-designated as Cavalry once again in 2007, combining mechanized infantry with Abrams tank units.' In the 2006 reorganization, the 1st Battalion, 190th Field Artillery at Billings became the 190th Combat Service Support Battalion.

In April 2010, the 1st Battalion, 163rd Cavalry received mobilization orders and prepared to deploy to the Middle East for the second time in five years.


National Guard units can be mobilized at any time by presidential order to supplement regular armed forces, and upon declaration of a state of emergency by the governor of the state in which they serve. Unlike Army Reserve members, National Guard members cannot be mobilized individually (except through voluntary transfers and Temporary Duty Assignments TDY), but only as part of their respective units. However, there has been a significant number of individual activations to support military operations (2001-?); the legality of this policy is a major issue within the National Guard.

For much of the final decades of the twentieth century, National Guard personnel typically served "One weekend a month, two weeks a year", with a portion working for the Guard in a full-time capacity. The current forces formation plans of the US Army call for the typical National Guard unit (or National Guardsman) to serve one year of active duty for every three years of service. More specifically, current Department of Defense policy is that no Guardsman will be involuntarily activated for a total of more than 24 months (cumulative) in one six-year enlistment period (this policy is due to change 1 August 2007, the new policy states that soldiers will be given 24 months between deployments of no more than 24 months, individual states have differing policies).



Roman Catholic Diocese of Città di Castello

The Diocese of Città di Castello () is a Latin diocese of the Catholic Church in the ecclesiastical province of the metropolitan Archdiocese of Perugia-Città della Pieve, in the central Italian region of Umbria.

Its cathedral episcopal see is a Minor basilica: Basilica Cattedrale di Ss. Florido e Amanzio Basilica, dedicated to Saints Floridus (the diocesan patron saint) and Amantius, in Città di Castello. The province and diocese have a Marian second Minor Basilica: Santuario-Basilica della Madonna del Transito Santuario, in Canoscio.

During the persecution of Diocletian (303), St. Crescentianus, a Roman knight, and ten others suffered martyrdom at Tifernum. Crescentianus killed a dragon before he was decapitated. The bishopric was erected circa 450 AD. In 550, by order of the Ostrogothic king Totila, the city then known as Tifernum or Civitas Tiberina was captured and destroyed. Città di Castello was later rebuilt around a castle, giving origin to the name used today.

In 590, the diocese of Tifernum gained territory from the suppressed Diocese of Sant'Angelo in Vado. The bishop was Floridus, who attended the synod of Pope Gregory I in 593.

By the Donation of Pepin (752), it became subject to the Holy See. It lost territories in 1013, to establish the Territorial Abbey of Sansepolcro, and on 19 June 1325 to establish the Diocese of Cortona.

The first-known bishop of this see was Ennodius, present at a Roman council (465) under Pope Hilary.

In 711 Arian Longobards put to death the bishop of the city, Albertus, and his deacon Britius.

In 875 Bishop Rainaldus was summoned to appear before the papal apocrisiarius Gregory and the magister militum Georgius, the vestiarius of the Patriarch of Aquileia, to answer a charge of homicide. Having failed to deal with the situation, despite several letters of excommunication, Rainaldus was summoned by Pope John VIII to appear in Rome and stand trial. Rainaldus appeared at the papal court, but stealthily avoided taking his seat in the synod, and instead fled the city by going over the walls like a thief. Revealing himself to be guilty, he was immediately excommunicated and interdicted. The Pope announced the result in a letter to the Emperor Louis.

Pope Celestine II (Guido di Castello) (1143–1144) was a native of Città di Castello.

In 1375 Città di Castello joined in the insurrection of other cities of the Papal States. Cardinal Robert of Geneva (later Pope Clement VII, Avignon Obedience), undertook to recapture it with Breton mercenaries, but was repulsed. Under Pope Martin V, however, it was taken by Braccio da Montone (1420). Later, Nicolò Vitelli, with the help of Florence and Milan, became absolute ruler.

In 1474 Pope Sixtus IV sent an army commanded by his nephew, Cardinal Giuliano della Rovere (later Pope Julius II). After fruitless negotiations Cardinal Giuliano laid siege to the city, but Vitelli did not surrender until he learned that the command of the army had been given to Duke Federigo of Urbino. The following year Vitelli tried unsuccessfully to recapture the city; fear of Cesare Borgia alone induced him to desist.

On 22 September 1515 it lost more territory to the Territorial Abbey of Sansepolcro.

A diocesan synod was an irregular but important meeting of the bishop of a diocese and his clergy. Its purpose was (1) to proclaim generally the various decrees already issued by the bishop; (2) to discuss and ratify measures on which the bishop chose to consult with his clergy; (3) to publish statutes and decrees of the diocesan synod, of the provincial synod, and of the Holy See.

Bishop Giovanni Battista Lattanzi (1750–1782) held his first diocesan synod on 23–25 September 1766.

Bishop Francesco Antonio Mondelli (1814–1825) held a diocesan synod on 8–10 April 1818.

Bishop Giovanni Muzi held a diocesan synod on 1 June 1835.

Letterio Turchi (1850–1861) held a diocesan synod on 14–16 June 1853.






Wyton, East Riding of Yorkshire

Wyton is a hamlet in the civil parish of Bilton, in the East Riding of Yorkshire, It is situated approximately east of Kingston upon Hull city centre. Wyton leads from Bilton through to Sproatley.

Wyton was formerly a township in the parish of Swine, in 1866 Wyton became a separate civil parish, on 1 April 1935 the parish was abolished and merged with Bilton. In 1931 the parish had a population of 111.

Wyton is a small farming village with few houses, it is used for farming because of its rich soil, and large, open space. Its history is small, but was a Quaker village in the 17th century. There are still signs of the Quakers, such as buried ploughing machines, buried clothes and the remains of the houses (more on the Sproatley track, leading from Sproatley to Coniston).
Wyton contains a Grade II listed Wesleyan Methodist Church, a milestone and a hall but there are no schools, public houses, post offices, hotels, public telephones or sports centres.
Wyton is usually called a hamlet because it is even smaller than a village.

1993 British Touring Car Championship

The 1993 Auto Trader RAC British Touring Car Championship season was 36th British Touring Car Championship (BTCC) season.

At the end of 1992 BMW GB withdrew from the championship after the rules had been changed in a direction which BMW felt disadvantaged them. Prodrive, which had run the works operation for BMW, had been expected to be entering a works Mercedes-Benz team in cooperation with AMG, running the C-class. Prodrive stalwart Tim Sugden and Bernd Schneider were due to drive for the team. The plans were for a late season appearance leading to a full challenge in 1994, but this eventually came to nothing. Vic Lee Motorsport was liquidated after owner Vic Lee's drug scandal. The assets of the team were taken over by Steve Neal and Ray Bellm, who picked up personnel from Euroracing's discontinued sports car effort and merged it into Neal's Rimstock Racing outfit, creating Team Dynamics. Bellm would sell his share in the team later in the year, leaving Steve Neal as the only owner. The team started the 1993 season with three 1992-spec 318iS cars piloted by Matt Neal, Ray Bellm and Alex Portman, later dropping down to two. 
Only weeks after BMW GB withdrew from the BTCC, BMW withdrew their Schnitzer Motorsport-run works operation from the German DTM championship, also there because of their disagreement with new rules. With few other series to contest in Schnitzer Motorsport were sent over by BMW to the British championship along with works drivers Steve Soper and Joachim Winkelhock. 
Andy Rouse had lost his Toyota contract to famous Toyota tuners TOM'S Norfolk-based European arm known as Tom's GB, who had previously run Group A Toyotas in BTCC in the eighties. Andy Rouse's seat was taken over by Julian Bailey, and the new shape Carina E GTi replaced the older model. Toyota also supported a junior team run by Park Lane Racing, who would run two older shape Carinas for James Kaye and Bobby Verdon-Roe. Rouse himself had landed a Ford works deal, but the new Mondeo would not appear until after the season had started. 
Vauxhall retained their John Cleland / Jeff Allam line-up in the Vauxhall Cavalier and their Ecurie Ecosse semi-works team; at Ecurie Ecosse David Leslie retained his seat and was after a few races joined by fellow Scotsman Harry Nuttall. Peugeot added Eugene O’Brien and Ian Flux to Robb Gravett for a three-car line-up in the Peugeot 405 Mi16 (with Flux’ car being run by Roy Kennedy Racing); Nissan ran three cars for Keith O'Dor, Win Percy and Tiff Needell, and Mazda returned with Patrick Watts in a brand new Xedos 6. Renault was the new manufacturer to join the championship with Alain Menu and reigning champion Tim Harvey as their drivers in the Renault 19 16v

The season started at Silverstone, where Steve Soper led team-mate Joachim Winkelhock home for a dominating BMW one-two. The second round at Donington Park was the support race for the European Grand Prix. The race was hit by torrential rain, and thanks to Michelin (whose wet-weather tyres were far superior to the ones of the other tire manufacturers) Renault was able to claim a one-two finish, Tim Harvey winning the race ahead of Alain Menu. It soon became apparent that Renault's pace was tied to conditions, as they struggled to match the championship's privateers in the dry.

A start line crash at the next round at Snetterton forced a red flag, and five cars failed to make the restart. The race would be won by Soper, with Julian Bailey in second and David Leslie in third. Winkelhock then took the victory at Round 4 at Donington Park ahead of Jeff Allam and Steve Soper. Winkelhock then took a commanding victory at Oulton Park, and as Steve Soper had gone off into a tyre wall and forced into retirement Winkelhock now took the championship lead by two points.

Brands Hatch hosted the first double header of the season. Winkelhock was at the centre of controversy when he shunted David Leslie out of the lead to take the win. Keith O’Dor finished second and Will Hoy third. Leslie was not amused, commenting that Winkelhock had not had any opportunity whatsoever to pull the pass off. Winkelhock apologized, saying he was a lot faster than Leslie in that corner but that there had been a bit of a misunderstanding when he tried his move. Winkelhock then led the second race when he made a mistake going into Clearways and went off into the Armco barrier and retirement. Will Hoy then went off at the same place, but ended up a bit further to the right and into the tires that covered some of the barriers at that corner. With both of his major contenders out Soper could take an easy win ahead of O’Dor and Jeff Allam.

The BTCC then headed to Wales for Round 8 at Pembrey, where Ford made its debut. Winkelhock won the race with Hoy in second and Soper in third. At the next round at Silverstone Toyota appeared to be heading home a one-two finish for Will Hoy and Julian Bailey. An over-ambitious move from Bailey however put Hoy on his roof and forced Bailey himself into retirement. It was instead Keith O’Dor who took his and Nissan's first BTCC victory. To make it a perfect day for Nissan his teammate Win Percy finished second in a drag race over the line with Paul Radisich, who took the returning Ford team's first podium.

Knockhill held the next double header of the season. A race long battle between Vauxhall driver John Cleland and Toyota driver Julian Bailey saw Cleland finally come out on top, with Will Hoy finishing in third. Further back, Soper lost valuable points when he was pushed off by Radisich in the Ford. Winkelhock was not able to start the second race due to clutch problems. It was now Bailey's turn to win a race, finishing ahead of Cleland and Hoy. The Renault team decided to skip the Scottish meeting and focus on developing their car.

Oulton Park hosted Round 12 which was the Gold Cup, and Renault's car updates appeared to have paid off. Both cars qualified and finished much better than before, Menu taking fourth. Up front Winkelhock led from start to finish while Soper was second ahead of Cleland. 
Round 13 took place at Brands Hatch and Winkelhock and Leslie clashed again. First Winkelhock barged past Leslie to take second, and when Leslie attempted to retake the place he pushed Winkelhock into a spin. Both drivers dropped down the field while Radisich won the race from Soper and Peugeot driver Robb Gravett; Soper was however later penalised one position because of his rather forceful move on Gravett on the last lap to take second.

Leslie then finally won a race when the series visited Thruxton. Ford was second and third with Radisich and Andy Rouse, while a sixth place from Soper closed the gap between him and Winkelhock to twelve points.

Donington Park hosted the penultimate weekend of the championship and the last double header meeting. Radisich dominated the first race and won it by more than ten seconds, while wet weather conditions enabled Renault to finish second and third. A puncture had forced Soper to retire, and with Winkelhock finishing fifth the German now had the chance to take the title in the second race. Menu then won Race 2 from Radisich and Winkelhock, but as Soper finished fifth the championship would be decided in the final round at Silverstone.

At Silverstone the race was red flagged following an accident involving Robb Gravett's Peugeot. Will Hoy led away in the Toyota after the restart, but was later passed by both Paul Radisich and Andy Rouse, who took a one-two finish for Ford. Hoy held on to third, and while Steve Soper finished ahead of Winkelhock he did not get the result he needed and it was Joachim Winkelhock who won the 1993 British Touring Car Championship. Despite missing the first part of the season Paul Radisich finished third in the championship, with John Cleland in fourth and Julian Bailey in fifth.

(https://web.archive.org/web/20030923053911/http://www.lawsworld.co.uk:80/)

All races were held in the United Kingdom.



Midlands Express

The Midlands Express was one of the three flagship named passenger trains operated by Midland Mainline and now East Midlands Trains. This train ran along the Midland Main Line and was operated using an InterCity 125.

The "Midlands Express" name was introduced in 1999 and withdrawn from use by East Midlands Trains for the start of the December 2008 timetable. The last day the "Midlands Express" ran was 12 December 2008.

The north-bound "Midlands Express" was the 1625 train from London St Pancras to Sheffield and called at:

The south-bound "Midlands Express" was the 0705 train from Sheffield to London St Pancras and called at:
Midland Mainline/East Midlands operated two other named trains at the time called:
East Midlands Railway still run services with these names after the franchise was handed over from East Midlands Trains.



Magdi Rúzsa

Magdolna "Magdi" Rúzsa (; ; born 28 November 1985) is a Hungarian singer who won the 2006 title of "Megasztár" (""Megastar""), Hungary's nationwide talent search, that resembles, but is not based on, "Pop Idol". As the winner of the category "Newcomer of the Year" at the Fonogram Hungarian Music Awards in 2007, she represented Hungary at the Eurovision Song Contest in Helsinki, Finland with the song "Unsubstantial Blues". She finished ninth and won a Marcel Bezençon Award in the Best Composer category. She often performs songs by her favorite singer, Janis Joplin.

Born in Vrbas into the Hungarian ethnic minority in Serbia, Rúzsa studied in Subotica as an obstetric nurse. She was discovered in 2005, after winning the third season of "Megasztár" ("Megastar") in Hungary.

After winning the competition, Rúzsa's album, featuring the songs she performed during the show's finals, went triple platinum and to date has sold around 80,000 copies. Her first artist album "Ördögi Angyal" (Devilish Angel) was released on her birthday (28 November 2006) and has sold 36,000 copies so far. These two records were the biggest-selling releases in 2006 in Hungary.

Rúzsa was voted New Talent of the Year in 2006, representing Hungary at the 2007 Eurovision Song Contest in Helsinki. She decided to sing in English because she felt that the lyrics of the song are of high importance and wanted people to understand what Unsubstantial Blues was all about. The semi-finals took place on 10 May 2007 and Rúzsa made her way to the finals in second place with 224 points. At the final on 12 May 2007 she finished ninth with 128 points. Being the songwriter of Unsubstantial Blues, she was also granted the Best Composer Award, which is given to the best songwriter among the Eurovision song composers every year.

On February 1, 2022, Rúzsa gave birth to her children Lujza, Keve and Zalán.
Song performances by Rúzsa on "Megasztár":
Finale: "The Winner Takes It All" (ABBA) (Crowned to be the Voice of 2006)

All figures and chart positions are given for Hungary if not stated otherwise.


Roman Catholic Diocese of Coimbra

The Diocese of Coimbra () is a Latin Church diocese of the Catholic Church in Coimbra, Portugal. It is a suffragan of the Archdiocese of Braga.

From 1472, the bishop of Coimbra held the comital title of Count of Arganil, being thus called Bishop-Count ().

The first known bishop was Lucentius, who participated in the first council of Braga (563), the metropolitan See of Coimbra, until the latter was attached to the ecclesiastical province of Mérida (650–62). Titular bishops of Coimbra continued the succession under the Islamic conquest, one of whom witnessed the consecration of the church of Santiago de Compostela in 876.

The see was re-established in 1088, after the reconquest of the city of Coimbra by the Christian forces of Sisnando Davides (1064). The first bishop of the new series was Martin. In the midst of the difficulties of restoring the Church in Portugal in the wake of the request of the country from the Arabs, Bishop Mauricio Burdino applied to Pope Paschal II and obtained a bull "Apostolicae Sedis" (24 March 1101), assuring him of the possession of the old territory of his diocese, including parts which were once part of the diocese as they are reconquered from the Moors and the Arabs. He also assigned the bishop, for the time being, the territories of the vacant bishoprics of Lamego and Viseu, until such time as they could have their own bishops; and the territory and parishes of the Villa Vacaricia, which had been given by Count Raymond to the Diocese of Coimbra.

From 1139 Coimbra was the capital of the kingdom of Portugal and a principal beneficiary of the generosity of its kings, until the seat of government was moved to Lisbon in 1260. Among the more famous bishops have been Pedro (1300), chancellor of King Dinis; João Galvão, who was granted the title of Conde de Arganil for himself and his successors, on 25 September 1472 by King Alfonso V, in gratitude for his service in the conquest of Arzila and Tangier; and Manuel de Menezes (1573–78), former rector of the University of Coimbra from 1556 to 1560, who fell with King Sebastian in the Battle of Alcácer Quibir on 4 August 1578.

The University of Coimbra, the only university in Portugal until the 20th century, was founded in 1290, but in Lisbon, not in Coimbra. A papal bull was obtained from Pope Nicholas IV, and King Dinis I carried out the act of establishment. It was not until 1308 that the university was moved to Coimbra, due principally to the hostility of the people of Lisbon, though in 1338 it moved back. In 1354 the university returned to Coimbra, and in 1377 was established back in Lisbon. The university remained in Lisbon until King John III moved it back to Coimbra permanently in 1537. The involvement of the bishops of Coimbra in the affairs of the university was therefore intermittent and superficial, at least until the second half of the sixteenth century. Then they protected its medieval and Catholic character with zeal. One bishop, Miguel da Anunciação, spent eight years in prison for defying the efforts of the government to modernize the educational system of Portugal's university.

The Old Cathedral of Coimbra, built in the first half of the 12th century, partly at the expense of Bishop Miguel and his chapter, is a remarkable monument of Romanesque architecture. The architect was Robert of Clermont. It was dedicated to the Assumption of the Body of the Virgin Mary into Heaven. The new cathedral, a Renaissance church built in 1580 as a church for its adjacent Jesuit college, is another important monument. The episcopal palace was built in the 18th century. The cathedral was administered by a chapter, whose eight dignities (not "dignitaries") included: the dean, the cantor, the scholasticus, the treasurer, and the three archdeacons (Coimbra, Sena). There were twenty-one canons.

The most important monastery in the diocese is Santa Cruz Monastery, founded in 1131 by Afonso Henriques, and for some time the most important in the kingdom by reason of its wealth and privileges. Its prior was authorized, or so it was claimed, by Anastasius IV and Celestine III to wear the episcopal insignia.

The Academic Center of Christian Democracy is an association of Christian inspiration, belonging to the Diocese of Coimbra, which provides support to university students, who study in the University of Coimbra. The directorate of the association is composed almost entirely of tenured professors and doctors at the university. Notable members have included include António de Oliveira Salazar, Prime Minister (1932–1968) and dictator of Portugal.





Framingham Secondary

The Framingham Secondary (formerly the Framingham Subdivision) is a railroad line in the U.S. state of Massachusetts. The line runs from Mansfield northwest to Framingham along a former New York, New Haven and Hartford Railroad line. Its south end is at Amtrak's Northeast Corridor, over which CSX has trackage rights to reach the Middleboro Subdivision at Attleboro and the Boston Subdivision in Boston (via the Fairmount Line). Its north end is at the Framingham/Worcester Line; the Fitchburg Subdivision continues northwest from Framingham.

Special MBTA Commuter Rail trains use the line between Mansfield and Walpole for access to Foxboro station, which is used for New England Patriots home games and other major events at Gillette Stadium. Regular commuter service to Foxboro ran as a pilot in 2019-2020, and became permanent in 2022.

The Foxborough Branch Railroad was incorporated in 1862 to provide a rail connection from Mansfield through Foxborough to Walpole. In 1867, it became the Mansfield and Framingham Railroad, with a new charter allowing it to connect to the Boston, Clinton and Fitchburg Railroad and Boston and Worcester Railroad at Framingham. The line was completed on May 1, 1870. On January 1, 1873, it was leased to the Boston, Clinton and Fitchburg Railroad for fifty years, before merging with that railroad on June 1, 1875.

On June 1, 1876, the line became part of the Boston, Clinton, Fitchburg and New Bedford Railroad with the merger of the Boston, Clinton and Fitchburg Railroad with the New Bedford Railroad, forming an overall network of 126.2 miles of track. In 1879, the Boston, Clinton, Fitchburg and New Bedford Railroad was leased to the Old Colony Railroad for 999 years, before being consolidated with the Old Colony in 1883. The line was double-tracked between Walpole and Mansfield in 1886. In 1893, it became part of the New York, New Haven and Hartford Railroad as part of the lease of the entire Old Colony Railroad network.

Passenger service ceased in 1933. The line passed to Penn Central and Conrail, and was assigned to CSX Transportation as its Framingham Subdivision in the 1999 breakup of Conrail. Effective June 17, 2015, the state purchased the line for $23 million with the intent to upgrade it for faster game day service and eventual full-time passenger service. By 2021, of continuous welded rail had been installed.


Roman Catholic Diocese of Crema

The Diocese of Crema () is a Latin diocese of the Catholic Church in Lombardy in northern Italy. It has existed since 1579. It is suffragan to the Archdiocese of Milan. The seat of the bishop is the cathedral of Santa Maria Assunta.

Founded in the sixth century, the town of Crema endured a particularly hazardous geographical position in terms of its civic independence. It is only 29.7 km east of Milan, and its neighbor to the east, the Serene Republic of Venice, was always pressing to expand its holdings on the mainland. In addition the German emperors held the overlordship of the Po Valley, and from time to time dominated the political situation. Otto of Freising (died 1158), for instance, draws attention to Crema's situation in the perpetual struggle between Cremona and Milan, situated as Crema was , just halfway between Cremona and Milan. It bore a good deal of the military action, and, as Cremona regularly rejected its demands in litigation for redress and reparations, Crema developed a grudge. This was particularly wrenching since Crema was politically subject to Cremona and spiritually subject to its bishop. To gain an advantage, the leaders of Cremona urged the Emperor Frederic Barbarossa to destroy Crema in exchange for a considerable sum of money, which would allow him to pursue his ventures in the Po Valley. The citizens of Crema therefore threw in their lot with Milan.

Crema became subject to the Republic of Venice in September 1449, and the possession was ratified by the Treaty of Blois, between Louis XII of France and the Republic of Venice, on 23 March 1513.

The diocese of Crema was created by Pope Gregory XIII on 11 April 1579, by splitting off territory that had been part of the Diocese of Lodi, the diocese of Cremona, and the diocese of Piacenza.

On 10 December 1582, with the bull "Universi orbis", Gregory XIII raised the diocese of Bologna, his birthplace, to the status of a metropolitan archbishopric, annexing the diocese of Crema and six others as its suffragans.

A diocesan synod was held in Crema on 3–5 January 1650 by Bishop Alberto Badoer (1633–1677). On 9–11 September 1688, Bishop Marcantonio Zollio (1678–1702) held a diocesan synod in the cathedral of Crema. Bishop Faustino Giuseppe Griffoni Sant’Angelo (1702–1730) presided over a diocesan synod on 4–6 November 1727. A diocesan synod was held by Bishop Ludovico Calini (1730–1751) in 1737 on 29 April and the two following days.

In 1801, following the principles established in law by the French National Assembly in 1791, the number of dioceses in French territory in Savoy, Piedmont, and Lombardy was to be reduced. Crema was one of the dioceses which was suppressed. The cathedral Chapter, the seminary, and the mendicant religious orders were also suppressed. It was the Emperor Napoleon, King of Italy, who, on 19 July 1806, brought the diocese back to life with his nomination of Tommaso Ronna of Milan to be the new bishop; Pius VII approved the candidate on 19 March 1807.

On 5 February 1835, with the bull "Romani Pontifices", Pope Gregory XVI assigned the diocese of Crema as suffragan of the archdiocese of Milan. The change was made at the insistence of Count Richard von Lutzow, the ambassador in Rome of Ferdinand I, King of Lombardy-Venetia.

The 62 parishes of the diocese are all located in the Province of Cremona, Lombardy. In 2013 in the diocese of Crema there was one priest for every 1,000 Catholics.



Roman Catholic Diocese of Cuneo

The Diocese of Cuneo () is a Latin diocese of the Catholic Church. It was created in 1817, from territory that previously had belonged to the Diocese of Mondovì. It is suffragan of the Archdiocese of Turin. The first bishop of Cuneo was Bruno di Samone.

The city of Cuneo is a provincial capital, the metropolis of the civil Province of Cuneo, Piedmont and covered 1,566 square kilometers (604 Square Miles).

During the French occupation, religious orders were dissolved or expelled, and convents and monasteries closed and confiscated by the government. In Cuneo this included two monasteries and the convent of the Capuchins. The monastery of S. Annunziata became a hospice for the poor and an orphanage, and the monastery of the Terziarie became first a prison and then a warehouse for salt and a military barracks.

Following the Concordat of 1801 between Bonaparte and Pope Pius VII, the French demanded a reduction in the number of dioceses in Piedmont and their conformity to rules established by the French government. The Pope was compelled to issue a bull, "Gravissimis causis" (1 June 1803), in which the number of dioceses in Piedmont was reduced to eight: Turin, Vercelli, Ivrea, Acqui, Asti, Mondovi, Alessandria and Saluzzo. This, and the appointment of bishops by Napoleon, caused great confusion, and once Bonaparte had been compelled to abdicate, and the Kingdom of Sardina was returned to the House of Savoy, a revision of the ecclesiastical situation was essential. The revision was carried out in 1817 by Pope Pius VII in his bull, "Beati Petri" (17 July 1817). The new diocese of Cuneo was created as diocesan borders were redrawn.

Before the creation of the diocese, the largest church in the city was the Collegiate Church of S. Maria del Bosco, presided over by a Chapter, consisting of three dignities and fifteen Canons. The church, whose existence is attested as far back as 1446, was severely damaged in the siege of 1744, and was rebuilt through the generosity of King Charles Emmanuel III of Sardinia. The Chapter was suppressed by the papal bull of 1817.

The Chapter of the Cathedral of S. Maria del Bosco consisted of three dignities (Prior, Archpriest, and Provost) and fifteen Canons, one of whom was the Canon Theologus and another the Penitentiary. By 1844 there was a sixteenth Canon.

In 1835 a major outbreak of "asiatic cholera" struck the Ligurian coast, and reached Cuneo in July of that year. Bishop Bruno engaged in heroic relief works.

Restored or newly imported religious communities included: Suore del Cottolengo (1836), Suore della Carità (1843), Compagnia di S. Orsola (1866), Figlie di S. Chiara (1870), Petites Soeurs des Pauvres (1883-1983), PR Gesuiti (1888), Suore di S. Vincenzo (1899), Figli della Divina Provvidenza di Don Orione (1907-1997), Figlie di S. Giuseppe - Suore Ostiarie (1900), PE Salesiani (1928), Suore della Misericordia di Savona (1937), Figlie di M. Ausiliatrice (1937), Figlie del Cuore di Maria (1945), Suore di S. Marta (1948), Suore della S. Famiglia di Savigliano (1952), Suore Francescane (1954-1975). Currently at work in the diocese are a large number of institutes of religion.

Seminarians of the diocese of Cuneo are sent to the Seminario Interdiocesano in Fossano.

[A list of bishops of Cuneo is provided by the Diocese of Cuneo]


The diocese has 82 parishes, all within the Province of Cuneo in the (civil) region of Piedmont.





Leonid Spirin

Leonid Vasilevich Spirin (, 21 June 1932 – 23 February 1982) was a Russian athlete who competed for the Soviet Union. He was born in Zhavoronki.

He competed for the USSR in the 1956 Summer Olympics held in Melbourne, Australia in the 20 kilometer walk where he won the gold medal.

Spirin was awarded the Order of the Badge of Honor (1957).


Gerd Baltus

Gerd Baltus (29 March 1932 – 13 December 2019) was a German television actor.

Baltus was born in Bremen. While doing law studies Baltus became interested in acting. In 1952 he got his first theatre booking in Hamburg, later in Bonn, West Berlin and Munich.

Baltus became known to a broad public however above all as a regular guest with crime film series such as "Derrick" and "Tatort". He had basic roles also in the miniseries "PS" (1975) and in the popular family saga "", where he starred with Ernst Schröder and Hans Korte before the camera. Besides his film work Baltus worked extensively as a speaker of radio plays.

In 1964 he received the Federal Film Award for his work in the film "The Blood of the Walsungs". He died in Hamburg.

VSNL Northern Europe

VSNL Northern Europe (previously TGN Northern Europe) is a telecommunications cable system with both submarine and terrestrial parts, connecting England and the Netherlands. 

The submarine portion of the system runs for 562 km, and is constructed from cable containing four fibre pairs, utilising eight repeaters. Each fibre pair was commissioned to support sixty-four 10 Gbit/s wavelengths at construction, allowing for a total capacity of four fibre pairs at 640 Gbit/s each, or 2,560 Gbit/s in total.

The cable system's submarine portions have landing points in facilities near:

And are further extended inland by a terrestrial systems to:

In April 2016, Tata Communications (née VSNL) reputedly sold the entire cable system (including inland points of presence and co-location facilities) to a company trading as UnitedNet Ltd in the United Kingdom, however no publication of the sale has been made. 

UnitedNet claim that the cable system is capable of operating at 100 Gbit/s per wavelength currently, with 400Gbit/s speeds achievable following future upgrades.


Roman Catholic Diocese of Ferentino

The Roman Catholic diocese of Ferentino existed until 1986, when it was united into the new diocese of Frosinone-Veroli-Ferentino.

It is said, by Ferdinand Ughelli, that in the time of Emperor Constantine, in the 1st third of the fourth century, Ferentino had its own bishop; but the first bishop known by name is Bassus, at the end of the 5th century. Bishop Redemptus (about 570) is mentioned in the "Dialogues" of Gregory the Great, but Redemptus was bishop of Ferentum in Tuscany, not Ferentinum in Latium. Pope Gregory also refers to a Bishop Boniface, but he was a bishop of Ferentum in Tuscany.

The Second Vatican Council, in order to ensure that all Catholics received proper spiritual attention, decreed the reorganization of the diocesan structure of Italy and the consolidation of small and struggling dioceses, in particular those with financial and personnel problems. It also decreed that the natural population units of people, together with the civil jurisdictions and social institutions that compose their organic structure, should be preserved as far as possible as units.

On 18 February 1984, the Vatican and the Italian State signed a new and revised concordat. Based on the revisions, a set of "Normae" was issued on 15 November 1984, which was accompanied in the next year, on 3 June 1985, by enabling legislation. According to the agreement, the practice of having one bishop govern two separate dioceses at the same time, "aeque personaliter", was abolished. This applied to the dioceses of Veroli and Frosinone. The Vatican therefore continued consultations which had begun under Pope John XXIII for the merging of dioceses. On 30 September 1986, Pope John Paul II ordered that the dioceses of Veroli, Frosinone, and Ferentino be merged into one diocese with one bishop, with the Latin title "Dioecesis Frusinatensis-Verulana-Ferentina". The seat of the diocese was to be in Frosinone, whose cathedral was to serve as the cathedral of the merged dioceses. The cathedrals in Veroli and Ferentino were to become co-cathedrals, and the cathedral Chapters were each to be a "Capitulum Concathedralis". There was to be only one diocesan Tribunal, in Frosinone, and likewise one seminary, one College of Consultors, and one Priests' Council. The territory of the new diocese was to include the territory of the former dioceses of Veroli, Frosinone, and Ferentino.




MscGen

Mscgen (short for MSC generator) is a software tool for drawing message sequence charts from a simple to manage text-based source file. Rendered charts can be output in PNG, SVG and PostScript, with hyperlink information in ismap format. There is an extension for MediaWiki, Sphinx (documentation generator) and integration with Doxygen that allows embedding of charts into source code comments with generated automatically inserted into the generated documentation page. Mscgen is free software licensed under the GNU General Public License (GPL).

The following example is from the author:

msc {

Here are two examples of input and output for some standard SIP message flows:

msc {

msc {



Scratchy &amp; Co.

Scratchy & Co. is a British children's entertainment show that aired on ITV on Saturday mornings from 6 May 1995 to 25 April 1998.

"Scratchy & Co." starred Elliot Henderson-Boyle as "Reg" and Mark Speight as "Scratchy". Other characters included Annabel and a Scottish girl, both played by comedian and impressionist Ronni Ancona. The main gimmick of the show was that the cast wore solid rubber wigs and eccentric jackets. A stylistic similarity might be noted between this approach and "Max Headroom". This format only lasted for its first series.

Later series introduced other characters such as Sedgely the penguin and Fathead the football.

From the second series, the show moved away from the original "Max Headroom"-esque style, into a studio where Scratchy (now minus the rubber wig) sat behind a desk, with Reg behind a window. At this point, guests were invited into the studio and interviewed. However, most of the characters which had been introduced earlier were dropped.

Gail Porter was a frequent guest presenter in the third and fourth series.

The show was nominated for a BAFTA. It was axed after the fourth series in 1998 as part of a revamp of CITV's Saturday morning line-up which took effect that autumn with the launch of "SMTV Live" and "".


Fabio Virgili

Fabio Virgili (born 26 April 1986) is an Italian footballer who plays as a goalkeeper.

Born in Terni, Umbria, Virgili started his professional career at Emilia–Romagna club Parma. In the summer of 2005, he left the Primavera Youth Team and joined Serie C1 side Napoli in a 4-year co-ownership deal, for a peppercorn fee of €500; he won the league title with the club as an unused squad member, earning promotion to Serie B. In June 2006, he was bought back by Parma for €50,000 and became the club's third goalkeeper behind Luca Bucci and Alfonso De Lucia. He made his single appearance for the club that season in the second leg of the Coppa Italia quarter-final, in which Parma drew 2–2 with A.S. Roma, who won 4–3 on aggregate and went on to win the competition. In the next season, he was the backup of Bucci and Nicola Pavarini, along with Radek Petr and Eros Corradini.

In July 2008, he joined Carpenedolo along with Parma team-mate Thomas Som. Although he played as a regular starter for the Lega Pro Seconda Divisione side, he joined hometown club Sporting Terni in August 2009.

On 19 August 2010 he was signed by Paganese. The following season he was signed by Ternana Calcio, as the backup of Stefano Ambrosi, along with Carlo Camilli.

In the summer of 2012 he left Ternana Calcio and joined Botev Vratsa in the Bulgarian Second Division, but he never played for the club, and in March 2013 he returned in Italy to play with Narnese.

Virgili was an unused member of Italy U20 team at 2005 FIFA World Youth Championship. Along with Daniele Padelli, they were Emiliano Viviano's backup. He was the first choice goalkeeper at 2003 UEFA European Under-17 Football Championship, ahead Giacomo Bindi. He also capped at 2005 UEFA European Under-19 Football Championship elite qualification, ahead Davide Petrachi.





Nitti

Nitti may refer to one or more of the following:



Air Volga

LCC Air Volga () was an airline headquartered in Volgograd, Russia, operating scheduled passenger flights and holiday charters from its base at Volgograd International Airport.

When Aeroflot was dissolved in 1992, its Volgograd-based division became an independent company known as Volga Airlines, having inherited a number of Soviet aircraft. The airline was renamed Volga Aviaexpress () in 1998, and again Air Volga on 14 November 2008. In February 2009, the Bombardier CRJ200 became the first Western-built aircraft to be operated by Air Volga. After the initial two 50-seat Bombardier aircraft joined the fleet, another four arrived in November of that year.

On 1 April 2010, Air Volga declared bankruptcy, and all flight operations were stopped. Its assets and brand name was acquired by RusLine, along with the route network and CRJ200 fleet. The "Air Volga" name thus survived, currently being used for the marketing of regional RusLine flights.

Between 2006 and 2010, Volga Aviaexpress/Air Volga operated scheduled flights to the following destinations:
Over the years, the following aircraft types were operated:


Cayton railway station

Cayton railway station was a minor railway station serving the village of Cayton on the Yorkshire Coast Line from Scarborough to Hull and was opened on 5 October 1846 by the York and North Midland Railway. It closed on 5 May 1952.

Like its neighbour at , the former station house here remains standing as a private dwelling. The former signal box here has though been demolished, as the level crossing it worked has been converted to automatic barrier operation. One platform has also survives, though it is heavily overgrown and difficult to see.


Globally hyperbolic manifold

In mathematical physics, global hyperbolicity is a certain condition on the causal structure of a spacetime manifold (that is, a Lorentzian manifold). It is called hyperbolic in analogy with the linear theory of wave propagation, where the future state of a system is specified by initial conditions. (In turn, the leading symbol of the wave operator is that of a hyperboloid.) This is relevant to Albert Einstein's theory of general relativity, and potentially to other metric gravitational theories.

There are several equivalent definitions of global hyperbolicity. Let "M" be a smooth connected Lorentzian manifold without boundary. We make the following preliminary definitions:
The following conditions are equivalent:
If any of these conditions are satisfied, we say "M" is "globally hyperbolic". If "M" is a smooth connected Lorentzian manifold with boundary, we say it is globally hyperbolic if its interior is globally hyperbolic.

Other equivalent characterizations of global hyperbolicity make use of the notion of Lorentzian distance formula_6 where the supremum is taken over all the formula_7 causal curves connecting the points (by convention d=0 if there is no such curve). They are

Global hyperbolicity, in the first form given above, was introduced by Leray in order to consider well-posedness of the Cauchy problem for the wave equation on the manifold. In 1970 Geroch proved the equivalence of definitions 1 and 2. Definition 3 under the assumption of strong causality and its equivalence to the first two was given by Hawking and Ellis.

As mentioned, in older literature, the condition of causality in the first and third definitions of global hyperbolicity given above is replaced by the stronger condition of "strong causality". In 2007, Bernal and Sánchez showed that the condition of strong causality can be replaced by causality. In particular, any globally hyperbolic manifold as defined in 3 is strongly causal. Later Hounnonkpe and Minguzzi proved that for quite reasonable spacetimes, more precisely those of dimension larger than three which are non-compact or non-totally vicious, the 'causal' condition can be dropped from definition 3. 

In definition 3 the closure of formula_4 seems strong (in fact, the closures of the sets formula_11 imply "causal simplicity", the level of the causal hierarchy of spacetimes which stays just below global hyperbolicity). It is possible to remedy this problem strengthening the causality condition as in definition 4 proposed by Minguzzi in 2009. This version clarifies that global hyperbolicity sets a compatibility condition between the causal relation and the notion of compactness: every causal diamond is contained in a compact set and every inextendible causal curve escapes compact sets. Observe that the larger the family of compact sets the easier for causal diamonds to be contained on some compact set but the harder for causal curves to escape compact sets. Thus global hyperbolicity sets a balance on the abundance of compact sets in relation to the causal structure. Since finer topologies have less compact sets we can also say that the balance is on the number of open sets given the causal relation.
Definition 4 is also robust under perturbations of the metric (which in principle could introduce closed causal curves). In fact using this version it has been shown that global hyperbolicity is stable under metric perturbations.

In 2003, Bernal and Sánchez showed that any globally hyperbolic manifold "M" has a smooth embedded three-dimensional Cauchy surface, and furthermore that any two Cauchy surfaces for "M" are diffeomorphic. In particular, "M" is diffeomorphic to the product of a Cauchy surface with formula_12. It was previously well known that any Cauchy surface of a globally hyperbolic manifold is an embedded three-dimensional formula_13 submanifold, any two of which are homeomorphic, and such that the manifold splits topologically as the product of the Cauchy surface and formula_12. In particular, a globally hyperbolic manifold is foliated by Cauchy surfaces.

In view of the initial value formulation for Einstein's equations, global hyperbolicity is seen to be a very natural condition in the context of general relativity, in the sense that given arbitrary initial data, there is a unique maximal globally hyperbolic solution of Einstein's equations.



Relational Model/Tasmania

Relational Model/Tasmania (RM/T) was published by Edgar F. Codd in 1979 and is the name given to a number of extensions to his original relational model (RM) published in 1970. The overall goal of the RM/T was to define some fundamental semantic units, at "atomic" and "molecular" levels, for data modelling. Codd writes: "the result is a model with a richer variety of objects than the original relational model, additional insert-update-delete rules and some additional operators that make the algebra more powerful."

Between 1968 and 1988 Codd published over 30 papers on the relational model (RM) - the most famous of which is his 1970 paper. Up to 1978 the papers describe RM Version 1 (RM/V1). In early 1979 Codd first presented some new ideas, called RM/T ('T' for Tasmania), at an invited talk for the "Australian Computer Science Conference" in Hobart, Tasmania. Later that year the ACM journal published a paper on RM/T, in which Codd acknowledges the influence of Schmid & Swensen (1975) and Wiederhold (1977).

A later version of RM/T (we shall call it here "RM/D") was described by Chris Date in Date (1983) in which Date and Codd improved and refined RM/T, adding an entity type called "designative". Although Codd writes nothing about this new type, Date offers a rationale in Date (1983, page 262). Date revised this 1983 article in Date (1995), which additionally compares the RM/T model with the E/R model.

Following a disappointing uptake of RM/T by the database industry, Codd decided to introduce the RM/T model more gradually. He planned to release a sequence of RM versions: RM/V2, RM/V3 etc. each time progressively including some of the ideas of the original RM/T into the new version. Perhaps this explains why there is no obvious mapping of concepts between RM/T and RM/V2. For example, there is no reference to "associative" or "designative" entity types in Codd's 1990 book that defines RM/V2. On the other hand, the book extends and builds on the existing body of query language issues, many of which were addressed by Codd in several papers throughout the 1980s.

First we shall introduce some of the new concepts of RM/T:










There is little mention of RM/T today and no articles have appeared recently. Peckam and Maryanski (1988) wrote about RM/T in their study of semantic data models. Codd published his book in 1990 but wrote nothing more about RM/T. RM/V1 and RM/V2 have a chapter each in "Date and Darwen" (1992) and the Date (1983) article was updated in (1995) and now contains a long overdue comparison of the E/R model and RM/T. Date's most recent reflections can be found on the Web at Date (1999), "The Database Relational Model" (2001) and "Date on RM/T" (2003).

RM/T contributed to the body of knowledge called semantic data modeling and semantic object modeling and continues to influence new data modellers. See the paper by Hammer and McLeod (1981), the book by Knoenke (2001) and implementation by Grabczewski et alia (2004).


2002 Men's Ice Hockey World Championships

The 2002 Men's Ice Hockey World Championships were held between 26 April and 11 May 2002 in Gothenburg, Karlstad and Jönköping, Sweden.

It was the 66th annual event, and was run by the International Ice Hockey Federation (IIHF). The competition also served as qualification for division placements in the 2003 competition.

The Championship division was contested from 26 April to 11 May 2002. Participants in this tournament were placed into groups of four with the top three teams in each group advancing to the qualifying round. Teams which finished last in the group were sent to the relegation round where the top bottom teams were relegated to the 2003 Division I tournament. Within the qualifying round teams where split into two groups of six with the top four advancing to the playoff round and the bottom two eliminated from advancing. The playoff round was a knockout stage towards the gold medal game. The Championship was played in Gothenburg, Sweden. Slovakia won the gold medal game, defeating Russia 4–3. While Poland and Italy were relegated to Division I for 2003.


Group A was played in Eindhoven, The Netherlands between April 14 and April 20, 2002.

Group B was played in Székesfehérvár and Dunaújváros, Hungary between April 14 and April 20, 2002.

" and are promoted to the 2003 Men's World Ice Hockey Championships, while and are relegated to Division II."

To integrate a new Division III being added for the 2003 Championships, the bottom team in each pool was relegated to the 2003 inaugural Division III competition.

Group A was played in Cape Town, South Africa between March 31 and April 6, 2002.

Group B was played in Novi Sad, Yugoslavia between March 25 and March 31, 2002.

" and are promoted to Division I, while and are relegated to Division III."

This Division II Qualification tournament took place between April 11 and April 13, 2002 in Mexico City, Mexico to determine the two teams that would earn promotion to Division II for 2003 Division II.

All times local

" and are promoted to Division II."


Cranmore, Somerset

Cranmore is a village and civil parish east of Shepton Mallet, in the Mendip district of Somerset, England. The parish includes the hamlets of Waterlip, East Cranmore and Dean.

The name comes from "Crane Mere", the Lake of the Cranes.

The parish of Cranmore was part of the hundred of Wells Forum. East Cranmore was part of the hundred of Frome.

It is the base of the East Somerset Railway which plays host to a variety of preserved diesel and steam locomotives. It operates the line between Cranmore railway station, Cranmore West, Merryfield Lane Halt, and Mendip Vale. The section between Cranmore and the mainline is used for heavy quarry traffic to the nearby Merehead Quarry. The quarry, which is also known as Torr Works, covers an area of some 200 hectares, including 60 hectares which have been landscaped to blend with the surrounding countryside. It was once operated by the Foster Yeoman Company, but is now owned and operated by Aggregate Industries LTD, employing over 200 people and produces 6 million tonnes of limestone annually which is carried directly from the quarry by Mendip Rail.

Cranmore Hall is a large 17th-century country house with landscaped gardens which now forms the main portion of All Hallows Preparatory School. Southill House is a smaller country house dating from the early 18th century which was refaced by John Wood, the Younger.

Dean farmhouse dates from the 17th century, as does The Old Smithy, just off the A361 which was originally two residential dwellings before being finally "knocked through" to just one.

On a hill north of the village is the tall Victorian folly, Cranmore Tower, built in 1862–64 by Thomas Henry Wyatt for John Moore Paget. The site is above sea level, and is the highest point on the Mendip Way.

The parish council has responsibility for local issues, including setting an annual precept (local rate) to cover the council's operating costs and producing annual accounts for public scrutiny. The parish council evaluates local planning applications and works with the local police, district council officers, and neighbourhood watch groups on matters of crime, security, and traffic. The parish council's role also includes initiating projects for the maintenance and repair of parish facilities, as well as consulting with the district council on the maintenance, repair, and improvement of highways, drainage, footpaths, public transport, and street cleaning. Conservation matters (including trees and listed buildings) and environmental issues are also the responsibility of the council.

The village falls within the Non-metropolitan district of Mendip, which was formed on 1 April 1974 under the Local Government Act 1972, having previously been part of Shepton Mallet Rural District, which is responsible for local planning and building control, local roads, council housing, environmental health, markets and fairs, refuse collection and recycling, cemeteries and crematoria, leisure services, parks, and tourism. Cranmore is in the electoral ward called Cranmore, Doulting and Nunney. At the 2011 Census this had a population of 2,374.

Somerset County Council is responsible for running the largest and most expensive local services such as education, social services, libraries, main roads, public transport, policing and fire services, trading standards, waste disposal and strategic planning.

It is also part of the Wells county constituency represented in the House of Commons of the Parliament of the United Kingdom. It elects one Member of Parliament (MP) by the first past the post system of election, and was part of the South West England constituency of the European Parliament prior to Britain leaving the European Union in January 2020, which elected seven MEPs using the d'Hondt method of party-list proportional representation.

Southill House is an early 18th-century manor house south of the main village. It was given a new facade by John Wood, the Younger, of Bath, in the late 18th century.

Close to Cranmore is a small lake called Torr Works Reservoir which attracts large numbers of roosting gulls.

The Church of St Bartholomew dates from the 15th century and has been designated by English Heritage as a Grade I listed building. The former church of St James in East Cranmore has been deconsecrated and is now used as a private dwelling.


Roman Catholic Diocese of Guastalla

The Diocese of Guastalla ("Dioecesis Guastallensis") was a Catholic suffragan bishopric in the province of Reggio Emilia, Italy, from 1828 to 1986. It began as a small chapel, ordered by a Holy Roman Emperor in 865; it was promoted into being a parish; it then became a territorial abbey; and finally, after the Napoleonic occupation of Italy, it was made a diocese at the request of his second wife. The diocese employed the Roman rite.

Guastalla began as a chapel, built on order of the Emperor Louis II dated 2 November 865, on territory given to his wife Engelberga. Ecclesiastically, the chapel was part of the diocese of Reggio; the bishop subinfeudated the chapel into the hands of Boniface, Count of Toscana.

The chapel of S. Peter was promoted into being a parish church ("plebes", "piave") c. 996–999 by Pope Gregory V. In 1101 Countess Matilda of Tuscany bestowed liberty upon the church of Guastalla.

On 21 October 1106, Pope Paschal II held a council in Guastalla of bishops from France, Germany and Italy. He declared that, since the See of Ravenna had so frequently opposed the leadership of the Church of Rome, the dioceses of Parma, Reggio, Modena, and Bologna should never thereafter be subject to Ravenna as their metropolitan.

By 1145 the Church of S. Peter at Guastalla was presided over by an Archpriest, as Pope Eugene III noted in his bull which took the Church of Guastalla under the protection of the Holy See. He also granted them the right to seek holy oils, consecrations and ordinations from whichever Catholic bishop they wished. The archive of the Archpriest of the Pieve of Guastalla was destroyed in 1557 as a casualty of war.

Guastalla formed part of the diocese of Reggio until 1471, when the Collegiate Church of S. Peter of Guastalla was declared to be "nullius dioecesis" (of no diocese) and was territorially detached from the jurisdiction of the bishop of Reggio Emilia.

On 5 November 1585 Pope Sixtus V promoted the parish to the status of a secular territorial abbey "nullius dioecesis" (belonging to no diocese), as the abbey of San Pietro Apostolo di Guastalla.


The eleventh Abbot Ordinary of Guastalla, Francesco Maria Scutellari of Parma, was also titular bishop of Joppa (Palestine). He ruled Guastalla from 1792 until his death in 1826. His death brought about a major change in the status of the Pieve. He was succeeded by the chaplain of Marie Louise, Duchess of Parma, Giovanni Neuschel, titular bishop of Alessandria Troas (Ilio), from 1826 to 1828.

By a decree of Pope Pius VII in an apostolic letter of 1 December 1821, as part of a general reorganization of the hierarchy of Italy following the expulsion of the French, the territory of the Abbey of Guastalla became subject to the Diocese of Parma. It had been subject to the Diocese of Milan, under the French organization of the Cisalpine Republic (1797–1802) and the Napoleonic Kingdom of Italy (1805–1814).

In his papal bull "De commisso" of 13 September 1828, Pope Leo XII, at the request of Marie Louise, Duchess of Parma, created the bishopric of Guastalla. He decreed that the diocese be directly subject to the Holy See (Papacy) unless and until the pope decided otherwise. He suppressed the abbatial college chapter, and ordered the creation of a new cathedral Chapter. The Chapter was to consist of five dignities (the Archpriest, the Archdeacon, the Provost, the Dean, and the Primicerius), sixteen Canons, and seven "mansionarii". The two senior Canons were to be the Theologus and the Penitentiarius, in accordance with the decrees of the Council of Trent.

In 1920, the diocese of Guastalla had 26 parishes, 58 other churches and chapels, 76 diocesan priests, and 25 students in the seminary. In 1980, it had 30 parishes, 47 diocesan priests, and 3 priests belonging to Religious Orders.

After a vacancy of nearly thirty months, following the death of Bishop Angelo Zambarbieri, Pope Paul VI appointed Bishop Gilberto Baroni, who was already bishop of Reggio Emilia, to also be bishop of Guastalla. Bishop Baroni had been acting as Apostolic Administrator of the diocese of Guastalla during the "Sede vacante". On 30 September 1986, the diocese was suppressed by Pope John Paul II, and its territory and title merged into the Diocese of Reggio Emilia, with the new name of Reggio Emilia–Guastalla. Guastalla became Vicariate IV of the diocese of Reggio Emilia-Guastalla.



Fitchburg Secondary

The Fitchburg Subdivision is a railroad line owned by CSX Transportation in the U.S. state of Massachusetts. The line runs from Fitchburg southeast to Framingham Center along a former New York, New Haven and Hartford Railroad line. Its south end is at the Boston Subdivision; the MBTA's Framingham Secondary continues southeast from Framingham.

The part from Fitchburg south to Pratt Junction (in Sterling) opened in 1850 as part of the Fitchburg and Worcester Railroad. At the other end, the Boston and Worcester Railroad opened a branch from Framingham northwest to Framingham Center in 1849. The Agricultural Branch Railroad opened in 1855 from Framingham Center west to Northborough and in 1866 to Pratts Junction. The entire line became part of the NYNH&H and Conrail through leases, mergers, and takeovers, and was assigned to CSX in the 1999 breakup of Conrail.


Speeton railway station

Speeton railway station served the villages of Speeton and Reighton in North Yorkshire, England. It was situated on the Yorkshire Coast Line from Scarborough to Hull and was opened on 20 October 1847 by the York and North Midland Railway. It closed on 5 January 1970. The station building and the adjacent platform are still in place.


Booker Newberry III

Booker Newberry III (January 19, 1956 – April 5, 2023) was an American singer and keyboardist, who was a member of the mid-1970s soul groups Sweet Thunder ("Baby I Need Your Love Today"), and Impact, before pursuing a solo career. He is probably best remembered for his 1983 hit "Love Town".

Newberry was born in Youngstown, Ohio, on January 19, 1956. He began his professional singing career in the group Mystic Nights around 1971. Moving to Philadelphia he became the lead singer of Sweet Thunder, which also included drummer John Aaron, bassist Rudell Alexander, and guitarist Charles Buie. Signing with the Philly-based record label WMOT Records, the group's single, "Baby I Need Your Love Today" b/w "I Don't Care What You Say", stirred interest and was picked up for distribution by Berkeley, California based Fantasy Records.

The group recorded three albums, "Above the Clouds" (1976), "Sweet Thunder" (1978), and "Horizons" (1979), the latter of which saw the single "I Leave You Stronger," go to #63 "Billboard" R&B chart in late 1979. Newberry joined another WMOT Records group, Impact, who was best known for the dance hits "Give a Broken Heart a Break" and "Rainy Days Stormy Nights".

Newberry signed with Neil Bogart's Casablanca Records in 1983, and his solo single "Love Town" originally released on the Boardwalk label, was a Top 10 UK hit. The "Love Town" album was issued the same year. He has also recorded for Malaco Records and Omni Records. In 1986 he released the single "Take a Piece of Me".

In 1991 he released "Bad Luck", his last single to date. He later recorded his second studio album entitled "Power People" in 1996. In 2005 Unidisc Music released the "Love Town" compilation album. It contained many previously unreleased songs recorded by Newberry in the 1980s.

Newberry died on April 5, 2023, at the age of 67.




Joy Partridge

Joy Evelyn Partridge (28 March 1899 – 27 April 1947) was an English cricketer who played as a right-handed batter and right-arm slow bowler. She appeared in four Test matches for England between 1934 and 1935. She played in the first four women's Test matches in history, with her best performance coming in the second innings of the second Test against Australia, when her 6/96 helped England to an Ashes-winning victory by 8 wickets. She played domestic cricket for Buckinghamshire.


Mt Gravatt Bus Service

Mt Gravatt Bus Service is an Australian operator of bus services in South East Brisbane. It operates three services under contract to the Queensland Government under the Translink banner.

Originally named Burbank Busways the business was renamed Mt Gravatt Bus Service in 1995.

The company currently operates 3 urban routes across Brisbane and Logan cities. They are:
As at December 2022, the fleet consisted of 48 buses and coaches.


Electoral district of Yuroke

The electoral district of Yuroke was an electoral district of the Victorian Legislative Assembly. It was situated in the outer northern suburbs of Melbourne and was created in a redistribution before the 2002 state election, replacing the former electorate of Tullamarine.

Included within its boundaries were Attwood, Craigieburn, Greenvale, Kalkallo, Mickleham and Yuroke, as well as parts of Roxburgh Park, Somerton, and Westmeadows.

It was considered to be a very safe Labor Party seat.

The seat was abolished by the Electoral Boundaries Commission ahead of the 2022 election and replaced by the electoral districts of Kalkallo and Greenvale. 



Croscombe

Croscombe is a village and civil parish west of Shepton Mallet and from Wells, in the Mendip district of Somerset, England. It is situated on the A371 road in the valley of the River Sheppey.

Croscombe has a village hall, a shop, a public house, a Church, a chapel and a school.

North-east of the village and within the parish boundary is Maesbury Castle, an Iron Age hill fort.

It was first recorded in 706 when King Ine of Wessex referred to the village as "Correges Cumb". The parish of Croscombe was part of the Whitstone Hundred. Croscombe emerged in the 16th and 17th centuries with a boom in the wool trade. During this period many houses, cottages and hostelries were built and the church was reconstructed.

During the Industrial Revolution, silk, mining, quarrying and milling replaced the wool trade. In 1848 the River Sheppey powered two mills for grinding corn, one for winding silk, and another used as a stocking manufactory.

The Old Manor was built around 1460–89 as a rectorial manor house for Hugh Sugar, the Treasurer of Wells Cathedral. It was altered in the 16th and 18th centuries, and in the 20th century by the Landmark Trust. It has been designated as a Grade I listed building.
The village cross was put in place in the 19th century, replacing an older one which had been there since the 14th century. It is heavily weathered (the rock type is oolite - a soft limestone), especially on the front right where it served as a seat for patrons of the adjacent former public house now known as The Cross bed and breakfast.

In August 1861 the local waywardens decided that the village cross was a hindrance to the public way and endeavoured to remove it. The villagers were much against this and when masons from a neighbouring city began the act of despoiling it, the villagers gathered around the cross in its defence and a melee ensued involving both men and women inhabitants. The demolishing party were eventually driven off but not before the shaft had been broken and its finial broken in two. A flag was hoisted by the villagers bearing upon it the legend "Be Faithful" . During that night around 30 villagers volunteered to bivouac around the cross to guard it during the night. No other attempt has been made to remove the cross since.

The village's remaining public house is The George Inn.

The parish council has responsibility for local issues, including setting an annual precept (local rate) to cover the council’s operating costs and producing annual accounts for public scrutiny. The parish council evaluates local planning applications and works with the local police, district council officers, and neighbourhood watch groups on matters of crime, security, and traffic. The parish council's role also includes initiating projects for the maintenance and repair of parish facilities, as well as consulting with the district council on the maintenance, repair, and improvement of highways, drainage, footpaths, public transport, and street cleaning. Conservation matters (including trees and listed buildings) and environmental issues are also the responsibility of the council.

The village falls within the non-metropolitan district of Mendip, which was formed on 1 April 1974 under the Local Government Act 1972, having previously been part of Wells Rural District, which is responsible for local planning and building control, local roads, council housing, environmental health, markets and fairs, refuse collection and recycling, cemeteries and crematoria, leisure services, parks and tourism.

Somerset County Council is responsible for running the largest and most expensive local services such as education, social services, libraries, main roads, public transport, policing and fire services, trading standards, waste disposal and strategic planning.

The village falls in the 'Croscombe and Pilton' electoral ward. The ward stretches from "Croscombe" in the north east to Pilton in the south. North Wootton is also included. The total parish population at the 2011 census was 2,284.

It is also part of the Wells county constituency represented in the House of Commons of the Parliament of the United Kingdom. It elects one Member of Parliament (MP) by the first-past-the-post system of election. It was part of the South West England constituency of the European Parliament prior to Britain leaving the European Union in January 2020, which elected seven MEPs using the d'Hondt method of party-list proportional representation.

The large Church of St Mary the Virgin is of particular interest, having an unusual spire for Somerset, and Jacobean interior woodwork of national renown. It is primarily from the 15th and 16th centuries with 19th-century restoration. It includes a peal of six bells, the earliest dated 1613, and an organ from 1837. It has been designated by English Heritage as a Grade I listed building.

The Old Rectory (also known as Parsonage House) was built in the 17th century and rebuilt in the 18th. It is a Grade II listed building. In 2014 it was announced by the Church Commissioners that the house would be purchased, for £900,000 as a residence for Peter Hancock the incoming Bishop of Bath and Wells as an alternative to living at the traditional Bishop's Palace in Wells, to provide him with more privacy. This proposition was strongly opposed by the populace and eventually abandoned. The rectory was resold.

Heike Faber

Heike Faber (born 5 May 1965 in Berlin, Germany) is a German television actress.


Ulmus parvifolia 'Todd'

The Chinese Elm cultivar Ulmus parvifolia 'Todd' was developed by Fleming's Nurseries in Victoria, Australia, and registered in 2001.

The clone has a pronounced upright habit.

The species and its cultivars are highly resistant, but not immune, to Dutch elm disease, and unaffected by the Elm Leaf Beetle "Xanthogaleruca luteola".

'Todd' is not known to have been introduced (2006) to Europe or North America.




Roman Catholic Diocese of Monopoli

The Italian Catholic diocese of Monopoli, in the province of Bari, existed from the eleventh century to 1986. In that year it was united into the diocese of Conversano-Monopoli.

The episcopal see at Monopoli was created in 1062, and its first prelate was Deodatus. The cathedral was erected by the second bishop, Romualdus, in 1073.

In 1118, the Diocese of Polignano, located in Polignano, a small town situated on a high promontory along the Adriatic, was united to this diocese. The diocese was historically immediately subject to the Holy See, but came under the archdiocese of Bari.

"Erected: 11th Century"<br>
"Latin Name: Monopolitanus"

North Carolina Army National Guard

The North Carolina Army National Guard (NCARNG) is North Carolina's principal military force. The force is equipped by the federal government and jointly maintained subject to the call of either. The professional head of the North Carolina Army National Guard is the Adjutant General.

The North Carolina National Guard, or Carolina militia as it was originally known, was born from the Carolina Charter of 1663. The charter gave to the Proprietors the right "to Leavy Mufter and Trayne all sortes of men of what Conditon or wherefoever borne in the said Province for the tyme being".

The North Carolina Army National Guard is organized into six major commands. These units come under supervision of the Adjutant General in time of peace, and automatically become part of his command when they are first ordered into active service in the active military services of the United States in case of emergency:

Regiments of the North Carolina Army National Guard are listed in order of precedence according to the U.S. Army Regimental System -- Army National Guard where seniority does not always bring priority:


Fflaps

Fflaps were a Welsh post-punk band active in the late 1980s and early 1990s, formed in Bangor, Wales. The band comprised vocalist and guitarist Ann Matthews, bassist Alan Holmes and drummer Jonny Evans. Between their formation in 1987 and split in 1992, they released three albums and an EP, recorded two Peel Sessions (in 1988 and 1990), and toured Europe extensively, playing a total of 154 gigs in 7 countries. The band's songs were in the Welsh language.

Matthews and Holmes later formed Ectogram after Evans had to quit to continue his education (he died on 3 March 2001).




Diema

DIEMA () is a Bulgarian television channel, part of Nova Broadcasting Group, owned by United Group. The channel airs mainly films and action series. Along with Nova Sport and Diema Sport airs sports, including matches from the English FA Premier League, the FA Cup and the UEFA European Football Championship qualifications, as well as the England national football team home matches.

Diema Vision was founded on 15 May 1999 by Emil Slavchev, Anatoli Belchev and Asen Radulov. The first owned channel was Diema +. Over the years the channel proved popular, and the company launched a second channel - Diema 2. At the end of 2005, it was sold to Apace Media, owned by Kamen Vodenicharov. In March 2007 Diema Vision became part of Balkan Media Group Limited, a joint venture between Apace Media Group UK and the international entertainment-broadcasting group Modern Times Group MTG AB and re-branded the main channel only as Diema, dropping the "plus" from its name. In March 2009, MTG announced an agreement that would see the assets of Balkan Media Group Limited merge with the newly acquired Nova television. On 12 September 2011, the channel changed its look and logo again alongside the other Nova TV channels.

Pino Dordoni

Giuseppe "Pino" Dordoni (28 June 1926 – 24 October 1998) was an Italian athlete who competed mainly in the 50 kilometre race walk.

He competed for Italy at the 1952 Summer Olympics held in Helsinki, Finland, where he won the gold medal in the men's 50 kilometre walk event. In 1950 he became European champion.

Pino Dordoni has won 26 times the individual national championship.


Ewen Vernal

Ewen Vernal (born 27 February 1964) is a Scottish musician.

Born in Glasgow to a musical family, Vernal began taking piano lessons at 8 years old — inspired by a Beatles-singing mother and a choir-leading, saxophone-playing father. Singing competitions and local talent contests followed, but it was not until his teenage years that the bass guitar became the focus of his musical aspirations. Discovering an old guitar in the family loft with only a single low E-string left, he started to pick out bass-lines from favourite records, finally graduating to the real thing at 16 years old.

From the early 1980s, Vernal began playing in a variety of Glasgow-based bands and some jazz residencies throughout Scotland until, after some persuasion from their drummer, joined newly signed Deacon Blue in the autumn of 1986—until 1994, the band enjoyed worldwide success. In 1997 Vernal joined Capercaillie, of which he is still a member.

He has appeared with the Scottish progressive rock singer Fish, English folk star Kate Rusby, Hue and Cry, Lou Reed, Michael Brecker, Chris Rea, and many more.

He lives in the Netherlands with his Dutch girlfriend and has three children.


Hadassah

Hadassah () means myrtle. It is given as the Hebrew name of Esther in the Book of Esther.

Hadassah may also refer to:


Cardinia, Victoria

Cardinia is a town in Victoria, Australia, 52 km south-east of Melbourne's Central Business District, located within the Shire of Cardinia local government area. Cardinia recorded a population of 342 at the 2021 census.

Cardinia is located between Pakenham and Tooradin on the south-eastern fringe of Melbourne.

The Post Office opened on 1 September 1881, was known as Cardinia Creek until 1912, and closed in 1970.

Cardinia is part of the Australian Rules ROC Football Club (Rythdale, Officer, Cardinia) competing in the Mornington Peninsula Nepean Football League.


Ditcheat

Ditcheat is a village and civil parish south of Shepton Mallet, and north-west of Castle Cary, in Somerset, England. Besides the village, the parish has four hamlets: Wraxall, Lower Wraxall, Alhampton and Sutton.

In the Domesday Book of 1086, Ditcheat belonged to Glastonbury Abbey and contained 36 families. The parish of Ditcheat was part of the Whitstone Hundred.

Nearby main roads are the A37, west of the village, connecting Bristol and Yeovil, and the A371, east, connecting Shepton Mallet and Wincanton. It lies near the River Brue which is crossed by Ansford bridge which dates from 1823. Boulter's Bridge which spans the River Alham is of medieval origin and has been designated as a Scheduled Ancient Monument. The parish is close to the Roman Fosse Way.

The Manor House is a 17th-century manor house built by Sir Ralph Hopton.

The parish council has responsibility for local issues, including setting an annual precept (local rate) to cover the council’s operating costs and producing annual accounts for public scrutiny. The parish council evaluates local planning applications and works with the local police, district council officers, and neighbourhood watch groups on matters of crime, security, and traffic. The parish council's role also includes initiating projects for the maintenance and repair of parish facilities, as well as consulting with the district council on the maintenance, repair, and improvement of highways, drainage, footpaths, public transport, and street cleaning. Conservation matters (including trees and listed buildings) and environmental issues are also the responsibility of the council.

For local government purposes, since 1 April 2023, the village comes under the unitary authority of Somerset Council. Prior to this, it was part of the non-metropolitan district of Mendip, which was formed on 1 April 1974 under the Local Government Act 1972, having previously been part of Shepton Mallet Rural District.

It is also part of the Somerton and Frome county constituency represented in the House of Commons of the Parliament of the United Kingdom. It elects one Member of Parliament (MP) by the first past the post system of election. It was part of the South West England constituency of the European Parliament prior to Britain leaving the European Union in January 2020, which elected seven MEPs using the d'Hondt method of party-list proportional representation.

The Church of St Mary Magdalene has 12th-century origins. It has been designated by English Heritage as a Grade I listed building.

The Abbey is a large house (formerly known as The Priory), built as the rectory by John Gunthorpe who was rector of Ditcheat, Dean of Wells and Lord Privy Seal, in 1473. The house was altered in 1667 for Christopher Coward; and given a new facade and rearranged internally in 1864–68, probably by James Piers St Aubyn for Rev. William Leir. The exterior is now mostly his Victorian neo-Tudor; inside there are reused fragments and some original 15th- and 17th-century work – coffered ceilings and the arch-braced roof of the ‘chapel wing’ – but most of the elaborate Gothic work dates from the 1860s.

Priors Leigh on the Alhampton Road is a former chapel, now a private home.

Alhampton is served by Alhampton Chapel, a small mission church and tin tabernacle which was erected in 1892. Alhampton Chapel is under the auspices of St Mary Magdalene Church in Ditcheat, both of which form part of the Fosse Trinity Benefice.
There is a public house, called The Manor House Inn, dating from the 17th Century and which used to be owned by the lord of the manor.

The Alhampton Inn, also known as the Knave of Clubs, was open from at least the nineteenth century until it closed in 2022. A community initiative was set up to reopen the pub, and this was successfully achieved in August 2023.

A new woodland, Haddon Wood, was established at Alhampton on land donated by the owner in 2013 to the Woodland Trust for the benefit of the local community. The land has been planted with native and orchard trees, and has a pond.

Ditcheat is home to the stables operated by Paul Nicholls, trainer of Cheltenham Gold Cup-winning horses Kauto Star and Denman.



Morris County Traction Company

The Morris County Traction Company began trolley service in downtown Dover, New Jersey in July 1904. It was expanded over the years until the system was completed in 1914 to Newark, New Jersey. Service lasted until 1928. 

According to records, service was provided to: Bertrand Island Amusement Park at Lake Hopatcong, Ledgewood, Succasunna, Kenvil, Mine Hill, Dover, Wharton, Rockaway Borough, Denville, Mountain Lakes, Boonton, Morris Plains (including Greystone Park Psychiatric Hospital), Morristown, Madison, Chatham, Summit, Irvington, Elizabeth, and Newark, a distance of about 75 miles.

The line ran on both exclusive right-of-way streets and on city streets, some of which, such as Broad Street in Summit, were designed and built to accommodate the trolley line. The power house for the trolley was located along the Passaic River in Summit, on the border of Chatham, New Jersey.

Between 1926 and 1928, after private automobiles became more prominent on the roads, the trolley lines were replaced by buses.

A two mile portion of the former Morris County Traction Company trolley line, along New Jersey Transit's Morris and Essex line in Morris Township, New Jersey, now serves as a bike and walking trail called the 
Traction Line Recreation Trail, under the supervision of the Morris County Park System.

In Union, a portion of the line forked off of Morris Avenue. Part of the right of way and partial grading is very noticeable behind Holy Spirit Church. Huguenot Avenue and Euclid Avenues have the same compass orientation as this portion of the line.

The Summit car barn was still in existence as of November 2008. The building was located on River Road in Summit, just north of the intersection with Chatham Road. A turntable was visible between the Passaic River and the building. The building, then vacant, had been a car dealership, and earlier, a Public Service Coordinated Transport bus servicing facility for the number 70 and 72 routes. These routes replaced the MCTC lines when PS assumed the routes in the late 1920s.

The bridge over the Passaic River between Chatham and Summit is gone, but the piers still stand in the river.

The Dover NJ car barn is still in use as a facility for Lakeland Bus Lines.

In Mountain Lakes the right-of-way is used as a paved cycle and walking path. It is located along the left side of Boulevard between Boonton and Route 46.



Lockington railway station

Lockington railway station was a minor station serving the village of Lockington, East Riding of Yorkshire, England. It was on the Hull to Scarborough Line and was opened on 6 October 1846 by the York and North Midland Railway. It closed on 13 June 1960.

In 1986, the Lockington rail crash, a serious collision on the level crossing by the station causing eight deaths and several injuries.

The station building, which was designed by George Townsend Andrews, was given Grade II listed building status in 1987.


Diema Family

Diema Family is a Bulgarian television channel, part of Nova Broadcasting Group, owned by United Group.

The television was established on 1 August 1999 under the name Alexandra TV as a film channel. On 3 July 2006 the channel was sold to Diema Vision and was rebranded to Diema Family, retooling its program towards families. In 2007, it became a part of Apace Media, and from 2011 it was a part of MTG's Nova TV Group, changing its logo and packaging again and retooling its schedule once more, this time it aired mainly Turkish series and Latin American telenovelas, alongside reruns of some programs from the Nova TV channel. In March 2010, it began broadcasting Big Brother Family live in a house, being scheduled on weekdays from 9:30 to 12:00 and on Saturday and Sunday until 12:15. On 1 April 2011 on the children's block, it broadcast the cartoons "Balls" and "New Adventures of Batman"; as of 4 April, it was suspended for an indefinite period. New graphics package and a new logo were introduced on 8 April 2019.

Charles-Louis Tarieu de Lanaudière

Charles-Louis Tarieu de Lanaudière (October 14, 1743 – October 2, 1811) was a soldier, seigneur and political figure in Lower Canada.

He was born in Quebec City in 1743, the son of seigneur Charles-François Tarieu de La Naudière, and studied at the Petit Séminaire de Québec. He joined the Régiment de La Sarre in 1756 and was wounded in the Battle of Sainte-Foy. Lanaudière returned to France with his regiment in 1760 but came back to Quebec in 1768. The following year, he married Geneviève-Élisabeth, the daughter of Luc de La Corne. He was named aide-de-camp for Governor Guy Carleton. In 1771, he was appointed surveyor general of woods and waters; he refused the offer of a baronetcy for religious reasons. In 1777, he took part in a military expedition into New York led by Major-General John Burgoyne. In 1786, Lanaudière was named to the Legislative Council of Quebec and, in 1792, to the Legislative Council of Lower Canada. He also served as overseer of highways and superintendent of postal services. From his mother, he inherited land in the seigneury of Lac-Maskinongé (also known as Lanaudière) and, from his father, the seigneury of Sainte-Anne De La Pérade. In 1799, he was named quartermaster general of the militia.

He died at Quebec City in 1811.

His half-brother Charles-Gaspard served in the legislative assembly and legislative council in Lower Canada.


Diema Sport

Diema Sport () is a Bulgarian paid sports television channel, part of Nova Broadcasting Group, owned by United Group. It is part of Diema Extra premium sport package, which also includes the channels Diema Sport 2, Diema Sport 3 and Trace Sports Stars HD. The channel broadcasts premium live sports events such as the Bulgarian A Football Group, Premier League. The channel also features magazine sports shows, commentator sports studios and talk shows.

Diema Extra () was a Bulgarian premium paid channel which launched in April 2005. It aired films and other series, as well as sports events mostly from the English and Spanish Football Leagues. Later, most of these programs were moved to the other Diema Vision channels, as few people signed up for the service, and advertising proved more profitable. In September 2007 Diema Extra was finally closed after Diema Vision was sold to Apace Media.

On 21 February 2015 Diema Extra was relaunched as a premium sport package, initially containing the channels Diema Sport and Trace Sports Stars HD. On 8 August 2015, Diema Sport 2 was launched, followed by Diema Sport 3 on 1 July 2021. All theses channels under Diema Extra package aired matches from the two highest echelons of the Bulgarian football championship, the matches for the Bulgarian Cup, the spectacular matches from the English Premier League, First and Second Bundesliga and French League 1, League Cup and FA Cup, German Football Cup, NBA basketball matches, Bulgarian volleyball championships, Formula 1 races and many other exciting sports events.

Car brokers in Australia

Car brokers specialise in helping car buyers source and buy cars. They typically offer services such as finding a particular used car model to fit a budget, getting the lowest price on a new car, or negotiating with a used car seller on behalf of a client that already located the car by themselves.

There have been car brokers operating in Australia almost as long as there have been car dealers. Car dealers recognised that some individuals stood out in their circle of friends or community as experts on car buying. The dealers started offering them a "spotters fee" each time they would bring a customer to the dealership. If the customer bought the car, the broker (or "spotter") would be paid.After some time, a business model evolved where businesses would set up and call themselves "motor brokers".

Motor brokers would typically be started by car sales people who wanted a change of lifestyle. They were almost exclusively one-person operations, and operated as de facto car dealers. They would be licensed as car dealers, and focus on achieving the best bottom line deal for the customer.

As the popularity of the Internet increased, the first pure online car brokers appeared around 2003. These car brokers are typified by the lack of a dealer's license, and only dealing in new cars. This minimises the labour component of the business and allows a high level of automation.In spite of car brokers having been in existence for decades, general public awareness of them in Australia is relatively limited.

Car brokers work with their own established network of new car dealerships. When a client requires a new car, the car broker will contact one or more dealers in their network and determine which one will provide the required car at the lowest price. Delivery and location parameters may also be considered. Some car brokers offer to deliver the car to the client's home or place of work 

Some car brokers can help source used cars as well as new ones. In many of these cases, the car broker will buy the car and then sell it to their client. Used car brokers are generally licensed. The reasons for having a dealer's license are:
Many clients buy used cars via brokers without first seeing the car.

Other services provided by car brokers can include:

Many car brokers disclose their referral fee (also called dealer fee) on their websites. These referral fees are usually minimal amounts also known as "spotter fees" and as dealers are not having to pay for extra advertising or staff costs they welcome the extra volume orders from their regular brokers.

With the Internet's popularity ever increasing car brokers are becoming less common. Today we see more online classifieds/broker type systems. Online web applications have almost completely replaced the broker. And broker fees have become listing fees, with some sites also charging a spotters fee when the deal has been sealed.

TCM Underground

TCM Underground was a weekly late-night cult film showcase airing on Turner Classic Movies. Developed by former TCM marketing director Eric Weber, it was originally hosted by industrial rock/heavy metal musician and independent filmmaker Rob Zombie. The films were programmed by Eric Weber until 2007, when TCM programmer Millie De Chirico took over the role. The block ended on February 24, 2023, following layoffs in December that included De Chirico.

The series was launched in an attempt to attract more young viewers to Turner's older-skewing audience. TCM began airing a new program titled "Friday Night Spotlight" and, in effect, "TCM Underground" was moved from its Friday time slot to Saturdays beginning April 6, 2013 (a TCM broadcast day runs from 6am – 5:59am EST the following day, making "Underground", in fact, airing on Sunday); however, on March 10, 2018, the series returned to its original Friday night time slot. Promotional bumper material and opening credit sequences were created by Raygun. The series was periodically preempted by special month-long or seasonal scheduling themes, such as February's "31 Days of Oscar" film series and the month-long "Summer Under the Stars". When it did not conflict with a special theme, "TCM Underground" aired in its usual slot early on Saturday morning.

The cult films featured in "TCM Underground" belonged to a number of genres, including but not limited to blaxploitation films ("Coffy", "Darktown Strutters", "The Mack"), horror, slasher, and giallo films ("Let's Scare Jessica to Death", "Black Christmas", "Hatchet for the Honeymoon"), and counterculture films ("An American Hippie in Israel", "Ciao! Manhattan", "Blue Sunshine"). On October 13, 2006, "Plan 9 from Outer Space" was the block's first film broadcast, paired with "Bride of the Monster"; it was also the block's final film when it closed on February 24, 2023, paired with various drug education short films.




Tulsi Tanti

Tulsi Tanti (2 February 1958 – 1 October 2022) was an Indian businessman best known for being the founder and chairman-cum-managing director of Suzlon. He was known as the "Wind man of India" (or India's 'Wind Man') and was the president of the Indian Wind Turbine Manufacturers Association apart from being the chairman of ZF Wind Power Antwerpen, the Belgium-based manufacturer of wind turbine gearboxes since May 2006.

Tanti was acknowledged as one of the two richest energy entrepreneurs in the world in 2006, and Suzlon was the largest wind power company in the world by market capitalization. He was in the eighth place in the India's Global Wealth Club List but also made it to the Forbes' list of Billionaire Blowups of 2008. In 2009, he had been awarded the Champions of the Earth award by UNEP in the Entrepreneurial Vision category.

An engineer by profession,Tanti completed his Graduation in engineering from Birla Vishvkarma Mahavidyalaya, Tanti was originally the owner and manager of a small textile firm; beleaguered by erratic electricity supply, he bought a couple of wind turbines to solve the problem, and eventually branched out into wind power.

Tanti died of cardiac arrest on 1 October 2022, at the age of 64.

Richy Müller

Richy Müller (born Hans-Jürgen Müller; 26 September 1955) is a German television and movie actor. He is particularly known as a crime scene investigator in the German television series Tatort.


During the COVID-19 pandemic in April 2021, Richy Müller contributed to and later distanced himself from
the controversial #allesdichtmachen initiative.


Doulting

Doulting is a village and civil parish east of Shepton Mallet, on the A361, in the Mendip district of Somerset, England.

The parish of Doulting was part of the Whitstone Hundred.

The parish includes the village of Bodden, which was founded in 1541 by Earl Michael Bodden (1512-1569). Notable former residents include Trish Bodden (1753-1777), who disguised herself as a man to fight in the American War of Independence (she was killed at Saratoga), and Amrose Bowden ("sic"), the first English colonist to settle in Maine. Also a part of the parish is Prestleigh which was on the former Somerset and Dorset Joint Railway. The viaduct that carried it over the village was demolished in 1996; the railway itself had been out of use for a number of years before this. There is one pub in the village, the Prestleigh Inn.

Doulting village dates from the 8th century when King Ine of Wessex gave the local estate to Glastonbury Abbey after his nephew St Aldhelm died in the village in 709. In his honour the local spring which is the source of the River Sheppey is called St Aldhelm's Well. The well head was built in the late 19th century and incorporates a wrought-iron pump handle. It is marked with a cast-iron plate with raised initials: "W.N.F.M.", and an additional brass memorial plaque dating from 1976. Folklore has attributed healing powers to the water from the well.

The poet John Edmund Reade went to school in Doulting, and later wrote a poem about a return visit there, called 'Lines upon Doulting Sheep-slate', a "sheep-slate" being a piece of pasture used for grazing sheep. In it he says that:
<poem>Grey Doulting's spire above the waste a sheeted spectre rose;
And Mendip's bleak and barren heights again enclosed me round,
Like faces of forgotten friends met on forgotten ground.</poem>

The tithe barn at the southern end of the village dates from the 15th century and was used to store tithes, from the local farmers to the ecclesiastical landlord at Glastonbury Abbey.

Around the village there are some extensive quarries of freestone, from which Wells Cathedral and later additions to Glastonbury Abbey and other churches were built. Doulting Stone Quarry has been producing stone since Roman times. Until 1994 it was operated by Amalgamated Roadstone Corporation (part of Hanson plc since 1989), at which time the landowner terminated the tenancy and now operates the quarry as an independent business. The stone is oolite of middle Jurassic age deposited as sediments in fairly shallow coastal seas.

The heritage East Somerset Railway runs just to the south of the village, and terminates at the Mendip Vale railway station.

The parish council has responsibility for local issues, including setting an annual precept (local rate) to cover the council’s operating costs and producing annual accounts for public scrutiny. The parish council evaluates local planning applications and works with the local police, district council officers, and neighbourhood watch groups on matters of crime, security, and traffic. The parish council's role also includes initiating projects for the maintenance and repair of parish facilities, as well as consulting with the district council on the maintenance, repair, and improvement of highways, drainage, footpaths, public transport, and street cleaning. Conservation matters (including trees and listed buildings) and environmental issues are also the responsibility of the council.

The village falls within the Non-metropolitan district of Mendip, which was formed on 1 April 1974 under the Local Government Act 1972, having previously been part of Shepton Mallet Rural District, which is responsible for local planning and building control, local roads, council housing, environmental health, markets and fairs, refuse collection and recycling, cemeteries and crematoria, leisure services, parks, and tourism.

Somerset County Council is responsible for running the largest and most expensive local services such as education, social services, libraries, main roads, public transport, policing and fire services, trading standards, waste disposal and strategic planning.

It is also part of the Wells county constituency represented in the House of Commons of the Parliament of the United Kingdom. It elects one Member of Parliament (MP) by the first past the post system of election, and was part of the South West England constituency of the European Parliament prior to Britain leaving the European Union in January 2020, which elected seven MEPs using the d'Hondt method of party-list proportional representation.

The parish church is also dedicated to St Aldhelm and dates from the 12th century. It is a Grade I listed building, and has a tall spire rather than the towers which are more usual in Somerset. It has a two-storey porch which incorporates a carving of the Green Man into its vaulting. The local primary school is dedicated to St Aldhelm as well.


Montserrat oriole

The Montserrat oriole (Icterus oberi) is a medium-sized black-and-yellow icterid (the same family as many blackbirds, meadowlarks, cowbirds, grackles, and others, including the New World orioles).

It inhabits the Centre Hills and South Soufriere Hills Important Bird Areas on the island of Montserrat in the Lesser Antilles of the West Indies, and is the national bird of this British territory. It is threatened by habitat loss, and until 2016 was classified by BirdLife International as Critically Endangered, with a current estimated population of between 200 and 800. Much of its habitat was destroyed by deforestation, Hurricane Hugo and the volcanic activity between 1995 and 1997.
The oriole once was found in three main areas: the bamboo forest east of Galways Soufrière, the leeward slopes of the Chances Peak mountain and the Centre Hills (especially the Runaway Ghaut area).

The diet of the bird consists mainly of insects and fruits. The birds usually lay two spotted eggs. All models indicate that they begin breeding at the age of one year. Most of them were almost wiped out during the volcano eruptions and only about 200 of them are still surviving.

The binomial name of this bird commemorates the American naturalist Frederick Albion Ober.

The Montserrat oriole was formally described in 1880 by the American amateur ornithologist George Newbold Lawrence from a specimen collected on the island Montserrat during an expedition to the West Indies led by the US naturalist Frederick Albion Ober. Lawrence introduced the current binomial name "Icterus oberi", with the specific epithet chosen to honour Ober. The genus "Icterus" was introduced by the French zoologist Mathurin Jacques Brisson in 1760. The species is monotypic: no subspecies are recognised.


Helsingfors Skridskoklubb

Helsingfors Skridskoklubb (in Swedish, HSK), in Finnish Helsingin Luistinklubi, is the oldest figure skating club in Finland. It was founded in Helsinki in 1875. When spoken in Finnish, the Swedish name is, however, more common than the Finnish, the only abbreviation used is HSK.

HSK trains athletes and non-professionals in three figure skating disciplines: single skating, ice dance and synchronized skating. The club's most successful skaters include the ice dance pair Susanna Rahkamo/Petri Kokko, who are the 1995 European champions and 1995 World silver medalists. HSK has synchronized skating teams at all competitive levels: Team Unique at the senior, Team Mystique at the junior, Team Dynamique at the novice and Team Sympatique at the intermediate level. The club trains beginners' teams and teams in the open leagues as well.

The senior team Team Unique are the 2013 World and Finnish Champions.

The junior team Team Mystique are the 2004 and 2005 silver medalists at the Junior World Challenge Cup.

The novice team Team Dynamique are the 2014 and 2016 Finnish Champions.

HSK had a successful ice hockey team during the 1930s which won the SM-sarja twice (1933 & 1934). The Ice hockey team ceased to exist in early 1950s.


Park Ridge Transit

Park Ridge Transit is an Australian operator of bus services in the southern suburbs of Brisbane. It operates nine urban services and nearly 70 school runs under the contract of Translink, which is owned and operated by the Queensland Government.

In 1988, Park Ridge Transit was purchased from Greyhound owners the Penfold family by the Pulitano Group. In 2008 the Woodhill Coaches was purchased and integrated into Park Ridge Transit.

The company currently operates nine urban routes across Brisbane, Logan and Ipswich cities. They are:

As at June 2020, the fleet consists of 94 buses.


Bribie Island Coaches

Bribie Island Coaches was an Australian bus operator on Bribie Island. It operated five services under contract to the Government of Queensland under the Translink banner. In July 2020 the business was purchased by Caboolture Bus Lines and the brand retired.

Originally owned by Barry Muir and trading as Bribie Island Bus & Coaches, in 1997 the business was sold to former Picton Omnibus Service proprietor George Lee and renamed Bribie Island Coaches. In March 2009 the business was sold to Ballarat operator Des Trotter. In July 2020 the business was sold to Caboolture Bus Lines and the brand retired.

At the time of its cessation, Bribie Island Coaches operated five routes.
As at July 2020, the fleet consisted of 25 buses.


2006–2007 Dutch cabinet formation

Following the 2006 Dutch general election, held on November 22, a process of cabinet formation started, involving negotiations about which coalition partners to form a common programme of policy and to divide the posts in cabinet. On February 22, 2007 it resulted in the formation of the Fourth Balkenende cabinet.

The Netherlands has a large number of political parties across the political spectrum in the parliament, with no single party holding a majority. During the formation process, a coalition is formed, usually consisting of three parties. Dutch coalition negotiations are conventionally conducted in two stages:

The Dutch House of Representatives has 150 seats. In the 2006 elections the coalition partners of the cabinet in power before the fall of that cabinet earlier that year lost a total of 12 seats. Christian Democratic Appeal (CDA) lost three out of 44, the right-wing liberal People's Party for Freedom and Democracy (VVD) lost six out of 28 and the centre-left liberal D66 lost three of six. Nevertheless, the CDA remained the largest party in the parliament with 41 seats. The main opposition party, the social-democratic Labour Party (PvdA) lost nine of its 42 seats; getting 33 seats in the new parliament. The largest winner in seats was the Socialist Party (SP), which won 16 seats, increasing from nine to 25 seats. Two previously unrepresented parties were also successful; the far right-wing Party for Freedom (PVV) of former VVD MP Geert Wilders, winning nine seats, and the animal-rights Party for the Animals, winning two seats. The social, and orthodox Protestant, ChristianUnion (CU) doubled its seats from three to six. GreenLeft (GL) dropped from eight to seven seats, while the orthodox Reformed Political Reformed Party (SGP) remained stable with two seats.

The cabinet fell because D66 stepped out. The resulting Balkenende III cabinet no longer had a majority in parliament. Like any minority cabinet it had to negotiate with parties that were not member of the governing coalition for a majority of its bills, including the budgets. As is conventional, just before the elections the cabinet officially became a caretaker cabinet, with limited powers.

On November 30, 2006 the new parliament was sworn in, including several members of the current demissionair cabinet (Balkenende, Verdonk, van der Hoeven, Wijn, van Geel, Kamp, Remkes among others). Because of the election results, this House of Representatives had a majority of parties that opposed the course of the third Balkenende cabinet on important issues. One important election issue was an amnesty for a specific group of asylum seekers. This group originally of 26,000 and later 38,000 people had been in an administrative process since 2001, many of their children were raised exclusively in the Netherlands. The Minister for Integration and Immigration Rita Verdonk was currently looking into each of these dossiers to assess their future: either an expulsion or permanent residence. On December 1 the new House of Representatives adopted a motion in favour of amnestying this group. Balkenende reacted with annoyance as he stated that this ad hoc left wing coalition (including PvdA and SP) was no good basis for negotiations for a stable government. On December 5, the cabinet announced that it refused to execute this motion. It had three reasons for this: first, it claimed that a parliament which deals with a caretaker cabinet cannot demand that cabinet to implement new policy; second, it argued that a general amnesty would only attract more asylum seekers and it also raised several questions on which specific groups of asylum seekers should be amnestied and what the legal consequences would be for other groups not included in the amnesty. Minister Verdonk did announce that the expulsion would be suspended until the next parliamentary debate. A majority in the House of Representatives now proposed stopping the expulsion of asylum seekers until the formation talks were finished and allowing the formation talks to solve this issue; again the minister refused to execute this. On December 13, the House of Representatives decided to respond to this unwillingness with a motion of no confidence specifically aimed at Minister Verdonk. The leader of the VVD, Mark Rutte announced that if Minister Verdonk were forced to leave the cabinet all VVD ministers would leave, leaving only seven CDA ministers in the cabinet. On December 14, the cabinet held a meeting on how to respond to this motion: it found the solution in a small reshuffle of portfolios between Verdonk and Ernst Hirsch Ballin, the Minister of Justice, who became responsible for migration, while Verdonk became responsible for youth criminality. Hirsch Ballin could then partially execute the motion of the House of Representatives for a temporary stop in expulsion, and the VVD would be allowed to voice its opposition to this decision, breaking the principle that cabinets speak with one voice.

On 24 and 25 November the chairs of parliamentary parties of the House of Representatives gave advice to the Queen on who should be appointed "informateur" and who should be involved in the first information talks. Sometimes the information and formation is fairly straightforward. However, after the November 2006 elections an elongated and complicated information and formation period is foreseen by most commentators.

An extra complicating factor is that, provincial elections will be held in March 2007, only four months after the general election. These are also indirect elections for the Senate and any coalition will be stronger if it has a majority in both chambers. However, with many voters afloat, the result for those elections might be significantly different from these general elections. This is even more the case since disagreement with any formed coalition cabinet may directly reflect upon the results in that upcoming election.

Some politicians have already expressed their views on what the options should be if it is impossible to forge a CDA-PvdA-SP cabinet. Prominent VVD-members Gerrit Zalm and Atzo Nicolaï proposed a parliamentary minority cabinet; while Party for the Animals leader Marianne Thieme indicated that she preferred a minority PvdA-SP-GL cabinet which may be supported by several environmentalist, liberal and social parties. This would be a novum in Dutch politics. Nicolaï stated that a minority cabinet would be the most democratic option because for each proposed law a proposal-specific majority has to be gathered for it to pass the chamber vote.

The CDA offered to provide the informateur which should explore as many possible coalitions as possible. The PvdA proposed that someone unconnected to a political party should provide the informateur, and that the first negotiations should be focussed on the SP besides the CDA who won the elections. The PvdA has stated it doesn't want to form a coalition without the SP. GreenLeft also advised that SP should be involved and recommended Doekle Terpstra, former chair of the Christian trade union CNV as informateur. The SP advised the Queen to appoint D66 Minister of State Hans van Mierlo as informateur and examine the possibilities for a SP, PvdA and CDA coalition. The VVD, D66 and ChristianUnion gave the advice to appoint a CDA informateur. The SGP proposed a coalition between the CDA, PvdA and ChristianUnion, explicitly suggesting CDA member Rein Jan Hoekstra as the informateur who was involved as informateur in the 2003 Dutch cabinet formation. In the late afternoon of 25 November 2006, Queen Beatrix appointed Rein Jan Hoekstra as informateur.

Hoekstra had his first discussion with the larger parties on November 28. He held talks with the smaller parties the next day. Rouvoet, of the ChristianUnion, made clear that a cabinet of CDA-PvdA-SP looks like the most obvious coalition. Subsequently, Hoekstra continued his talks with a CDA-PvdA-SP coalition in mind .

After introductory talks on December 6 between Marijnissen (SP) and Balkenende (CDA), it was acknowledged that the formation of an CDA-SP-PvdA cabinet would be difficult as their viewpoints are far apart. Both of them also shared the opinion that the balance in this coalition may, with the largest, centre oriented, party (CDA) being smaller than the combined two leftwing parties (SP-PvdA), complicate the formation of such a cabinet On December 8 the informateur announced a brief postponement in the negotiations as a result of an apparent stalemate. The PvdA insisted on the SP as a coalition partner but SP and CDA agreed that the two parties had little in common especially on issues such as distribution of income, military peacekeeping missions one of them Task Force Uruzgan and European integration. At the same time it is expected that CDA would prefer participation of CU over SP. But if the PvdA would enter a government with SP in the opposition, it might lose even more seats to that party in the next elections.

On December 11 Hoekstra started a new information round without SP participation after consulting with Balkenende, Bos and Marijnissen. The parties involved agreed that the differences between CDA and SP were too large. Marijnissen did not express regrets as he expects to be involved again in a later stage in the formation a possible PvdA, SP, GreenLeft coalition. Hoekstra will now consult with all the parliamentary group representatives in order to identify a suitable SP replacement, which according to analysts will be ChristianUnion or GreenLeft or both.

On December 12 Wouter Bos expressed his doubts whether further discussions would be fruitful as in his view CDA was not prepared to change course. In his words he did not intent to "fall in the same trap" as in the 2003 Dutch cabinet formation. He suggested that negotiations from now on should be of more substance and with additional informateurs. Femke Halsema (GL) on December 13 also walked away from a possible coalition with GL and PvdA. She had three reasons for doing so: the differences between CDA and GL on economic, environmental and cultural issues; the fact that all three parties lost seats in the elections; and the fact that the GreenLeft as smallest party of the three would be unlikely to get any substantial concessions from the CDA and the PvdA.
By 17 December it had become clear that at this stage in the formation the combination CDA-PvdA-CU is the most likely. Hoekstra finished his mission on the exploratory information round.

In the second information round the wishes, similarities and potential problems in forming a cabinet CDA-PvdA-CU are explored by a new informateur. While the PvdA voiced a preference for several informateurs operating in parallel in this next round, the CDA preferred a single person. Both the PvdA and the CU accepted the esteemed CDA member, and former chair of the Social Economic Council Herman Wijffels as the single informateur. Importantly, Wijffels is a known advocate for the phased abolition of the existing practice of tax deduction on housing mortgages, a potential wedge between CDA (against) and PvdA/CU (support). Two other potential stumbling blocks in this phase of the proceedings continued to make headlines: existing abortion laws and the future of social welfare for the elderly. The CU, who from their Christian morals feel obliged to defend the unborn, would not go as far as to seek reversal of abortion laws but would find opportunities within existing legislation to curb it. The current law dating back to 1981 only allows abortion when a pregnant woman decides she is at serious health risk. In everyday practice however the decision is left entirely to the woman regardless of the precise argumentation and forcing legislation to use the exact wording of the law is where the CU might achieve its aims, although the PvdA sees this as a problem. One of the main election themes of the PvdA concerned the future financing of social welfare for the elderly given a projected 23% of people over 65 years of age in 2040 (2006:14%). The PvdA advocated some taxation for affluent elderly, something the CDA is against.

There are some personal similarities that may facilitate successful negotiation, for example, the three party leaders have in common that they all graduated from Free University of Amsterdam giving the coalition talks a certain reformed edge.

In a special parliamentary session on December 19 devoted to the coalition talks, PvdA, D66 and GreenLeft voiced their displeasure with the SP for walking away from the talks in an earlier phase 

On December 21, the negotiators for the three parties, Jan Peter Balkenende (CDA), Wouter Bos (PvdA) and André Rouvoet (ChristenUnie) agreed with informateur Wijffels to start the actual coalition talks on January 3, 2007. These started in a secret location, which was quickly revealed by De Telegraaf as the manor house Lauswolt in Beetsterzwaag, Friesland. All negotiators had brought along a second: Maxime Verhagen (CDA), Jacques Tichelaar (PvdA) and Arie Slob (CU). On Friday, January 5, Balkenende, Bos and Rouvoet announced that they would continue the talks to be held on different (secret) locations in the country, with the intention to have a new cabinet before the Provincial elections on March 7, 2007. On January 11 it was rumoured that Bos was in for the position of Minister of Finance and that of Deputy Prime Minister as the successor of Gerrit Zalm. This would be remarkable because Bos in the election campaign more than once expressed his ambition to remain in parliament as parliamentary leader rather than to serve in a cabinet led by Balkenende. A few days later on January 17 Bos denied the rumour. On that same day the three prospective cabinet partners continued their talks at a military facility in Hilversum (again not a secret location as anticipated) and not in The Hague. Due to the lack of any substantial news in this part of the formation, the conference table Wijffels selected for the talks made the headlines. Apparently he is fond of it and it travels with him whatever the location.

The formation talks already started to leave their mark on the ongoing parliamentary deliberations: On January 18 the CU voted down a motion seeking to the curb of advertisements for alcohol with the understanding that this issue was already part of the formation negotiations. In week 10 after the general elections, talks continued in The Hague again with little news to report. On January 24 a plan leaked to reduce the number of cabinet ministers. and a week later a plan for the reduction of the number of civil servants by 10,000. Even more leaks and speculations followed on January 29 when it was reported that a (record breaking) 40 page agreement was in the making to be presented on February 2. According to the accountants and statisticians at the Centraal Planbureau on January 31 new policies in this agreement would be paid for by anticipating higher economic growth than the officially projected one much to the dismay of the outgoing VVD finance minister Zalm. Also on January 31 the ministerial ambitions of Wouter Bos became an issue for the third time in the formation process and on this occasion his party and a parliamentary majority formally requested him to accept the vice-prime ministership. On the same day a PvdA minority group led by renegade Diederik Samson urged him to keep his election promise. In Samson's view only the other left-wing parties would benefit from a submissive PvdA fraction with Bos a member of the cabinet.

Nearly a month after this round of talks started, Wijffels on February 2 was able to announce its conclusion with a provisional agreement which was presented to the parliamentary fractions on February 5. Again some details leaked: the continuation of the tax deduction on housing mortgages much desired by CDA, the housing rent freezing and a form of taxation on early retirement as a defence against the costs of population ageing as desired by PvdA although effective after 2011.

The three parliamentary fractions of CDA, PvdA and CU met on February 5 to discuss behind closed doors the preliminary agreement. Large parts of it had already been leaked to the media by then.

It led NRC Handelsblad to conclude (on that same day) that the new cabinet was not very reform-minded: a status quo on the housing market (no changes in tax deduction home owners or rent-control), partial reversal of policies of the previous government (general amnesty for asylum seekers and reintegration of people with disability benefits into the work force) or election promises not secured or watered down (subsidized instead of free child day-care, no deregulations in job security).

On February 6 the negotiators met for a final meeting in order to address some of the issues raised by their respective parliamentary fractions. The PvdA especially turned down the initial AOW agreement which led to some last minute compromising (only taxation over 18,000 euro not 15,000 euro).

In the meanwhile two political players Joop Wijn and Aart Jan de Geus both current CDA cabinet ministers announced their farewell to national politics, officially for various non-political reasons but unofficially (according to RTL Nieuws) because they were unable to secure a post in the new cabinet.

The coalition agreement titled "Living together, working together" was presented on February 7 in a press conference. It is structured into six commitments of the new cabinet to an active role in world politics, to an innovative economy, to sustainable development, to social cohesion, to safety and a servile public sector. The most notable policies include:

The major opposition parties expressed their disappointment in various aspects of the agreement (some even before its actual announcement). Jan Marijnissen (SP) deplored the cancellation of a parliamentary inquiry into The Netherlands participation in the Iraq War. Femke Halsema (GL) noted that the projected taxation on environmental pollution of 1 billion euro should be 15 times as much. Both Mark Rutte (VVD) and Geert Wilders (PVV) criticised the general amnesty, Rutte fearing an influx of new asylum seekers and Wilders claiming that "the country is on the verge of collapsing". Rutte also claimed the new cabinet slogan was more like "in-stasis together, spending money together".

Both NOS News and RTL Nieuws on February 7 hailed the return of the polder model (which became marginalized with the rise of Fortuynism) as a government tool for the new cabinet as they pledged their intent to involve all sorts of organizations (employers' associations, labour unions) in their future policy making.

A parliamentary session devoted to the agreement was held on February 8 instigated by the new coalition partners but deemed not relevant by the new opposition who'd rather have had a session with the new cabinet later this month. Marijnissen mocked the proceedings by quizzing Wijffels about his conference table. On the same day the Centraal Planbureau criticised the new AOW plans as unrealistic, claiming it would involve too much paperwork.

On February 9 Jan Peter Balkenende was appointed as the formateur by the Queen. In Dutch politics his main responsibility in this capacity is filling in the vacancies in the new cabinet, the Fourth Balkenende cabinet. Two appointments were already revealed on the day the coalition agreement was announced: Wouter Bos (despite many reassurances he would never serve under Balkenende in a cabinet) as finance minister and André Rouvoet at the newly created post of youth and family minister. Both men will also act as deputy prime ministers. The new cabinet was appointed by the queen on February 22.

The parties announced the division of the government posts among the three parties on February 12: 

Bottlebrush

Bottlebrush may refer to:



Thornton in Lonsdale

Thornton in Lonsdale is a village and civil parish in the Craven District and ceremonial county of North Yorkshire in England. It is very close to the border with Cumbria and Lancashire and is north of Ingleton and south-east of Kirkby Lonsdale, and has a population of 308, falling to 288 at the 2011 Census. Its main claims to fame are the Marton Arms pub and St Oswald's Church, Sir Arthur Conan Doyle married his first wife at this church in 1885 and held his reception at The Marton Arms before setting off to Ireland on honeymoon. Doyle's mother resided at nearby Masongill from 1882 to 1917.

 In 1086 the "Domesday Book" listed on folio 301v under Craven "Torntun & in Borch, Orm vi curactes ad geld." – that is in "Thornton in Lonsdale with Burrow-with-Burrow Orm has circa 720 acres of plough-land to be taxed". This manor belonged to Orm, one of the family of Norse Noblemen who held the most land in Northern England. All estates would also include grazing land but since only arable land was tallied their total area can only be induced.

Because the parish of Thornton in Lonsdale was in the Lonsdale Hundred, a region more ancient than the county of Lancashire, it lay across two counties. A strip down the left side of the parish including Ireby was in Lancashire. The Lancashire area was about long and its width tapered from about to 
about . However the majority of the parish, including Thornton and Burton in Lonsdale, was in Yorkshire.


Thorpe, North Yorkshire

Thorpe is a hamlet and civil parish in the Wharfedale valley, in North Yorkshire, England. It is south of Grassington and north of Skipton. At the 2011 census the population remained less than 100, so the details were included in the civil parish of Burnsall. However in 2015, North Yorkshire County Council estimated the population to be 50.

Thorpe is mentioned in the Domesday Book as belonging to Osborn of Arques. The name derives from the Old Norse of "þorp", which means "outlying farmstead". It was sometimes referred to as "Thorpe Subtus Montem". The hamlet is secluded and surrounded by reef knolls, especially Elbolton Hill to the west, and Kail Hill to the east. All of these form part of the "Cracoe Reef Knolls" SSSI. These areas also have an extensive field systems of lynchets, a terraced hillside notable within the Yorkshire Dales. This seclusion apparently meant that Thorpe remained unaffected by Scottish raiders, and was the place that local people went to in the area to escape troops engaged in the English Civil War.

The hamlet is at an elevation of , and faces northwards with the hill of Burnsall and Thorpe Fell directly behind it, which rises to a height of . The only road out of the village runs northwards towards Linton, and this road is part of the National Cycle Route 688. Whilst there are many farmhouses and barns in the hamlet, which are indicative of agriculture, (of the 21 listed buildings in the parish, at least half are associated with farming), it also historically had a large community of cobblers. Just to the south of the village is the remains of Elbolton Lead Mine, which was producing lead and fluorspar in the 19th century, closing down in 1888.

Historically, the hamlet was in the parish of Burnsall, within Skipton Rural District, the wapentake of Staincliffe, in the West Riding of Yorkshire. In 1974, the area was moved from the West Riding into North Yorkshire, and Thorpe was made into its own civil parish as part of Craven District. The parish is rural and extends southwards over the summit of Burnsall and Thorpe Fell, covering . The parish is represented at Westminster as part of the Skipton & Ripon Constituency.

Thorpe has always been in the ecclesiastical parish of Burnsall, and remains so in the 21st century, being part of the benefice of Linton, Burnsall and Rylstone. In the 19th century, the Wesleyan Methodists had a mission room in the hamlet.

Norbert Schultze

Norbert Arnold Wilhelm Richard Schultze (26 January 1911 in Brunswick – 14 October 2002 in Bad Tölz) was a prolific German composer of film music and a member of the NSDAP and of Joseph Goebbels' staff during World War II. He is best remembered for having written the melody of the World War II classic "Lili Marleen", originally a poem from the 1915 book "Die kleine Hafenorgel" by Hans Leip.

Other works were the operas "Schwarzer Peter" and "Das kalte Herz", the musical "Käpt'n Bye-Bye", from which comes the evergreen "Nimm' mich mit, Kapitän, auf die Reise" ("Take me travelling, Captain"), as well as numerous films, such as "The Immenhof Girls" (1955).

Pseudonyms used by Schultze include "Frank Norbert", "Peter Kornfeld", and "Henri Iversen".

Schultze took the Abitur in Brunswick and went on to study piano, conducting, composing and theatre science in Cologne and Munich. He went to the Bavarian capital in the 1930s as a composer and worked under the name Frank Norbert as an actor in a student cabaret "Die Vier Nachrichter" ("The Four Reporters"). This was followed by 1932-34 involvement in Heidelberg and as a conductor in Darmstadt, Munich and Leipzig and Mannheim.

After several projects as production manager at Telefunken, Schultze decided in 1936 to try his luck as a freelance composer for stage and film. He delivered a series of compositions for martial and propaganda songs and was advised to become a member of the National Socialist German Workers Party in 1940 in order not to be conscripted. In 1932 he married his first wife, the actress Vera Spohr, with whom he had four children. After his divorce in 1943 he married the Bulgarian actress, singer and writer Iwa Wanja, who contributed libretti to several of his stage works. They had two sons.

On behalf of Propaganda Minister Joseph Goebbels he created works such as "From Finland to the Black Sea", "the song of the Kleist tank group", "tanks roll in Africa" and "bombs on England".

The popularity of these combat and soldier songs led Norbert Schultze to be continually in demand by National Socialist propaganda. He also wrote music for Veit Harlan's morale-boosting "hold out" film "Kolberg", and the main theme of the war documentary "Baptism of Fire" ("Feuertaufe"). His subsequent comment regarding his war work was, "You know, I was at the best age for a soldier, 30 or so. For me the alternatives were: compose or croak. So I decided for the former."

Schultze was defined under denazification as a "fellow traveller", and on payment of a "processing fee" of 3,000 DM he got an immediate work permit. His songs being controlled to this day by GEMA (Germany), Schultze ordered that all of his royalties from 1933 to 1945 go to the German Red Cross as is the case to this day.

Especially his song "Bomben auf Engeland" led to him being nicknamed "Bomben-Schultze" within Germany's writers of popular tunes in the war years.

In a German speaking BBC documentary about artists working with Joseph Goebbels he claimed: "after writing the tune for national culture bombs on England I said to myself: Oh my god, what if the air-defence hits my relatives or friends. So naive I was."

Schultze wrote the melody to "Lili Marleen" from the poem "Die kleine Hafenorgel" by Hans Leip. In 1990 he told BBC researcher Karen Liebreich that the tune was originally written for a toothpaste radio commercial. Sound recordings, first with a female singer Lale Andersen in 1939 at first sold little, but when the German military transmitter in Belgrade signed off with a recording from the singer several times, listeners' letters showed lively demand. The song met the inner mood of millions of soldiers of all armies who were fighting on both sides of the fronts and was translated into about fifty languages to become one of the global cultural "index fossils" of the Second World War. It was the first German million-seller.

Schultze remained true to his profession and wrote numerous operas, operettas (such as "Rain in Paris"), musicals, ballets ("Struwwelpeter" written pre-war during his time at Telefunken) and "Max and Moritz" (), music for more than 50 movies, and songs.

He was from 1961 president of the Association of German stage writers and composers and from 1973 to 1991 was a board member of the German Composer Association. Until 1996, he held offices on the board of GEMA, the Board of Trustees of the Social Welfare Fund of GEMA and the supply Foundation of the German composers. His later life was spent with his third wife Brigitt Salvatori (married Easter 1992, in a ceremony performed by his daughter), mainly in Majorca but also often in Bavaria.




Downhead

Downhead is a village and civil parish just south of Leigh-on-Mendip and north east of Shepton Mallet, in the Mendip district of Somerset, England. The parish includes the hamlet of Tadhill.

South west of the village is Dinies Camp, a univallate Iron Age hill fort enclosure. The hill fort is considered to be medieval as it is on the site of earlier earthworks.

The parish of Downhead was part of the Whitstone Hundred.

The village was recorded as "Dunehevede", meaning "the top of the down", in 1196. The manor was given to Glastonbury Abbey by King Æthelwulf of Wessex, but by 1066 was held under the abbey by Erneis. By the early 18th century the estate was held by the Portmans of Orchard Portman.

One source states that Tadhill or Toad Hill was a medieval settlement.

Downhead Basalt Quarry, to the west of the village, opened before 1904 and ceased basalt mining in 1925. It was serviced by a narrow-gauge railway.

The parish council has responsibility for local issues, including setting an annual precept (local rate) to cover the council's operating costs and producing annual accounts for public scrutiny. The parish council evaluates local planning applications and works with the local police, district council officers, and neighbourhood watch groups on matters of crime, security, and traffic. The parish council's role also includes initiating projects for the maintenance and repair of parish facilities, as well as consulting with the district council on the maintenance, repair, and improvement of highways, drainage, footpaths, public transport, and street cleaning. Conservation matters (including trees and listed buildings) and environmental issues are also of interest to the parish council.

The parish is in the area of Somerset Council, a unitary authority, which is responsible for all other local government matters. It was previously part of Shepton Mallet Rural District and then, from 1974 until 2023, the non-metropolitan district of Mendip.

It is also part of the Somerton and Frome county constituency represented in the House of Commons of the Parliament of the United Kingdom.

Downhead is close to the Asham Wood biological Site of Special Scientific Interest which is the largest and most diverse of the ancient semi-natural woods in the Mendip Hills. It has been the subject of controversy and attempts to protect the environment from increased quarrying activity in the area, particularly at Torr Works which is also known as Merehead Quarry. The wood occupies two deep valleys and the intervening plateau. Most of the underlying rocks are calcareous Carboniferous Limestone and shales, but Devonian Portishead Beds outcrop along the northern valley. There is a range of unusual flora and fauna.

All Saints church is a Grade II* listed building with a 14th-century tower and 18th-century nave and chancel. The church tower contains three bells cast in 1782 by William Bilbie of Chew Stoke. In 2007, funding from the levy on nearby quarries was obtained to pay for repair and restoration of the bells.

Wigglesworth

Wigglesworth is a village and civil parish in the Craven district of North Yorkshire, England. The population of the civil parish taken at the 2011 Census was 379. It is on the road between Long Preston to the east, Clitheroe to the south and the small village of Rathmell lies just to the north. It is about south of Settle.

Despite the small size of the village, it has a public house called the Plough Inn. Wigglesworth consists of a few small scattered houses and farmsteads. The heart of the village lies on the crossroads between Clitheroe, Rathmell and Long Preston.

A former Wesleyan chapel stands on the B6478 road in the western part of the settlement.


Ivan Tvorozhnikov

Ivan Ivanovich Tvorozhnikov (; October 10, 1848 – 1919) was a Russian painter and a member of the Imperial Academy of Arts.

Tvorozhnikov graduated from the Saint Petersburg Drawing School attached to the Society of Imperial Incentive. Finishing his studies there in 1868, he entered the Academy of Arts, where he continued his education up to 1875. Tvorozhnikov's major works are considered to be "The salvation books vendor" (1888), "Grandmother and granddaughter", "", "By the church" (1889) and "God sent the mercy".

A son of peasants from Moscow Guberniya, Tvorozhnikov was born in Zhukovo village of the Tver uyezd. Being 12 years old, he was sent to Saint Petersburg for wages. Later, Tvorozhnikov repeatedly visited the Tver Guberniya.


Ephedra sinica

Ephedra sinica (also known as Chinese ephedra or Ma Huang) is a species of "Ephedra" native to Mongolia, Russia (Buryatiya, Chita, Primorye), and northeastern China (Gansu, Hebei, Heilongjiang, Jilin, Liaoning, Nei Mongol, Ningxia, Shaanxi, Shanxi).

It is the primary source of the medicinal preparation ephedra, also known by its Chinese name "ma huang". It has been proposed as a candidate for the legendary soma of the Rigveda. 


Pramāṇa-samuccaya

The Pramāṇa-samuccaya () is a philosophical treatise by Dignāga, an Indian Buddhist logician and epistemologist who lived from c. 480 to c. 540 . The work comprises an outline in the highly elliptical verse format typical of early Indian philosophical texts, and an explanatory auto-commentary.



Morita-za

The Morita-za (森田座・守田座), also known later as the Shintomi-za (新富座), was one of the major Kabuki theaters in Edo (modern-day Tokyo) during the Edo period and into the beginning of the 20th century. It was established in January 1660, and run by the Morita family of actors until its destruction in the 1923 Great Kantō earthquake which destroyed much of Tokyo.

The Morita-za was first built by Morita Tarōbei I and his son Morita Tashichi in 1660, in Edo's Kobiki-chō district. The theater would burn down only a few months later, and many more times over the years, but was always rebuilt (until 1923). It was designated as one of only four theaters allowed to operate in Edo, by a 1670 government edict; the other three officially designated theaters were the Nakamura-za, Ichimura-Takenojō-za, and Yamamura-za. After all four were destroyed in the 1703 Great Genroku fire, and rebuilt, there began a tradition of co-producing plays for New Year's celebrations.

The Morita-za experienced great success for a time, and took part in a number of major events along with the other three top theaters; for example, in 1717, Chikamatsu's "Battles of Coxinga", performed at the Morita-za and two other theaters, was the first instance of a "bunraku" puppet play being adapted to kabuki.

However, in 1734, the Morita-za went bankrupt, and was forced to transfer the rights to its performances to another theatre, through the "hikae yagura" system. Kawarazaki Gonnosuke III of the Kawarazaki-za, took over the Morita-za's place as a designated theater for a decade or so. This relationship between the two theaters would continue through the Edo period, as the Morita-za went bankrupt numerous times in the late 18th and early 19th centuries.

Though on shaky ground in terms of financial stability, the Morita-za would see a great number of significant kabuki events over the following decades, including the introductory performances of many now-famous plays, and other such special occasions. In 1781, Ichikawa Danzō IV, performing at the Morita-za, became the first performer to take on seven roles in the grand epic "Chushingura" (The Tale of the 47 Ronin).

In 1858, after a number of closings and reopenings of the theater, the Morita-za opened once more, changing its name, however, from 「森田座」 to 「守田座」 (both are pronounced the same, as "Morita-za"). The character 守 ("mori") means "protection", and this change was perhaps made to seek better luck for the theater, and protection from fire and from bankruptcy. The theater would then be moved and rebuilt in 1872, leaving Saruwaka-chō for Shintomi-chō; the new building was larger, and had a few new features, such as indoor toilets and a seating section for foreigners. A few years later, in 1875, the theater was renamed Shintomi-za, after the district, in celebration and recognition of its becoming a stock company ("sogo shosha").

Though the theater would continue to be destroyed by fire, and to face financial difficulties, it continued to improve and to experiment. The Shintomi-za would be rebuilt bigger and better several times in the late 19th century, and experimented with new styles of productions. In September 1879, it premiered a play called "Hyōryū Kidan Seiyō Kabuki" (漂流気団西洋歌舞伎, "A strange story about drifters and Western Kabuki"); the story was one of Japanese exploring Europe and the United States, and featured a number of Western actors, and Italian-style arias. It was not well-received, and was a commercial failure in this first performance, but is representative of the kinds of experimentation and innovation that the Shintomi-za explored.

Morita Kanya XII, then head of the theater ("zamoto") was forced to hand over official management duties in 1894, due to financial problems, but stayed on as producer until his death three years later. In 1909, the theater was bought out by the Shōchiku Corporation, though it continued to be managed by members of the Morita family.

Finally, in 1923, the Great Kantō earthquake destroyed much of the capital, including the Shintomi-za, which was never rebuilt.


Censorship on MTV

Censorship on MTV has been the subject of debate for years. MTV, the first and most popular music television network in the U.S., has come under criticism for alleged censorship in their programming. Throughout the decades, MTV has altered or removed shows from the channel's schedule to address complaints; and music videos have been censored, moved to late-night rotation, or banned from the channel's rotation for various types of controversial content.

The hit show "Jackass" was subject to frequent censorship in the early 2000s. The popularity of the show, combined with the propensity of young viewers to attempt to imitate the show's risky stunts, led to substantial controversy. Although the show featured prominent warning messages at its start, end, and upon return from all commercial breaks urging viewers not to re-create any stunts seen on the program, nor submit footage to the network of those stunts for casting consideration on that or other MTV series, the show was nonetheless blamed for many injuries. In 2001, then-Senator Joe Lieberman urged Viacom to take more responsibility for the program's content; which led MTV to only air the show after 10p.m. The creators of "Jackass" expressed frustration over the restraints that MTV's producers imposed on stunts after Lieberman's statement. These limitations eventually led to the departure of several cast members, and to the conclusion of the show. 

MTV's influence also affected its famous animated program, "Beavis and Butt-Head". In the wake of a controversy that followed a child burning down his house after allegedly watching the show, producers moved the show from its original 7p.m. time slot to a late-night, 11p.m. slot. Beavis' tendency to flick a lighter and chant the word "fire" was removed from new episodes, and controversial scenes were removed from existing episodes before rebroadcast. Some of the edits were so extensive that when series creator Mike Judge compiled his he commented that "some of those episodes may not even exist actually in their original form".

The Parents Television Council has argued that much of the censored material on MTV is easily discernible because of the context in which it is presented.

MTV has frequently edited music videos to remove lyrical references to alcohol, tobacco, drugs, sex, nudity, violence, weapons, homophobia, ableism, suicide, religion or advertising, and completely edits out swear words. Usually, all racial slurs are censored on MTV music videos and programming, and MTV has emphasized racial tolerance for people of all races and creeds.

Examples of lyric edits have included:


In attempt to address criticism over risqué content, MTV has sometimes moved certain videos to late-night rotation in censored format. 





Several videos have been perceived as too controversial to play on MTV even in censored form, for varying reasons. In the 1980s, parent-media watchdog groups such as the PMRC criticized MTV over certain music videos that were claimed to have explicit imagery of Satanism. MTV has developed a strict policy refusing to air videos that may depict devil worship or anti-religious bigotry.




Ludwig von Hofmann

Ludwig von Hofmann (17 August 1861 – 23 August 1945) was a German painter, graphic artist and designer. He worked in a combination of the Art Nouveau and Symbolist styles. His work was part of the painting event in the art competition at the 1928 Summer Olympics.

He was born in Darmstadt. His father was the Prussian statesman Karl von Hofmann, who served as Minister-president of the Grand Duchy of Hesse from 1872 to 1876 and was briefly Trade Minister in the cabinet of Otto von Bismarck.

Ludwig began his studies in 1883 at the Dresden Academy of Fine Arts, then studied with Ferdinand Keller at the Academy of Fine Arts, Karlsruhe. In 1889, he attended the Académie Julian in Paris, where he came under the influence of Pierre Puvis de Chavannes and Paul-Albert Besnard.

After 1890, he was a freelance painter in Berlin. From 1894 to 1900, he travelled extensively and spent a great deal of his time at his villa in Fiesole. His appreciation of antiquity and attraction to the idea of Arcadia permeates much of his work. After 1895, he was a regular contributor of illustrations for the Art Nouveau magazine "Pan". In 1896, he became a member of the Berlin Secession and he was married in 1899. He was also a member of the Deutscher Künstlerbund

In 1903, he was appointed a professor at the Weimar Saxon Grand Ducal Art School, where he became a member of the avant-garde literary and artistic group centered around Harry Graf Kessler. Jean Arp and Ivo Hauptmann were among his students. In 1916, he was named a professor at the academy in Dresden, where he remained until 1931. He also provided illustrations for a new translation of the "Odyssey" by Leopold Ziegler and works by Gerhart Hauptmann (Ivo's father).

His overall production slackened in the 1930s and, in 1937, some of his works were labeled as "degenerate art". He retired to Pillnitz, near Dresden, where he died in 1945. His remaining works were almost confiscated by the Russians after the war, but his widow managed to save them.




Ōnokuni Yasushi

Aoki was born in Memuro, Hokkaidō. At school he did judo, but after a sumo tournament in the area, he was recruited to Hanakago stable by Kaiketsu Masateru and fought his first bout in March 1978, aged 15. He took on the "shikona", or ring name, of in the following tournament. When Kaiketsu set up his Hanaregoma stable in 1981, he took Ōnokuni with him.

Ōnokuni reached the second "jūryō" division in March 1982, and the top "makuuchi" division a year later in March 1983. He made his "san'yaku" debut at "komusubi" just three tournaments later. In November 1983, ranked as "maegashira" 3, he won his first special prize and three gold stars by defeating all three "yokozuna" (Kitanoumi, Chiyonofuji and Takanosato). This earned him promotion to "sekiwake". In March 1984, he changed the spelling of his ring name to . In the tournament that month, he defeated three "yokozuna" and three "ōzeki" and won special prizes for Fighting Spirit and Outstanding Performance. Ōnokuni was runner-up in the July 1985 tournament, recording 12 wins against 3 losses, enough to secure promotion to "ōzeki". He was runner-up again in his "ōzeki" debut, scoring 12–3 once more.

His performance over the next few tournaments was good but not spectacular, until he won his first tournament in May 1987 with a perfect record of 15 wins and no losses, becoming the first man other than Chiyonofuji to win a top division "yūshō" in the new Ryōgoku Kokugikan. After two runner-up performances in the next two tournaments, in September of that year he was promoted to "yokozuna", sumo's highest rank. His three tournament record of 40 wins and just five losses tied with Wakanohana II as the best produced by a candidate for "yokozuna" promotion in the six tournaments per year era (post 1958).

Ōnokuni's first tournament as "yokozuna" finished with a disappointing 8–7 score, but in March 1988 he beat "yokozuna" Hokutoumi in a play-off to achieve his second tournament championship. However, the Kokonoe stable "yokozuna" Chiyonofuji and Hokutoumi were to prove dominant over the next few tournaments and he never won another tournament. He scored a famous victory over Chiyonofuji on the last day of the November 1988 tournament, however, ending Chiyonofuji's 53-bout winning streak in what turned out to be the last sumo match of the Shōwa period.

From 1989 he began to suffer from sleep apnea. He gained weight, peaking at 210 kg (463 lbs) in May 1989, and began to suffer leg problems. He lost some weight through a combination of training and diet, but this weakened him and he never fully recovered. He missed most of the July tournament due to a knee injury, then in September he became the first "yokozuna" ever to have "make-koshi", or turn in a losing score of just 7 wins out of 15 bouts. He did the only thing expected of him – he offered to resign – but was told by the Japan Sumo Association to soldier on. In his comeback tournament in January 1990, Ōnokuni scraped by with 8 wins but suffered a serious ankle injury and missed the next four tournaments, an unprecedented absence for a "yokozuna".

He finally returned to the ring in November 1990, and scored ten wins, defeating Chiyonofuji on the final day. In March 1991 he was runner-up for the seventh and final time in his career, finishing one win behind Hokutoumi on 12–3. His final day defeat to Kirishima handed the "yūshō" to Hokutoumi and robbed him of the chance of a play-off (which Hokutoumi admitted he would almost certainly have lost as he was injured in his bout the previous day). Ōnokuni missed the following tournament in May due to a fever resulting from a skin infection, and upon his return in July he was defeated four times in the first eight days. He announced his retirement from sumo at the age of just 28 after being beaten by Akinoshima on day 8, leaving a disappointing record of just one "yūshō" and two runner-up performances in his 23 tournaments at "yokozuna" rank. He never managed to obtain the highest rank on the "banzuke" of east "yokozuna" in any of those tournaments. Discounting the special circumstances of Futahaguro's departure from sumo he was the second youngest "yokozuna" to retire, after Tochinoumi.

Ōnokuni has remained in the sumo world as an "oyakata", or elder, and opened his own training stable, Shibatayama-"beya" in 1999. In March 2008 the stable produced its first "sekitori", Daiyūbu, but he spent only one tournament in "jūryō" and retired suddenly in June 2010 after falling out with his stablemaster. Daiyūbu filed a lawsuit in September claiming that he was slapped and punched, and his topknot was cut off against his will. Shibatayama was questioned by police over the alleged incidents. The case was eventually settled out of court. In March 2016 Shibatayama and one of his wrestlers, Komanokuni, were ordered by the Tokyo District Court to pay 32.4 million yen (287,500 USD) in compensation to another former wrestler who the court ruled had faced "daily abuse" since joining in 2008 and had to undergo four surgeries for a detached retina, eventually losing sight in the eye in 2013. Shibatayama appealed the ruling, and in November 2016 a court-mediated confidential settlement was reached.

In 2013 his old stable closed when Hanaregoma-"oyakata" reached the mandatory retirement age, and their wrestlers transferred to Shibatayama stable. As of January 2020 the stable has one "sekitori", Sakigake. He was elected to the board of directors of the Sumo Association in 2018 and has the role of head of the public relations department.

He has been married since 1989.

He has a reputation as a baker of cakes, and often appears on baking shows on television. He published a book . He baked a cake to celebrate Daiyūbu's promotion to "jūryō."

His autobiography, titled "Winning Even When You Lose", was published in 2008.

Ōnokuni's favoured grip on his opponent's "mawashi" was "migi-yotsu", a left hand outside and right hand inside position. His most common winning "kimarite" was "yori-kiri", which accounted for nearly half his victories at "sekitori" level. He was also fond of "uwatenage", or overarm throw. He had a somewhat defensive style, preferring to wait for his opportunity rather than take the initiative right from the beginning of a bout.

 


Black wattle

Black wattle is the common name for a number of species of trees that are native to Australia, as listed below:


It may also refer to "Callicoma serratifolia", a tall shrub or tree which is also found in Australia.

Dougie Hall

Dougie Hall (born 24 September 1980) is a former Scottish international rugby union player, who played 151 games for the Glasgow Warriors and won 42 caps for Scotland.

Born in Dingwall, he was educated at Glenalmond College in Perthshire and it was playing for them he was first scouted.

He debuted for Scotland in the second-half defeat against Wales at the age of 22 in August 2003 (23–9). Hall had already represented Scotland at national under-19 and under-21 levels, before starting a training contract with the Glasgow Caledonians (now Glasgow Warriors) before turning professional in 2002.

He began his career with Glasgow in the 1999–00 season, making three substitute appearances in the Welsh-Scottish League and 1 appearance in Scottish Inter-District Championship. He made the bench the following season but did not play. He spent much of the 2001–02 season recovering from a broken leg but played for Glasgow in 5 matches that season.

He then transferred to Edinburgh Rugby where he spent five years learning his craft and cementing his place as Scotland's first-choice hooker. He was selected for the 2007 Rugby World Cup but picked up a knee injury and was forced to withdraw. For the start of the 2007–08 season Hall went back down the M8 to rejoin the Glasgow Warriors. In March 2012 he signed his second contract extension, which runs until 2014.

On 24 March 2015, it was announced Hall would retire at the end of the season and move into a career in financial services. His final game was the PRO12 final won by Glasgow at the end of the 2014/15 season.

Hall's 142 appearances for Glasgow Warriors in his second spell at the Warriors, together with his nine appearances from 1999 to 2002, gives him a total of 151 appearances for the Glasgow club.


List of MTV slogans

In the early days of MTV, the first and most popular music television network in the U.S., many of the more successful musicians featured on the channel could be seen doing station identification spots for the network, exclaiming the signature line, "I want my MTV!", and other phrases. Over the years, MTV would gather a large list of slogans that would become embedded in popular culture.



Cowesby

Cowesby is a village and civil parish in the Hambleton District of North Yorkshire, England. Part of the village including The Cowesby Hall Estate is within the North York Moors National Park and about north of Thirsk. The population of the civil parish was estimated at 70 in 2014.

The village is mentioned in the "Domesday Book" as being in the "Allerton" Hundred and listed as "Cahosbi". At the time of the Norman invasion the lands were recorded as belonging to Edwin, Earl of Mercia, but were ceded soon afterwards to King William I, though the manor was in the hands of "Hugh, son of Baldric".

The village lies within the Thirsk and Malton UK Parliament constituency. It also lies within the Thirsk electoral district of North Yorkshire County Council. The village is within the Whitestonecliffe ward of Hambleton District Council.

The parish shares a grouped parish council, known as Hillside Parish Council, with the civil parishes of Boltby, Felixkirk, Kirby Knowle and Upsall.

According to the 2001 UK Census, the population was 60. There are no local amenities or access to public transport.

The village lies at the foot of the Hambleton Hills in a natural, and thus sheltered bend The nearest settlements are Kepwick, to the north-north-east; Kirby Knowle, to the south and Knayton and Borrowby to the south-west.

Cowesby Hall sits around half-a-mile from the centre of the village, the large Tudor-style country house sits prominently atop a hill in the centre of its 1,300 acre estate and was erected in 1832 from the designs of Anthony Salvin, the hall and the majority of its land falls within the North York Moors National Park. The present manor house is believed to be the 4th built on the site, with the first documented to have being built in the 12th century for William de Stuteville, whose son Robert died without issue, by the end of the 17th century, the manor was under the ownership of Nathaniel Crew, 3rd Baron Crew, who is also noted as the founder of Cowesby Hospital, a village-hospital built in the late 1700s to treat the impoverished estate workers.

By the early 1800s the manor was under ownership of George Lloyd, Esq, who built the present hall between 1828 and 1832, he died in 1844 and left the estate to his eldest son William, whose son, also called William was Lord of the Manor until the 1940s, when the hall and estate was purchased by Sir John Watson Cameron, the son of Watson Cameron of Camerons Brewery, it remained in ownership of the Camerons until 1999, when it was purchased by Robert Adair, a Yorkshire-based oil tycoon and his wife Lucy, a solicitor, the Adair's later divorced, which resulted in the £10m sale of The Cowesby Hall Estate in 2009 to a member of the billionaire Morrisons family, the sale included the main house, several estate cottages in the adjoining village, two working farms and 1,298 acres of land, including woodland, parkland, farmland and moorland.

The 24,000 square foot, 10-bedroom manor house and its sprawling gardens have undergone an extensive renovation and restoration programme by its current owners, the hall sits prominently atop a hill and is sheltered on the north and east facade, whilst the south and west facade enjoy expansive and far reaching views over the Hambleton Hills.
The church in the village is dedicated to St Michael and All Angels. The church was rebuilt by the widow of George Lloyd of Cowesby Hall to the designs of Anthony Salvin in 1846 on the site of a Saxon and a 13th-century church. The church is now a Grade II listed building.

Deportivo Madryn

Club Social y Deportivo Madryn (usually called simply Deportivo Madryn) is an Argentine sports club. Its home town is Puerto Madryn, in the Chubut Province. Although other sports are practised there, the club is mostly known for both its football and basketball teams.

Deportivo Madryn currently plays in the regionalised 4th level of Argentine football league system, the Torneo Argentino B.

The basketball squad plays in the regional "Liga Patagónica de Básquetbol". Madryn played three seasons in the Liga Nacional de Básquetbol (first division), but sold its spot at the end of the 2006–07 season for economic reasons.


Shintomiza

It opened under the name as a playhouse in Ujiyamada city, Mie Prefecture in 1927. Shintomiza shifted from playhouse to movie theater in 1953. The former name is (1953-1956), (1956-1983), (1983-1997), (1997-2002). Ise Écrin changed to current name in 2002.

It is one of the only independent movie theaters in Japan that is not located in a major metropolis. Shintomiza has 2 screens. 


Volker Lechtenbrink

Volker Lechtenbrink (18 August 1944 – 22 November 2021) was a German actor on stage, in film and television, a singer-songwriter, dubbing artist, stage director and theatre manager. He played in the anti-war movie "The Bridge" in 1959 at age 14. He appeared in popular television series including "Der Kommissar", "Der Alte" and "Tatort". Lechtenbrink was stage director at the Ernst Deutsch Theater in Hamburg, and intendant of the Bad Hersfelder Festspiele.

Lechtenbrink was born in Cranz, East Prussia, Prussia, Germany (now Zelenogradsk, Russia), but grew up in Hamburg and Bremen where his family lived after World War II. He started his career at the age of 14 acting in the Oscar-nominated anti-war movie "The Bridge" (1959) by director Bernhard Wicki.

After leaving the Gelehrtenschule des Johanneums a year after completing his mittlere Reife, he was educated at the drama school of the Hochschule für bildende Künste Hamburg. He worked as an actor, later also stage director at the Ernst Deutsch Theater in Hamburg. Between 2004 and 2006, he was the theatre's intendant. From 1995 and 1997, he was also intendant of the Bad Hersfelder Festspiele.

Lechtenbrink acted in several German television productions during the last decades, including "Der Kommissar", "Derrick", "Der Alte", "Tatort", "Ein Fall für zwei" and some Rosamunde Pilcher films. In 2006, he played one of the central roles in the short-lived television series "M.E.T.R.O. – Ein Team auf Leben und Tod".

He was the German dubbing voice of Burt Reynolds, Kris Kristofferson, Avery Brooks and Dennis Quaid. Besides his work as an actor he also started a very successful career as a singer and songwriter during the 1970s and 1980s, with songs like "Der Macher" and "Ich mag", some his own, others German versions of country rock ballads. He wrote the lyrics to the song "Rücksicht", performed by the duo Hoffmann & Hoffmann at the Eurovision Song Contest 1983, achieving 5th place in a field of 20.

Lechtenbrink was married five times, including the actresses and , and had three children. He lived in Berlin and Hamburg. He died on 22 November 2021, aged 77.

In 2010, Lechtenbrink was awarded the for a role in "Frost/Nixon" at the Hamburger Kammerspiele. In 2014, he was awarded the Biermann Ratjen Medal of the City of Hamburg. The city of Hamburg honoured his life achievements in 2021 by granting him the Gustaf Gründgens Prize. He passed the prize money of €15,000 to three charity organisations. He won the Hersfeld-Preis (Großer Hersfeld-Preis) in 1997.

Source:


Films and television and television series with Lechtenbrink include:



Clan Malcolm

The Clan Malcolm, also known as the Clan MacCallum, is a Highland Scottish clan. The Clan MacCallum may have originally been a separate clan until the 18th century, when the chief of the Clan MacCallum adopted the name Malcolm after inheriting the Malcolm estate, and the two clans were drawn together under the same chief.

The name MacCallum is derived from "Mac Ghille Chaluim" which means "son of the disciple of Columba". The MacCallums settled in Lorne towards the end of the 13th century. "Maol" or "shavenhead" is Scottish Gaelic for "monk". Therefore, "Maol Chaluim" can be translated as "monk" or "disciple of Columba".

Historian Ian Grimble has challenged the idea that MacCallum and Malcolm are simply interchangeable versions of the same name. Grimble claims that "Colm" was common throughout all areas of Celtic settlement. The name Malcolm appears as a surname as early as the 14th century in Dumbartonshire and Stirlingshire. Malcolm was also the name of four Scottish kings.

In 1414 Ronald MacCaullum of Corbarron was appointed as constable of Craignish Castle.

In May 1562 Donald McGillespie Vich O'Challum received a charter of the lands of Poltalloch in the parish of Kilmartin in the county of Argyll from Duncan Campbell of Duntrune.

The Reverend Archibald MacCallum translated parts of the Bible into Gaelic. In 1642 he succeeded his cousin to become the fourth Laird of Poltalloch. His son was Zachary MacCallum who was educated at the University of St Andrews and was also a noted swordsman.

Zachary's younger brother was Duncan whose son, Neil MacCallum served in the French Navy and is said to have been the natural father of Louis-Joseph de Montcalm. Zachary was a supporter of the Marquess of Argyll and he was killed in 1647 by forces of Sir Alexander MacDonald at Ederline. After killing seven of the enemy Zachary MacCallum turned to Sir Alexander MacDonald, who would have been his eighth that day if MacCallum was not taken from behind by an enemy (Maclean), who killed him with a Scythe.

John Malcolm of Balbedie was chamberlain of Fife during the reign of Charles I. He had four sons: Sir John Malcolm who was created a Baronet of Nova Scotia (see: Malcolm baronets), Alexander Malcolm, Lord Lochore who became a judge, James Malcolm who fought for John Graham, 1st Viscount Dundee at the Battle of Killiecrankie and Michael Malcolm.

In the late 18th century chief Dugald MacCallum, the ninth of Poltalloch changed his surname to Malcolm. This may have been because he inherited the Malcolm estates in 1779. Of the Malcolm chieftainship line: Admiral Sir Pulteney Malcolm was Commander in Chief of Saint Helena, and won the regard of Napoleon. Sir Pulteney Malcolm also commanded HMS Royal Oak.

According to research by the Centre for the Study of the Legacies of British Slave-ownership, during the 18th and 19th centuries, the Malcolm family greatly increased their wealth due to their activities in slave trading and their ownership of plantations in Jamaica, redeploying their slave-derived wealth in agrarian improvement and infrastructure in Britain. The records show that Neill Malcolm the 12th, owned more than 2000 enslaved people on 11 separate plantations The 12th Laird opposed Abolition and claimed thousands (millions of pounds in 'today' money, in compensation for the loss of his slaves in 1834 from the Slave Compensation Commission.

The Malcolm family have a recent entry in the Oxford Dictionary of National Biography that details the role of Neill Malcolm, 12th of Poltalloch in accelerating his father's move from slave trading to investment in Britain and portrays him as a 'paternalistic' landlord in Scotland. The same entry details the role of his son, Neill Malcolm or 13th of Poltalloch in driving clearances and evictions from his estates in Scotland.

John Wingfield Malcolm of Poltalloch was created Lord Malcolm in 1896, and died in 1902, when the peerage became extinct, though his brother inherited his estate, and the feudal title of 'Malcolm of Poltalloch', descended with the chieftainship of the Clan.

The Chief Malcolm family had an impressive reputation for military and naval success throughout the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. In addition to this, more than one of the chiefs of the clan has entered into the world of politics, the last of these being Sir Ian Malcolm, who was a Member of Parliament until 1919. More recent examples include Australian-born political journalist Mungo Wentworth MacCallum (b. 1941) and Stephen McCallum, Adelaide-born labour organiser and prominent operating figure within the Socialist Left faction of the Australian Labor Party in South Australia and Tasmania.

The beginning of the modern West Highland White Terrier breed is attributed to Colonel Malcolm of Poltalloch, Scotland in Argyllshire in the late 1800s. The story has it that Colonel Edward Malcolm was hunting with his pack of cairn terriers when he thought he saw a rabbit running through the underbrush and shot it, only to find that he had shot his favorite Cairn. From that day forward, he determined only to breed white dogs, because they were easy to see. At the same time, the Campbell of Rosneath began to breed white dogs which he called “Roseneath” terriers after the name of his estate. Later, the “Poltalloch” and “Roseneath” terriers were combined into the West Highland White Terrier, a name coined by Colonel Malcolm of Poltalloch Estates, which remains a very popular breed today.

The current Chief of Clan Malcolm is Robin Neill Lochnell Malcolm, 19th Laird of Poltalloch. After his death, he will be succeeded by his eldest son, Ian.





Caboolture Bus Lines

Caboolture Bus Lines is an Australian operator of bus services in the northern suburbs of Brisbane. It operates 12 services under contract to the Queensland Government under the Translink banner.

Caboolture Bus Lines was founded in 1988 by Grant and Jannette Craike with two buses. In July 2020 Bribie Island Coaches was acquired.

As at December 2022, the fleet consisted of 66 buses.


East Pennard

East Pennard is a village and civil parish north west of Castle Cary, and south of Shepton Mallet, in the Mendip district of Somerset, England. It has a population of 348. The parish includes the hamlets of Stone, Parbrook and Huxham.

It is very close to the site of the Glastonbury Festival. Residents receive free tickets to the Festival.

The village takes its name from the Brythonic family of Celtic languages: "penn-ardd" meaning "high hill".

The estate was granted by King Edred to Aelfgyth, a nun of Wilton and she transferred it to Glastonbury Abbey which retained it until the Dissolution of the monasteries in 1539. It then given to William Paulet and eventually to his descendants the Napiers of Tintinhull.

Stone was part of the hundred of Carhampton, while East Pennard was part of the Whitstone Hundred.

The parish council has responsibility for local issues, including setting an annual precept (local rate) to cover the council’s operating costs and producing annual accounts for public scrutiny. The parish council evaluates local planning applications and works with the local police, district council officers, and neighbourhood watch groups on matters of crime, security, and traffic. The parish council's role also includes initiating projects for the maintenance and repair of parish facilities, as well as consulting with the district council on the maintenance, repair, and improvement of highways, drainage, footpaths, public transport, and street cleaning. Conservation matters (including trees and listed buildings) and environmental issues are also the responsibility of the council.

The village falls within the Non-metropolitan district of Mendip, which was formed on 1 April 1974 under the Local Government Act 1972, having previously been part of Shepton Mallet Rural District, which is responsible for local planning and building control, local roads, council housing, environmental health, markets and fairs, refuse collection and recycling, cemeteries and crematoria, leisure services, parks, and tourism.

Somerset County Council is responsible for running the largest and most expensive local services such as education, social services, libraries, main roads, public transport, policing and fire services, trading standards, waste disposal and strategic planning.

It is also part of the Somerton and Frome county constituency represented in the House of Commons of the Parliament of the United Kingdom. It elects one Member of Parliament (MP) by the first past the post system of election. It was part of the South West England constituency of the European Parliament prior to Britain leaving the European Union in January 2020, which elected six MEPs using the d'Hondt method of party-list proportional representation.

The church, dedicated to All Saints, dates from the 14th century with a tower containing a clock and five bells. They are the second heaviest peal of five bells in the world. It contains a Norman font and several stained-glass windows, also an altar screen and monuments of the Martines and Napiers. It is a grade I listed building.

The hamlet of Huxham is just off the A37, south of Shepton Mallet. It is notable for the large area of common land at its centre (comprising two adjoining registered commons). This is one of the few areas of common land in this part of Somerset and is thought to have once been a holding area for cattle herds being driven to the markets at Lydford-on-Fosse and Glastonbury. There is a public right of Freedom to roam over the common land by virtue of the Countryside and Rights of Way Act 2000, and several public footpaths extend across the surrounding countryside. Huckeymead Lane, which crosses the common, ends at a bridleway that leads to the Monarch's Way. Local wildlife include roe deer, barn owls and (in the large pond on the common) greater-crested newts. 
Huxham includes four farms which date back to the Middle Ages and were once owned by Glastonbury Abbey. After the Dissolution of the Monasteries the farms passed into private ownership and in the nineteenth century one of the farms was owned by Wadham College, of Oxford University. The southern edge of Huxham is marked by the Fosse Way (now the A37).

Other amenities in Huxham include a small airfield and a bed and breakfast establishment which is one of the closest accommodations to the Glastonbury Festival site. There are two vineyards nearby, a car repair business, a wedding venue and a local cheesemaker.

The village was the birthplace, in 1869, of Tom Higdon who led the Burston Strike School.


Roman Catholic Diocese of Tricarico

The Diocese of Tricarico () is a Latin diocese of the Catholic Church in Basilicata. It is a suffragan of the Archdiocese of Potenza-Muro Lucano-Marsico Nuovo.

Bishop Liutprand of Cremona, who had participated in the siege of the Byzantines at Bari in 968, was sent by his patron the Emperor Otto I to Constantinople to seek a negotiated peace with the Emperor Nikephoros II Phokas. His mission was unsuccessful, and on his return Liutprand wrote a highly colored narration of his embassy, the "Relatio de legatione Constantinopolitana ad Nicephorum Phocam". The document mentions an aggressive act on the part of Polyeuctos, Patriarch of Constantinople, raising the bishopric of Otranto (Hydruntum) to the rank of a metropolitanate, and granting that prelate the right to consecrate bishops for Acerenza, Turcico (Tursi), Gravina, Macera, and Tricarico. Liutprand remarks that he thought that those consecrations were the right of the pope. This is the earliest mention of a bishop of Tricarico.

Nicephoros Phocas according to Liutprand, ordered that all the dioceses in Byzantine territory in south Italy should use only the Greek Rite in the liturgy. The names of the Greek-rite bishops of Tricarico whose allegiance was to Constantinople are not known.

In 1068, the diocese of Tricarico was assigned by Pope Alexander II to the metropolitanate of Acerenza.

Of the Latin bishops after the Norman conquest the first was Arnoldo (1068).

On 7 October 1123, Pope Calixtus II, who was residing in Benevento at the time, at the request of Bishop Peter of Tricarico, took the diocese under papal protection, and, in the bull "Aequitatis et justitiae", confirmed the bishops' privileges and possessions, which are extensively listed.

On 3 June 1237, at the request of Bishop Rogerius of Tricarico, Pope Gregory IX took the diocese under the protection of the papacy, and confirmed the bishops of the diocese in their privileges and possessions. The bull, "In eminenti", lists all of the towns, villages and churches belonging to the diocese.

On 29 July 1322, Pope John XXII reserved to the pope the right to nominate as well as confirm the appointment of all bishops in Italy, including the bishops of Tricarico. This act removed the power of electing a bishop from the cathedral Chapter. When Bishop Richardus died early in 1324, the Canons of the cathedral Chapter proceeded, in accordance with custom, to elect a new bishop, Rogerius de Sanseverino, even though he was under the minimum age. Pope John XXII immediately invalidated his election, as attempted contrary to papal reservation, and on 4 May 1324 appointed Bonaccursus, the archpriest of the church of Ferrara instead.

Bishop Fortunado Pinto (1792–1805) held a diocesan synod in Tricarico on 5 June 1800.

From 1805 to 1819 the see of Tricarico remained vacant. From 1806–1808, Naples was occupied by the French, and Joseph Bonaparte was made king, after Napoleon had deposed King Ferdinand IV. Joseph Bonaparte was succeeded by Joachim Murat from 1808 until the fall of Napoleon in 1815. Pope Pius VII was a prisoner of Napoleon in France from 1809 to 1815, and was both unable and unwilling to make new episcopal appointments. The French expelled all monks, nuns, and Jesuits from the kingdom, and closed the monasteries and convents; colleges of canons were also closed.

Following the extinction of the Napoleonic Kingdom of Italy, the Congress of Vienna authorized the restoration of the Papal States and the Kingdom of Naples. Since the French occupation had seen the abolition of many Church institutions in the Kingdom, as well as the confiscation of most Church property and resources, it was imperative that Pope Pius VII and King Ferdinand IV reach agreement on restoration and restitution. Ferdinand, however, was not prepared to accept the pre-Napoleonic situation, in which Naples was a feudal subject of the papacy. Neither was he prepared to accept the large number of small dioceses in his kingdom; following French intentions, he demanded the suppression of fifty dioceses. Lengthy, detailed, and acrimonious negotiations ensued. On 17 July 1816, King Ferdinand issued a decree, in which he forbade the reception of any papal document without prior reception of the royal "exequatur". This meant that prelates could not receive bulls of appointment, consecration, or installation without the king's permission.

A concordat was finally signed on 16 February 1818, and ratified by Pius VII on 25 February 1818. Ferdinand issued the concordat as a law on 21 March 1818. The re-erection of the dioceses of the kingdom and the ecclesiastical provinces took more than three years. The right of the king to nominate the candidate for a vacant bishopric was recognized, as in the Concordat of 1741, subject to papal confirmation (preconisation). On 27 June 1818, Pius VII issued the bull "De Ulteriore", in which the metropolitanate of Acerenza was restored, with Anglona e Tursi, Potenza, Tricarico, and Venosa as suffragans; the diocese of Matera was permanently suppressed and united to the Church of Acerenza.

The diocese of Tricarico was a suffragan of the newly constituted archdiocese of Acerenza and Matera from 1821 until 1954. On 2 July 1954, Pope Pius XII issued the bull "Acheronta et Matera", in which he revived the diocese of Matera as a metropolitan archbishopric with its own ecclesiastical province including the dioceses of Anglona-Turso and Tricarico as its suffragans. Following the Second Vatican Council, and in accordance with the norms laid out in the council's decree, "Christus Dominus" chapter 40, Pope Paul VI ordered a reorganization of the ecclesiastical provinces in southern Italy by the bull "Quo aptius" of 21 August 1976. The ecclesiastical provinces of Acerenza and of Matera were abolished, and a new province, that of Potenza, was created. The diocese of Tricarico became a suffragan of the metropolitanate of Potenza.

The current cathedral of Tricarico dates back to the 16–18th century; it was built on the pre-existing foundations of an earlier church, already dedicated to the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary, built in the 12th century. In order to keep the old medieval cathedral in repair, Cardinal Tommaso Brancaccio obtained from Pope Martin V an indulgence for persons visiting the cathedral and contributing to the fund for the maintenance of the fabric. The cathedral was administered by a Chapter composed of one, and then two dignities (the Archdeacon and the Cantor), and twelve canons. One of the canons was designated by the bishop as the pastor of the cathedral parish. There were also 30 hebdomidary priests appointed to say the daily Mass. In 1741, there were three dignities and eighteen canons. When Bishop Angelo succeeded to the diocese in 1411, he found the finances of the Chapter in such dire straits that he permanently diverted part of his own income from one of the gabelles to aid the prelates to live in some dignity.



Dalton, east North Yorkshire

Dalton is a village and civil parish in the Hambleton District of North Yorkshire, England. It is about south of Thirsk and near the A168 road. It mainly consists of farmland as well as an industrial estate. It has a population of 518.

The toponym is first recorded as "Deltone" in the Domesday Book of 1086. The name is derived from the Old English "dæl" "valley" and "tūn" "settlement", so means "valley settlement".

Dalton had 10.2 households in 1066 which is quite a small amount in comparison to other parishes according to the Domesday book. The total tax assessed is 5.2 geld units, which is quite large for a parish. The Lord in 1066 was called Bernwulf and the value to the lord was £4. The Lord as well as tenant-in-chief in 1086 was William of Percy and the value was £5. Dalton had 15 ploughlands, one mill, one church and four furlongs worth of woodland.

In 1086 Dalton was a berewick (outlying estate) of Topcliffe, and by the 15th century was known as a manor. Until the 19th century it remained a township of the large ancient parish of Topcliffe in the wapentake of Birdforth in the North Riding of Yorkshire. In 1866 it became a separate civil parish.

In 1870, John Marius Wilson recorded:
In 1890 Dalton was made up of 2,649 acres of land and 177 acres were covered in plantations. Some of it was elevated moorland and the rest was fertile land. A small ‘chapel of ease’ was created here in 1839 in which a service used to be held every second Sunday morning of the month, and every evening on all the other Sundays. In 1855 the Wesleyan Methodist Chapel was created which was described as “a very small and plain building”.

During the Second World War, RAF Dalton was used as an airfield by RAF Bomber Command. It was home to No.102 Squadron in November 1941. In 1943 it was allocated to No.6 Group Royal Canadian Air Force (RCAF).

In 1974 Dalton became part of the new county of North Yorkshire.

The distance from London to Dalton is . The closest railway station is Thirsk station at a distance of .

In 1881 the dominant occupation was in agriculture with 40 males in that profession. In 2011 this had changed to 32 males becoming Managers, Directors and Senior Officials in Dalton. In 1881 the main profession for females was domestic services or offices, by 2011 this had changed to 16 women being Managers and Senior professionals.

The average price of a property in North Yorkshire is £193,666. In the postcode region YO7 the average for all properties is £224,608. In 1881 there were 67 houses, by 1951 this had increased to 104 and then 10 years later, in 1961 decreased to 83. Between 1881 and 1901 there were six houses vacant and none being reconstructed, this means that many houses must have been built by 1951.

Currently, there are ten schools with a three-mile radius of Dalton, such as Topcliffe-pre school playgroup which is away. According to the 2009 Ofsted report, the ‘Overall effectiveness’ was given a score of 2. Primary schools include Cundall Manor Preparatory School, Sessay Church of England Voluntary Controlled Primary School and Queen Mary’s School.

Bernd Kannenberg

Bernhard "Bernd" Kannenberg (20 August 1942 – 13 January 2021) was a West German race walker who won the 50 km event at the 1972 Summer Olympics. He also competed in the 20 km at the 1972 and 1976 Games, but failed to finish. In 1972 Kannenberg became the first German athlete to walk 50 km within four hours; the same year he was awarded the Silbernes Lorbeerblatt. During his career he set five world records, and won six outdoor and four indoor West German titles.

Kannenberg was a professional soldier and trained at the sports school of the German Bundeswehr at Warendorf. After retiring from competitions, he coached the German race walking team.

Kannenberg was born in Koenigsberg (Eastern Prussia, from 1945, Kaliningrad). With his Grandma and cousine he was aboard the evacuation ship "Wilhelm Gustloff", when it was torpedoed by a russian submarine. He and his cousin were among the few survivors, while his Grandma died. In 1955, he emigrated with his family from Eastern Germany to West Germany.

Roman Catholic Diocese of Valence

The Diocese of Valence (–Die–Saint-Paul-Trois-Châteaux) (Latin: "Dioecesis Valentinensis (–Diensis–Sancti Pauli Tricastinorum)"; French: "Diocèse de Valence (–Die–Saint-Paul-Trois-Châteaux") is a Latin Church diocese of the Catholic Church in southern France. The contemporary diocese is co-extensive with the department of Drôme.

The Cathedral of Valence was originally dedicated to Saints Cornelius and Cyprianus (Bishops of Rome and of Carthage, both mid-third century martyrs), but in 1095, during his visit to France to rouse up the aristocracy for a Crusade to liberate the Holy Land, Pope Urban II rededicated the cathedral to Saint Apollinaris, one of Valence's sixth century bishops. The Cathedral had fourteen Canons, including a Dean, a Provost, the Archdeacon, a Theologian, and the Abbot of S. Felix.

In the Great Western Schism (1378–1417), the Bishops of Valence-et-Die were all appointed by and were loyal to the Popes of the Avignon Obedience.

Pope Pius VI, who had been taken prisoner and deported from Italy by troops of the French Directory, was imprisoned in the fortress of Valence. After six weeks he died there, on 29 August 1799. His body was buried in the chapel, and a month later, on First Consul Napoleon's orders, given a public funeral and buried in the town cemetery.

(" from 1275 to 1678 the diocese was united with the diocese of Dié")





Caraiman Peak

The Caraiman Peak is a mountain peak located in Romania, in the Bucegi Mountains of the Southern Carpathians. It has a height of 2,384 m. The nearest town is Buşteni.

Close to Caraiman peak lies the Heroes' Cross, a memorial of World War I. It was erected between 1926 and 1928, and was initiated by Queen Maria of Romania. The material needed for construction was carried up using a funicular, as well as carts carried by oxen. The monument's height is 29.5 meters and the arms' length is 14 meters. The cross was built at an altitude of 2291 m.

The cross is lit at night using 300 500 W bulbs. Until 1939, the lighting installation was powered by an electric generator located inside the base of the monument and was made up of only 120 bulbs. In 1939, it was connected to the national electrical network.


George William, Duke of Liegnitz

George William (), also known as George IV William (; 29 September 1660 – 21 November 1675) was the last Silesian duke of Legnica (Liegnitz) and Brzeg (Brieg) from 1672 until his death. He was the last male member of the Silesian Piast dynasty descending from Władysław II the Exile (1105–1159), as well as the last legitimate male member of the entire House of Piast.

George William was the eldest but only surviving son of Duke Christian of Legnica-Brzeg (1618–1672) by his wife Princess Louise of Anhalt-Dessau (1631–1680), a daughter of the Ascanian prince John Casimir of Anhalt-Dessau. He had three siblings:
As the only surviving son, George William was the sole heir to his father's possessions. Duke Christian of Legnica-Brzeg had spent many years in exile in Poland and in the Duchy of Prussia during the Thirty Years' War, after George William's grandfather Duke John Christian of Brieg had fallen out of favour with the Habsburg emperor Ferdinand II.

Duke Christian became sole ruler over the Silesian duchies of Legnica and Brzeg in 1664. After the abdication of King John II Casimir Vasa of Poland in 1668, he even put forward his candidacy for the Polish throne; to win the affection and support of the old nobility, he initially wanted to give his newborn son an old Piast name (like Mieszko or Bolesław); however, the Calvinist clergy of his duchy opposed this, maintaining that the idea could bring the return to paganism over Poland. The duke, however, saw to it that his son spoke Polish and wore Polish clothes.

The deaths in 1663 and 1664 of his paternal uncles Duke George III of Brzeg and Duke Louis IV of Legnica without surviving issue left him as the only heir of his father in the still vast Duchy of Legnica-Brzeg. As a result, since his early years, George William received a careful education. During his upbringing, he was put in the hands of the Anhalt-Bernburg count-marshal August Friedrich Bohne, and the personal doctor Henry Martini. During this first period of his education, he acquired an excellent knowledge of German, French and Latin, also understood Italian, Spanish and Polish; he was also educated in theology, philosophy, and rhetoric.

After his father's death in 1672, the then twelve-year-old George William succeeded him as Duke of Legnica and Brzeg; during his minority, the regency was exercised by his mother, Dowager Duchess Louise who held the towns of Wołów and Oława as her dower ("wittum"). Fearing claims raised by the Habsburg Emperor Leopold I in his capacity as ruler over the Crown of Bohemia, Duke Christian had devised by will that his son was formally under the tutelage of his maternal uncle Prince John George II of Anhalt-Dessau and the mighty Hohenzollern elector Frederick William of Brandenburg. The day before his father's death, Louise sent her son to study at the Viadrina University in Brandenburgian Frankfurt/Oder, considered as an act of mistrust by the Imperial court. On the other hand, the regency of the dowager duchess faced the opposition of the Protestant estates of Legnica-Brzeg, thanks to her increasingly open support for the Catholic faith; a major scandal occurred when the young duke's sister Karolina secretly married Frederick, a member of the aristocrat Catholic family of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Wiesenburg.

The Brandenburg elector reached an understanding with the Habsburg emperor, and in 1673 George William returned to Brzeg, where he received the homage by the estates. On 14 March 1675, the young duke could take formal possession of the government of his lands after he went to the Imperial court in Vienna, making his solemn homage to Emperor Leopold I, who confirmed his coming of age and the succession to his father's lands. Immediately after the beginning of George William's rule, Duchess Louise was forced to give up her area of Wołów. 

The announcements of the start of a good and prosperous government by George William were stopped with the sudden death of the duke on 21 November 1675. The cause of his death was an intense fever, developed shortly after his return from a hunt, the first sign of smallpox. The duke was buried in the church of St. John in Legnica, alongside his father, where his grieved mother had a mausoleum built.

Upon his death, the Duchy of Legnica-Brzeg reverted to Emperor Leopold as ruler over the Bohemian crown lands, which since 1526 were integral part of the Austrian Habsburg monarchy. Leopold took up the government by a "Landeshauptmann" deputy, despite the claims of George William's morganatic uncle Count August of Legnica, and had several Counter-Reformation measures implemented. Duchess Louise retained her lands of Oława until her death in 1680, when they were also incorporated into the Bohemian lands.

The independent Masovian Piasts had died out in 1526, while the Teschen (Cieszyn) line had become extinct in 1653. George William was therefore the last ruling member of all the Piast dynasty, which finally became extinct with the death of his only surviving sibling, Karolina, in 1707. The term "Piast dynasty" was first used by the Polish historian Adam Naruszewicz in his books "History of Poland", which he started in 1779. On George William's burial crypt a text was carved referring to him as the last of the Piast dukes of Silesia, who are since the 17th century referred to as "Silesian Piasts".

Patrilineal descent, descent from father to son, is the principle behind membership in royal houses, as it can be traced back through the generations.

George William, Duke of Liegnitz was the last legitimate male of the Piast dynasty. Descent before Mieszko I is partly fictional. This is the descent of the primary male heir.


Deighton, Hambleton

Deighton is a village and civil parish in the Hambleton District of North Yorkshire, England. It is about 6 miles north of Northallerton and near the A167 road.

A moated site at in Deighton is a scheduled ancient monument.

In the 2011 census, the population of Deighton (including Little Smeaton and Birkby) was 168.

James Cuthbert Jr.

James Cuthbert (June 4, 1769 – March 5, 1849) was a seigneur and political figure in Lower Canada.

He was born at Berthier in 1769, the son of seigneur James Cuthbert, and studied at the English College at Douai, France. He served in the 60th Regiment of the British Army, becoming lieutenant in 1797. Cuthbert inherited the seigneury of Berthier from his father in 1798. He was named justice of the peace for Trois-Rivières district in 1808. He served in the local militia, becoming lieutenant-colonel. He was elected to the Legislative Assembly of Lower Canada for Warwick in 1796 and served until 1811, when he was named to the Legislative Council. Cuthbert had run unsuccessfully for the same seat in the legislative assembly in 1792. At that time, he tried unsuccessfully to have the election of Pierre-Paul Margane de Lavaltrie overturned because Lavaltrie was not a British subject. In 1802, Cuthbert married Marie-Claire, the daughter of judge John Fraser. He married his cousin Mary-Louise-Amable Cairns in 1814. Cuthbert was named to the Special Council that governed the province after the Lower Canada Rebellion.

He was elected a member of the American Antiquarian Society in 1822. During his life he owned 3 slaves in Canada.

He died at his manor at Berthier in 1849.

His son Edward Octavian became a member of the Canadian House of Commons. His brother Ross also represented Warwick in the legislative assembly.

Emborough

Emborough is a village and civil parish north of Shepton Mallet, and north east of Wells, in the Mendip district of Somerset, England. It adjoins the parish of Ston Easton. It is situated on the B3139 between Radstock and Wells, just off the A37 road.

The name Emborough means "smooth hill".

The parish was part of the hundred of Chewton.

The parish includes two manor houses occupied by the Hippisley or Hippisley Coxe families since Elizabethan times. They bought the manor in 1570. The current Manor Farmhouse is medieval in origin, with some early 17th century alteration, and further work in the 19th century.

The parish meeting has responsibility for local issues, but does not set a precept, nor have any assets, nor costs. The parish meeting evaluates local planning applications and works with the local police, district council officers, and neighbourhood watch groups on matters of crime, security, and traffic. The parish meeting's role includes consulting with the district council on the maintenance, repair, and improvement of highways, drainage, footpaths, public transport, and street cleaning. Conservation matters (including trees and listed buildings) and environmental issues are also the responsibility of the council.

The village falls within the Non-metropolitan district of Mendip, which was formed on 1 April 1974 under the Local Government Act 1972, having previously been part of Shepton Mallet Rural District, which is responsible for local planning and building control, local roads, council housing, environmental health, markets and fairs, refuse collection and recycling, cemeteries and crematoria, leisure services, parks, and tourism.

Somerset County Council is responsible for running the largest and most expensive local services such as education, social services, libraries, main roads, public transport, policing and fire services, trading standards, waste disposal and strategic planning.

It is also part of the Somerton and Frome county constituency represented in the House of Commons of the Parliament of the United Kingdom. It elects one Member of Parliament (MP) by the first past the post system of election. It was part of the South West England constituency of the European Parliament prior to Britain leaving the European Union in January 2020, which elected six MEPs using the d'Hondt method of party-list proportional representation.

Emborough is close to the Emborough Quarries Site of Special Scientific Interest.
Emborough Pond (also known as Lechmere Water) is a lake just south of the village. It was originally a much smaller mill pond. It was held by monks on a 51-year lease from 1525 who stocked it with bream, tench, perch and roach, as they were not allowed to eat meat but were allowed to eat fish. In 1533 locals came and took the fish then throwing down the dam. It is now used for Carp angling.

The parish Church of the Blessed Virgin Mary is medieval in origin but underwent extensive renovation in the 18th century. The inside includes a Georgian gallery and a cast iron "Gurney Stove". It has been designated as a Grade II* listed building.
The church is in the care of the Churches Conservation Trust.

Brisbane Bus Lines

Brisbane Bus Lines is an Australian bus operator in the northern suburbs of Brisbane. It operates one service under contract to the Queensland Government under the Translink banner.

Brisbane Bus Lines was formed in the mid-1950s when Bill Mitchell commenced operating the Tamborine bus route between Brisbane and the Gold Coast. At this time he also began a charter service under the name Charter Coaches. In 1965 the business was renamed Brisbane Bus Lines and began to operate school and urban passenger services. School routes in the Pine Rivers Shire were acquired and the charter activities sold.

Brisbane Bus Lines previously operated services from Westfield Strathpine to Roma Street in central Brisbane. Services were also operated from Ferny Grove station to Brookside Shopping Centre via Mitchelton and Ferny Hills.<ref name="ABP12/1">"Brisbane Bus Lines Today" "Australian Bus Panorama" issue 12/1 August 1996 page 12</ref>

Today it operates services between Ferny Grove station and Samford, Dayboro and Strathpine. Most of its activities are based on transporting school students.

A coach service was also operated between Brisbane and Murgon. It previously operated to Biloela and Bundaberg. In August 2014, the four times weekly second service was withdrawn and the remaining daily service curtailed to Caboolture station with passengers required to transfer to a Queensland Rail train service into Brisbane. This ceased on 29 November 2014.

As at December 2022, the fleet consisted of 76 buses and coaches.

Brisbane Bus Lines operate depots in Dayboro, Enoggera and Samford.


East Harlsey

East Harlsey is a village and civil parish in the Hambleton District of North Yorkshire, England. It is about west of Ingleby Arncliffe and the A19 and north-east of Northallerton. The population of the village as measured at the 2011 census was 281.

Within the village there is a pub called the 'Cat and Bagpipes'.

Harlsey Hall manor house is in the centre of the village: the manor was the property of the Lascelles family from the 11th century until 1654, when it passed to the Trotter Bannerman family, and from 1825, to the Maynard family.

Comedian Roy 'Chubby' Brown has a home at Harlsey Manor, to the east of East Harlsey.

East Harlsey has a cricket team, the first record of which is from 1908. The club provides teams for the Langbaurgh League and Northallerton and District Evening League, as well as competing in a number of local cup competitions.



East Rounton

East Rounton is a village and civil parish in the Hambleton District of North Yorkshire, England. It is about west of the A19 and north-east of Northallerton. It is on the River Wiske and West Rounton is nearby. The population taken at the 2011 Census was less than 100. Details are included in the civil parish of West Rounton.

East Rounton was the site of Rounton Grange, a country house designed by the architect Philip Webb in 1872 to 1876 for the industrialist Sir Isaac Lowthian Bell. It was demolished in 1953.

The area was named “Rantune” in the Domesday survey of 1086, valued at £2, and with The Lord being the King, William the Conqueror.
The Church of St Lawrence is thought to probably date back to the 13th century, but at least to 1483. It was restored by Sir Isaac Lowthian Bell in 1884. In a field to the north of the church are the remains of the medieval village. The village appears on maps of 1577 and 1611, but is absent from later maps of 1645 and 1720.
There is an 18th century bridge over the River Wiske, where an old inn used to stand; the Black Horse.

In 1866, Sir Isaac Lowthian Bell, a scientist and ironmaster (Dorman Long – Middlesbrough) and early patron of the Arts and Crafts movement, bought the estate.
Architect Philip Webb was commissioned by Lowthian Bell to design Rounton Grange to replace an existing farmhouse. Building commenced in 1872 and completed in 1876, creating a “landmark of nineteenth century domestic architecture” in the view of "Country Life" magazine. William Morris and Sir Edward Burne-Jones were engaged as interior designers. Additional buildings were added by Lowthian Bell's son, Sir Hugh Bell, using George Jack as architect, including the East Lodge in 1909 linked by outside electric lights to the Grange.

The Rounton Village Hall, built in 1907 by Tarrans of Hutton Rudby, funded by Sir Hugh & Lady Bell, now includes a War Memorial at the front. The hall is adjoined on either side by three cottages (The Square). It was used during the First World War as a hospital for wounded soldiers, and is still in use today by local residents.
With two sets of Death Duties suffered in the early 1900s, the Grange became too expensive to maintain. It was offered to the National Trust, but was declined due to lack of an endowment. The Bell family moved to Mount Grace Priory in 1926 and the contents of the Grange were sold in 1932. The house was demolished in 1953 and the gardens abandoned.
Although the Grange no longer exists, various estate buildings still do, built in the Arts & Crafts style and mostly designed by Philip Webb. These include the Old Lodge, Home Farm, Garden House and walled gardens, the Coach House (used to hold the coaches and a horse-drawn steam-driven fire engine), the Motor House, Keeper's Cottage (home of the gamekeeper to the Grange) and Rounton House, the latter designed by George Jack (Philip Webb's assistant) in 1905 for the use of the estate manager. Pear Tree Cottage was originally the Rest House for sick or injured estate workers.

The Old School House was the village school, opened in 1877 but closed in 1967. Opposite the Village Hall, The School House was the residence of the headmistress. The Old Post Office was the village shop and post office / telegram office, closing in 1979.
A stained-glass window memorial to a local resident, Gertrude Bell, granddaughter of Lowthian Bell, historian and extensive traveller, is included in the Church of St Lawrence. It was made by Douglas Strachan and depicts Magdalen College, Oxford and Khadimain, Baghdad. Miss Bell was the subject of a film in 2015, "Queen of the Desert", and of a documentary, "Letters from Baghdad", the following year.


Northeast Minneapolis Arts Association

The Northeast Minneapolis Arts Association (or NEMAA) is a 501(c)(3) non-profit organization of working artists and allies based in Northeast Minneapolis, in the U.S. state of Minnesota. 

Founded by a small collective of artists in 1995, today NEMAA has more than 1,000 members including artists, students, community friends, non-profit organizations, art galleries, and business members. NEMAA's most visible event is Art-A-Whirl, the largest annual open artist studio tour in the U.S., held since 1996. During the event artists open their studios to the public, and other performing, visual and educational groups have special art events all around the neighborhoods of Northeast. In 2017, more than 600 artists in 50 locations participated.

NEMAA publishes an annual Artist Directory and Guide, a year-round guide for visitors to Northeast Minneapolis, Art-A-Whirl, and other arts happenings. Since 2019, NEMAA also produces the NEMAA 10x10 online member art show and fundraiser. In addition, NEMAA promotes members, artists, and events year-round, including monthly open studio events.

NEMAA was instrumental in establishing the Northeast Minneapolis Arts District in 2003, with the Mississippi River on the west, Broadway Street on the south, Central Avenue on the east, and 27th Avenue on the north.


Nannygate (disambiguation)

Nannygate was a 1993 political controversy in the United States wherein the nomination of Zoë Baird, and near-nomination of Kimba Wood, for U.S. Attorney General were withdrawn due to the hiring of illegal aliens as nannies or the failure to pay taxes for them

Nannygate may also refer to similar affairs:

Faceby

Faceby is a small village and civil parish in North Yorkshire, England. It is at the north-west corner of the North York Moors and near Stokesley.

The village is located on the north-western edge of the North York Moors National Park and is south of the A172 road, and is from the A19 to the west and from Stokesley to the north-east.

The name of the village derives from the Old Norse meaning "Feit's Settlement", with Feit being a personal name. It has one pub (The Sutton Arms), a village hall, and a 12th-century church, St Mary Magdalene. Buses run to Northallerton and Stokesley three or four times a day.

Whorlton, North Yorkshire

Whorlton is a hamlet and civil parish in the Hambleton District of North Yorkshire, England. It is very near Swainby and the A19, and 6 miles south west of Stokesley. Features include the remains of Whorlton Castle and the Church of the Holy Rood.

Whorlton Castle was built by Robert de Meynell as a typical 12th century motte and bailey Norman castle. A gatehouse was added in the 14th century. The only remains visible today are the grade I listed gatehouse and traces of the grade II* listed undercrofts (or cellars) of the main building. Due to vandalism access to the site is restricted.

Equestrian at the 2006 Asian Games

Equestrian and Equestrian Endurance were contested at the 2006 Asian Games in Doha, Qatar. Equestrian was contested from 4 to 14 December.

In this sport, men and women compete side by side, against one another. There were three equestrian disciplines: dressage, eventing and jumping. Endurance events was contested on 14 December on Mesaieed Endurance Course.

A total of 163 athletes from 22 nations competed in equestrian at the 2006 Asian Games:


West Rounton

West Rounton is a village and civil parish in North Yorkshire, England. It is north of Northallerton. East Rounton is about away across the fields.

The village is mentioned in the Domesday Book as "Rontun" or "Runtune", and as having 75 ploughlands and of meadows. The name "Rounton" derives from the Old English "hrung", and "tūn" (rung-town). The first part refers to a type of bridge made with poles, often built over marshy ground. Historically, the village was in the wapentake of Allertonshire, today being in the Hambleton District.

The nearest railway station was just outside the village (), which opened in June 1852, and closed in September 1939. The modern civil parish consists largely of agricultural land covering over , with the River Wiske flowing westwards across the parish.

The church of St Oswald dates from the 12th century and was completely rebuilt in 1860 by architect James Pritchett. It is a grade II* listed building. Historically the church was dedicated to St James, a listing from 1835 shows it as St James in the parish of Rouncton, West.

West Rounton had one pub, the Horseshoe Inn, but this closed down after trade suffered during the COVID-19 pandemic lockdowns. It is also home to Whitegates Nursery & Stamfrey Farm Organics which is known for its clotted cream products.

2008 AFC Challenge Cup

The 2008 AFC Challenge Cup football tournament was organised by AFC and was hosted by India.The tournament was played from 30 July – 13 August 2008. India won the final against Tajikistan. India was also the winner of the fair play award and the India captain Bhaichung Bhutia won the most valuable player award.

Chinese Taipei was originally designated the host, but could not guarantee it would meet the AFC's standards for hosting the tournament. Thailand was first chosen as host but withdrew due to lack of time to prepare. The Philippines also was to take over as host with matches to be played in Bacolod in May 2008 but the plan failed to materialized.

The winners of the 2008 and 2010 competitions will qualify directly for the 2011 Asian Cup. As a result, India qualified for the AFC Asian Cup, the first time since 1984.This competition is exclusive to members of the "emerging nations" class of the AFC. However, in the previous edition, Bangladesh and India were invited from the "developing nations" class – Bangladesh actually hosting the tournament, and India sending their under-20 team. India and Bangladesh have again been invited for the 2008 edition of the tournament, along with North Korea, Myanmar and Turkmenistan who are also a part of the "developing nations" class.

Laos withdrew from the competition on 2 May 2008.
Palestine withdrew from the competition on 14 May 2008.

Due to the poor conditions of the pitch at Lal Bahadur Shastri Stadium, the AFC moved the majority of the matches to another venue. It was decided that ten matches would be played at the Gachibowli Athletic Stadium, and two at the LBS Stadium. Due to incessant rains in Hyderabad in the days leading up to the final, the AFC changed the venue of the final and the third place play-off to the Ambedkar Stadium in New Delhi.

Qualification saw the top team from each of the four qualification groups qualify for the tournament proper, bringing the total number of participating teams in the centralized finals to eight. In addition, India (tournament hosts), Korea DPR, Turkmenistan and Myanmar qualified automatically.

Mongolia and Timor-Leste decided not to take part.

Bold Type – qualified teams, "Italics" – withdrawn teams
The following teams qualified for the final tournament:

All times are Indian Standard Time (IST) – 

Where two or more teams end the group stage with the same number of points, their ranking is determined by the following criteria:

<onlyinclude></onlyinclude>

<onlyinclude></onlyinclude>







Well, North Yorkshire

Well is a small village and civil parish in North Yorkshire, England. It is about 4 miles south of Bedale, near Snape. The village is situated at the edge of a limestone escarpment that overlooks the Vale of Mowbray. The population recorded by the 2011 Census was 230.

The 'well' of Well is a spring which, along with several other springs, feeds the beck running through the village. The well lends its name to the village, described as "Wella" in the Domesday Book. The name "Wella" is Old English, literally meaning "well" or "stream". The village used to be in the wapentake of Hang East.

The village has an old school with a schoolhouse. The Old School, originally the workhouse school, was founded in 1605 by Thomas Earl of Exeter and his wife Dorothy, daughter of John Neville.  The school was endowed with £30 a year for the maintenance of a master and mistress and 12 poor girls from Well and Snape. In 1788, it was converted into two single sex free schools, which each house in the village could send a boy and a girl between the ages of 6 and 13, with the option to pay for additional places.  The school was rebuilt in 1867 and in 1890 had space for 80 pupils. 

Built in 1722, the Old School House is Grade II listed principally owing to its 18th century roof structure, inglenook fireplace, and having been built by the same charitable trust. Today, they are both owned by "The Neville Trust", a charity named after an influential family from the Tudor period. In addition, there is a small playing field with two swings and a small football pitch. As these facilities are rarely used by the children in the village, the trust is now planning to sell all assets.

The village still has four almshouses called "St Michael's Cottages" with their own chapel. There is a family-run pub called The Milbank Arms, which serves food and drinks.

There is a Methodist Chapel, which holds regular services, and a village institute, which is used for children's parties, coffee mornings and other events. Every August, the village hosts a scarecrow trail in which many of the houses create a scarecrow and give it a name; each house then has a number, and members of the community have to work out which name belongs to which scarecrow. The winner receives a cash prize. The competition usually runs from mid-August to early September.

Well also has a number of walks, with views across the area; on a clear day, Roseberry Topping is visible.

The Church of St Michael the Archangel is a Grade I listed, 12th century structure. A place of worship was noted in the Domesday Book, but the present structure dates from the 12th and 14th centuries, being built by Sir Ralph Neville. The church contains a portion of Roman mosaic found in 1859.


Putyatin

Putyatin may refer to:

Tupí

Tupí, also known as "formatge de tupí", is a fermented cheese of a certain area of the Pyrenees and Pre-Pyrenees made from cows' or sheep's milk.

It is a cheese traditionally prepared in the mountainous Pallars region, as well as in the Cerdanya and the Alt Urgell. Together with the "llenguat", another fermented cheese of the same area, it is one of the few varieties of cheese of true Catalan origin.

Tupí cheese was home made in rural households according to old custom. It is quite soft and creamy, containing a high proportion of fat. Owing to its strong taste it is usually eaten with farmer-style bread along with strong wine. It can also be used as an ingredient for the preparation of sauces.

Its preparation includes sheep's or cow's milk and "aiguardent" or another similarly strong liquor. The fresh cheese is pressed by hand until it takes a ball shape and all liquid is drained from it. Then it is put inside of a "tupí" glazed ceramic jar and the liquor is added. The mixture is then stirred from time to time the first four or five days after preparation.

Following the preparation process the jar is covered and kept in a cool and dry place for a minimum of two months during which the cheese ferments, reaching the desired consistency. Some households add olive oil to the cheese in the jar after fermentation.



Welbury

Welbury is a village and civil parish in the Hambleton district of North Yorkshire, England. It is about south of Appleton Wiske and north of Northallerton.

The village is mentioned in the Domesday book (1086) as having 6 Geld units for taxable purposes and King William being the Lord. The village was originally in the Union of Northallerton which was in the Wapentake of Birdforth. In 1319, the village and fields were destroyed by marauding Scots on their way to meet the English at what would become the Battle of Myton.

Since about 1800, the manor of Welbury has been held by the Earl of Harewood.

St Leonard Church is 9th century and had renovations in 1815 and 1877. It is in the parish of Welbury in the Diocese of York.

Welbury used to have its own railway station just south of the village built by the Leeds and Thirsk Railway (later the Leeds Northern Railway) which later became part of the North Eastern Railway. The station opened in 1852 and closed to passengers in 1954. The line is still open and is served by Trans-Pennine expresses between Middlesbrough and Manchester Airport via York and Leeds.

Welbury has a village pub, The Duke of Wellington, which gives its land over to the welly wanging championships.


Roman Catholic Diocese of Valleyfield

The Roman Catholic Diocese of Valleyfield () is a Catholic diocese in Quebec and a suffragan of the Archdiocese of Montreal. It was erected in 1892.

The diocese, which is based in the western suburbs of Montreal, features approximately 201,000 baptized Catholics. Parishioners are served by 48 priests, 17 deacons, 31 religious brothers, and 76 religious sisters. In 2008, the diocese consolidated its 63 parishes into 24.






Luigi Poggi

Luigi Poggi (25 November 1917 – 4 May 2010) was an Italian prelate of the Catholic Church who worked in the diplomatic service of the Holy See from 1946 to 1994, as an archbishop and apostolic nuncio from 1965. After serving as nuncio in several African countries and Peru, he became the Vatican's principal emissary to the Communist countries of Eastern Europe as Popes Paul VI and John Paul II sought renewed engagement with that region. He became a cardinal in 1994. He ended his career in Rome, as Apostolic Nuncio to Italy and then as head of the Vatican Secret Archives and the Vatican Library.

Born in Piacenza, Poggi did all his studies prior to priestly ordination in that city. He entered the Pontifical Ecclesiastical Academy in 1944 to prepare a career in the diplomatic service of the Holy See. Poggi then joined the Secretariat of State. Poggi headed the mission to investigate the legal status of titular churches in Tunisia in 1963 and 1964.

On 3 April 1965, Pope Paul VI named him a titular archbishop and Apostolic Delegate to Central Africa, the region that later became the modern states of Cameroon, Chad, Congo-Brazzaville, Gabon, and the Central African Republic. He received his episcopal consecration from Cardinal Amleto Cicognani on 9 May 1965. As the Vatican established relationships with governments in the region, he was given additional titles: Apostolic Pro-Nuncio to Cameroon on 31 October 1966 Apostolic Pro-Nuncio to Gabon on 31 October 1967, and Apostolic Pro-Nuncio to the Central African Republic on 4 November 1967.

On 21 May 1969, he was named Apostolic Nuncio to Peru.

Pope Paul VI used Poggi in his "Ostpolitik", which aimed to improve Vatican relations with the Communist-ruled nations of the Warsaw Pact. On 1 August 1973, Pope Paul assigned him a special role as a nuncio responsible for improving relations with Poland, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, Rumania and Bulgaria. Early in the pontificate of Pope John Paul II, Poggi, an expert in Polish politics, was sent first to Warsaw and then to Moscow. He later visited Prague.

On 7 February 1975, Pope Paul named him to lead a special delegation to Poland.

Poggi's final assignment in the diplomatic service was as Apostolic Nuncio to Italy on 19 April 1986.

In 1992, Poggi became Archivist and Librarian of the Holy Roman Church, positions he resigned as required when he turned eighty.

He was made Cardinal-Deacon of Santa Maria in Domnica on 26 November 1994. On 26 February 2002 he became Cardinal Protodeacon, the most senior cardinal of the rank deacon, a role with ceremonial duties during a papal conclave and inauguration. After ten years as a cardinal deacon he took the option to be elevated to Cardinal-Priest of San Lorenzo in Lucina on 24 February 2005, just weeks before the death of Pope John Paul.

He died in Rome on 4 May 2010.


Bristol (UK Parliament constituency)

Bristol was a two-member constituency, used to elect members to the House of Commons in the Parliaments of England (to 1707), Great Britain (1707–1800), and the United Kingdom (from 1801). The constituency existed until Bristol was divided into single member constituencies in 1885.

The historic port city of Bristol is located in what is now the South West Region of England. It straddles the border between the historic geographical counties of Gloucestershire and Somerset. It was usually accounted as a Gloucestershire borough in the later part of the 19th and the 20th centuries.

The parliamentary borough of Bristol was represented in Parliament from the 13th century, as one of the most important population centres in the Kingdom. Namier and Brooke comment that in 1754 the city was the second largest in the Kingdom and had the third largest electorate for an urban seat.

From the 1885 United Kingdom general election the city was divided into four single member seats. These were Bristol East, Bristol North, Bristol South and Bristol West.

The use of Roman numerals in the list below denotes different politicians of the same name, not that the individuals concerned would have used the Roman numerals as part of their name.

Non Partisan denotes that the politician concerned is not known to have been associated with a party (not necessarily that he was not). Whilst Whig and Tory societies in the city continued to nominate candidates in the last half of the 18th century, the electoral labels used in Bristol had very little to do with what the MPs did in national politics.

Notes:-

During the existence of this constituency, Bristol was a city with the status of being a county of itself. That meant that the city was not subject to the administration of the officials of the geographic counties in which it was situated. In electoral terms it meant that the voters for the parliamentary borough included those qualified on the same 40 shilling freeholder franchise as that for a county constituency. Other electors qualified as freemen of the borough. These were the ancient right franchises, applicable to Bristol, preserved by the Reform Act 1832, which also introduced a broader occupation franchise for all borough constituencies.

Bristol was a fairly partisan constituency in the eighteenth century with two rival clubs - the Union Club for the Whigs and the Steadfast Society for the Tories.

The bloc vote electoral system was used in two seat elections and first past the post for single member by-elections. Each voter had up to as many votes as there were seats to be filled. Votes had to be cast by a spoken declaration, in public, at the hustings (until the secret ballot was introduced in 1872).

Namier and Brooke, in "The House of Commons 1754-1790", estimated the electorate of Bristol to number about 5,000. When registration of electors was introduced in 1832 the city had 10,315 names on the electoral register.

"Note on percentage change calculations:" Where there was only one candidate of a party in successive elections, for the same number of seats, change is calculated on the party percentage vote. Where there was more than one candidate, in one or both successive elections for the same number of seats, then change is calculated on the individual percentage vote.

"Note on sources:" The information for the election results given below is taken from Sedgwick 1715–1754, Namier and Brooke 1754–1790, Stooks Smith 1790-1832 and from Craig thereafter. Where Stooks Smith gives additional information or differs from the other sources this is indicated in a note after the result.
























 

 


 










Happy Day (film)

Yawm Sa'id (, "Happy Day") is a 1939 Egyptian drama film directed by Mohammed Karim and starring Egyptian actor and musician Mohamed Abdel Wahab. This was also the first movie that Faten Hamama, who was only eight years old then, acted in.

Abdel Wahab plays the role of a young man who is unlucky to be fired from his job. He meets a beautiful lady and falls in love with her. The lady's parents do not approve of the man. The young man earns a good reputation and becomes famous and a rich lady, secretly having a crush for him, asks him for music lessons, only to get closer to him. The rich lady discovers that he is in love with another woman and tries to ruin their relationship, but fails and the lovers remain together. After what happens, the lady's parents are convinced of the man's loyalty and love so they accept him as her husband.


Richard Harrington (actor)

Richard Harrington (born 12 March 1975) is a Welsh actor.

Harrington was born in Gurnos and brought up in Heolgerrig, Merthyr Tydfil. Harrington speaks Welsh as a second language; he came from an English-speaking family but studied in a Welsh Medium school in Merthyr. He has said that filming "Y Gwyll" improved his fluency significantly.

Harrington has two children with a former girlfriend and two with his partner Hannah Daniel, with whom he lives in Crystal Palace, London.

Harrington took part in the 2012 and 2013 Snowdonia Marathon alongside his friend and fellow actor Mark Lewis Jones. They both ran Marathon des Sables in 2014.

Harrington has had starring roles in the Welsh show "Hinterland" (known as "Y Gwyll" in Welsh), "Bleak House", Jimmy McGovern's "Gunpowder, Treason & Plot", and Gavin Claxton's comedy feature film "The All Together". He has also had roles in "Coronation Street", "Spooks", "Casualty", "Holby City", "Hustle", "Dalziel and Pascoe", "Silent Witness", "Lark Rise to Candleford, and Poldark." He won a BAFTA Cymru Award for his portrayal of a young gay hustler in the BBC film "Dafydd", part of the "Wales Playhouse" programme.

On stage, Harrington has toured with Fiction Factory/Y Cwmni's productions of Ed Thomas's plays "House of America", "Gas Station Angel" and "Stone City Blue". He also appeared in the 1997 film version of "House of America".

In 2015, Harrington won another BAFTA Cymru Award for his role as DCI Tom Matthias in "Y Gwyll" / "Hinterland".

In April 2017, Harrington presented the BBC Two Wales programme "Richard Harrington: My Grandfather's War", in which he followed the journey his grandfather had made through Spain in 1937 in order to fight against fascism in the Spanish Civil War.

In 2018 he appeared at the National Theatre in London in "Home I'm Darling", a co-production with Theatr Clwyd.

In February 2021, speaking of the first year of the COVID-19 pandemic, Harrington revealed that he had worked as a Deliveroo driver to supplement his income during lockdown, due to the lack of work.

Theatre


Warlaby

Warlaby is a small village and civil parish in the Hambleton District of North Yorkshire, England. The population of the civil parish taken at the 2011 Census was less than 100. Details are included in the civil parish of Ainderby Steeple. In 2015, North Yorkshire County Council estimated the population to be around 50 people. It is near the A684 and Morton-on-Swale. It is west of Northallerton.

The village is mentioned in the Domesday Book as having 75 ploughlands. the name derives from Old English and is believed to be from "Wærlaf's By", a personal name.

Robert Shavlakadze

Robert Shavlakadze (; , 1 April 1933 – 4 March 2020) was a Georgian high jumper. He competed for the Soviet Union at the 1960 and 1964 Olympics and finished in first and fifth place, respectively. He also won a bronze medal at the 1962 European Championships.

Domestically Shavlakadze won only one Soviet title, in 1964, finishing second in 1959, 1960 and 1962. After retiring from competitions he worked as an athletics coach, in Georgia and Congo. From 1981 to 1993 he was professor of physical education at the Agricultural University of Georgia. Later he became member of the Georgian Olympic Committee.

Thornton-le-Beans

Thornton-le-Beans is a village and civil parish in the Hambleton District of North Yorkshire, England. It is on the A168 road and south of Northallerton.

It is in the Thornton's electoral ward for district elections and the District Councillor is Bob Baker. The population of this electoral ward taken at the 2011 Census was 1,852. The village is currently in the Thirsk and Malton Parliamentary constituency, whose incumbent is Kevin Hollinrake.

The village has one pub called "The Crosby" behind which there is a campsite. In 2007 the Pub won "Best Pub Grub" in the Flavours of Hambleton Awards. There is a Methodist Chapel at the east end of the village and a Chapel of Ease at the west end. The graveyard looks over the Vale of York. The author Bill Bryson famously stated in his book Notes From a Small Island that he wants to be buried in Thornton-le-Beans, due to the oddness of the name.

The town's odd name is derived from the common place name 'Thornton', meaning a farm with thorn bushes. This farm had beans grown upon it. In 1534 it was called Thornton-in-Fabis, the Latin for Thornton-le-Beans.


Milhous

Milhous(e) may refer to:



Christophe de Thou

Christophe de Thou (1508 – 1 November 1582) was an eminent French advocate, and the First President of the Parlement of Paris.

De Thou became Président in 1554, and Premier Président on 14 December 1562, of the Parlement de Paris. He also served as chancellor to the Duke of Anjou and Duke of Alençon, and advisor to Henry II of France, Charles IX of France, and Henry III of France.

De Thou was a member of a respected family from Champagne. He was son of Augustin de Thou (d. 1544) and Claude de Thou (d 1523), also Président of the Parlement de Paris, and brother to Nicolas de Thou, the Bishop of Chartres. His son, Jacques Auguste de Thou (1553–1617), became a noted French historian. He was also the husband of Jacqueline de Tuleu and father of Anne de Thou and Jacques Auguste de Thou.


Bob McIntyre (motorcyclist)

Robert MacGregor McIntyre (28 November 1928 – 15 August 1962) was a Scottish motorcycle racer. The first rider to achieve an average speed of for one lap of the Snaefell Mountain Course in 1957, McIntyre is also remembered for his five motorcycle Grand Prix wins which included three wins at the Isle of Man TT races, and four victories in the North West 200. He died nine days after injuries sustained racing at Oulton Park, Cheshire, England in August 1962.

McIntyre was born in Scotstoun, Glasgow. He entered competition in 1948 on his only transport, an Ariel Red Hunter, and was soon competing in off-road scrambles. After a few seasons he began road racing, but the roads were not always well surfaced. McIntyre rode a BSA at Balado Airfield near Kinross. The concrete track had patches of loose gravel, and he won three of the four races he entered.

For 1952 he rode a BSA to second in the Isle of Man Junior Clubmans TT, averaging on his fastest lap. A long association with the Isle of Man Mountain Circuit had begun. Later that year McIntyre returned to win the Manx Junior (350cc) and come second in the Manx Senior (500cc) riding the same AJS 7R in both classes.

In 1953, following some English National short circuit wins, McIntyre went to the North West 200 for his first International win on an AJS 7R in the 350 cc class. Despite having to retire at the TT that year, his performance was noticed by AJS, and he joined that team for the 1953 Grands Prix World championship. The only win was at Pau in France, there was a third at the Ulster Grand Prix, and he was in the first six placings for the Netherlands, Switzerland and Belgium. In the 1954 Isle of Man Senior TT McIntyre came 14th on an AJS.

AJS pulled out of racing, and McIntyre was soon riding the 'Dustbin' faired Potts Norton, and winning. The TT looked to be within reach, and in the 1955 Isle of Man Junior TT he did lead for four of the seven laps, but brake overheating and suspension problems forced him to slow, allowing Bill Lomas on a Moto Guzzi to go on to victory, with McIntyre second. In the Senior he managed fifth, with an average of , very good for a private entrant among works teams. Giulio Carcano offered him a Guzzi ride after, but he did not accept.

He continued to ride the 'Dustbin' faired Norton for Joe Potts, from Bellshill near Glasgow, and continued to win races other than the TT. The 1956 TT saw retirements with mechanical problems.

In 1957, owing to personal intervention by injured Gilera works rider Geoff Duke, McIntyre was offered a ride on the four cylinder Gileras for the Isle of Man TT. Race week began with the Junior TT. He broke the lap record with a and his race average was . In celebration of the Golden Jubilee, the Senior was run over eight laps, a race of . The Gileras had pannier fuel tanks built into the side of the fairings to carry extra fuel. The extra fuel weight didn't stop him from making a first lap. The second lap saw , and the fourth lap was the fastest at . He caught up to, and overtook 1956 World Champion, John Surtees who was riding an MV Agusta 500. McIntyre went on to win, after racing for three hours, two minutes and fifty-seven seconds. This was McIntyre's best TT.

The 1957 World Championship looked to be within reach, but a crash at Assen, in the Dutch TT meant he was out of action for a couple of months. He did come second in the 500 cc Ulster Grand Prix, and won the 350 cc Nations Grand Prix at Monza. His teammate Libero Liberati won the 500 cc World Championship that year, with McIntyre coming second. McIntyre was third in the 350 cc World Championship as well.

At the end of 1957 the Italian teams quit Grand Prix racing citing increasing costs. In November 1957, with racing over, McIntyre rode a 350 cc Gilera racer around the banked circuit at Monza in an attempt to break the one-hour speed record, and he averaged on the bumpy Monza surface. This record was not bettered until 1964, by Mike Hailwood at 144.8 on an MV Agusta, on the track at Daytona.

In the 1961 Isle of Man TT Lightweight race McIntyre raised the lap record to , and had a strong lead, when his engine seized, ending his race. Riding a Norton in the Senior TT he came second. He won the 1961 250cc Ulster Grand Prix. In the 1962 Isle of Man Lightweight TT, he raised the lap record to 99.61, and then retired with electrical problems. He also rode in Grand Prix races on Honda and Bianchi, making the podium in the Netherlands, Belgium, and East Germany.

In 1962 McIntyre finished second in the Spanish and French Grands Prix, while he had a non-start in the 500 Senior TT and mechanical problems in both the 250 and 350 cc events.

He went on to win the Belgium GP at the Spa-Francorchamps circuit in the Ardennes, his last victory on the World stage.

McIntyre still competed in non-championship events, and it was at one such event at Oulton Park, Cheshire in August 1962 that he won the 250 cc race, and then started in the 500 cc race on his Manx Norton. After a bad start in poor conditions, he fought his way to the front before aquaplaning across a stream of water, losing control and crashing into a post holding an advertising sign, sustaining serious head injuries. After nine days in hospital he died.

In 2017, Michael Dunlop recreated McIntyre's achievement with a parade/demonstration on the TT course, at a similar speed with a 100-mph lap on a replica 1957 Gilera, and wearing period clothing.



Charles Cumming

Charles Cumming (born 1971) is a British writer of spy fiction and a screenwriter.

Cumming was born in 1971, in Ayr, Scotland, the son of Ian Cumming (b. 1938) and Caroline Pilkington (b. 1943).

He was educated at Ludgrove School (1979–1984), Eton College (1985–1989) and the University of Edinburgh (1990–1994), where he earned a first class honours degree in English Literature.

In 1995, Cumming was approached for recruitment by the United Kingdom's Secret Intelligence Service (MI6) but did not go on to work for them.

Cumming's first novel, "A Spy by Nature", was published in the UK in June 2001. The novel's hero, Alec Milius, is a flawed loner in his early 20s who is instructed by MI5 to sell doctored research data on oil exploration in the Caspian Sea to the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA).

In August 2001, Cumming moved to Madrid. His second novel, "The Hidden Man" (2003), tells the story of two brothers investigating the murder of their father, a former SIS officer, at the hands of the Russian mafia. "The Hidden Man" also examines the clandestine role played by SIS and the CIA during the Soviet–Afghan War.

His third novel, "The Spanish Game" (2006), marks the return of anti-hero Alec Milius, who becomes involved in a plot by the paramilitary Basque nationalist organization ETA to bring down the Spanish government. "The Spanish Game" was described by "The Times" as one of the six finest spy novels of all time, alongside "Tinker Tailor Soldier Spy", "Funeral in Berlin" and "The Scarlet Pimpernel".

"Typhoon", published in the UK in 2008, is a political thriller about a CIA plot to destabilise China on the eve of the Beijing Olympics. The story spans the decade from the transfer of sovereignty over Hong Kong in 1997 to present-day Shanghai. In particular, the author highlights the plight of the Uyghur Muslim population in Xinjiang, a semi-autonomous region of China. The novelist William Boyd described "Typhoon" as "a wholly compelling and sophisticated spy novel – vivid and disturbing – immaculately researched and full of harrowing contemporary relevance." "Typhoon" was listed by "The New York Times" as one of the 100 Notable Books of 2009.

Cumming's fifth novel, "The Trinity Six", a thriller about the discovery of a sixth member of the Cambridge spies ring, was published in 2011. "The Washington Post" named "The Trinity Six" as one of the Notable Books of 2011. 

"A Foreign Country", his sixth novel, concerning the disappearance of the first female Chief of MI6, was published in 2012. It is the first in a trilogy of novels about disgraced MI6 officer Thomas Kell. The novel is being developed into a television series by Bluegrass Films. "A Foreign Country" was named the first Scottish Crime Book of the Year at the inaugural Bloody Scotland Festival in Stirling in September 2012. It won the CWA Ian Fleming Steel Dagger for the best thriller of 2012.

A sequel, entitled "A Colder War", in which Kell investigates a traitor inside western intelligence, was published in 2014. The novel won the CrimeFest eDunnit Award for Best Crime eBook of the Year.

The third novel in the Thomas Kell series, "A Divided Spy", was published in 2016. 

Cumming's ninth novel, "The Man Between", was published in 2018. Released in the United States as "The Moroccan Girl", it tells the story of a writer who agrees to spy for MI6 while attending a literary festival in Morocco. This was followed up in 2020 by "BOX88", a thriller set in both the present day and in 1989. The protagonist, Lachlan Kite, is recruited into a top secret UK and US intelligence network while attending Alford, a fictional public school modelled on Eton College. A sequel, "JUDAS62" was published in the UK in 2021. Now a university student, Kite is sent to the Russian city of Voronezh in 1993 to extract a chemical weapons scientist. In the present day he mounts an operation against the FSB in Dubai. 

Cumming's novels have been translated into fourteen languages. His work is published in the United Kingdom by HarperCollins, in the United States by Mysterious Press and in Spain by Salamandra.

In 2015, Cumming sold an original screenplay, The Plane, to DiBonaventura Pictures. The film was released by Lionsgate as Plane in 2023 starring Gerard Butler and Mike Colter. It was directed by Jean-Francois Richet. 

Cumming was also an assistant editor of "The Week" from 1996 to 2013.

Cumming lives in west London. He is married and has three children.

He is one of the trustees of The Pierce Loughran Memorial Scholarship fund, which provides tuition fees for the Yeats Summer School in Sligo, Ireland. He is also the founder and President of the José Raúl Capablanca Memorial Chess Society.



Roman Catholic Diocese of Vannes

The Diocese of Vannes (Latin: "Dioecesis Venetensis"; French: "Diocèse de Vannes") is a Latin Church diocese of the Catholic Church in France. 
Erected in the 5th century, the Episcopal see is Vannes Cathedral in the city of Vannes. The diocese corresponds to the department of Morbihan, and is suffragan to the Archdiocese of Rennes, Dol, and Saint-Malo. Raymond Michel René Centène is the current bishop since his appointment in 2005.

In 1801, the diocese was expanded after the Concordat of 1802, to include part of the ancient Diocese of Saint-Malo, which was subsequently suppressed, after a three way split among the Dioceses of Vannes and Saint-Brieuc and the Archdiocese of Rennes.

Alexandre Dumas makes Aramis the local Ordinary of the Diocese of Vannes in "", the last book of his d'Artagnan Romances.







Pangea (cable system)

Pangea is a submarine telecommunications cable system transiting the North Sea connecting UK with Denmark and Netherlands. By 2002, it was no longer in service. It consisted of two widely separated submarine segments - Pangea North and Pangea South.

Pangea North segment of length 685 km had landing points at:

From Fanø, an island off the coast of Jutland, there was an onwards section to the mainland, landing near Esbjerg at:


Pangea South segment of length 252 km had landing points at:

The cable systems were deployed as a part of a larger effort by the network operator, Pangea Europe Limited, to connect countries in the Nordic region. However, the company already had economic difficulties in September 2001, and bankruptcy was filed in 2002 shortly after Pangea was finished. The cable ownership was transferred first to Arrowhead and Nortel and then to become a part of Linx Telecom (now CITIC Telecom CPC) later in 2004.


Kasamh Se

Kasamh Se (English title: The Promise) is an Indian soap opera produced by Ekta Kapoor of Balaji Telefilms. The show aired on Zee TV from 16 January 2006 to 12 March 2009. The story is about three sisters: Bani, Piya and Rano.

Three Dixit sisters; Bani, Pia and Rano are different but are close to each other. They live in Mount Abu. After their father's death, the three sisters go to Mumbai to live with Jai Udai Walia, a ruthless business tycoon who knew their parents. Jai falls for Pia, but she loves Jai's employee Pushkar Shukla and is more interested in Jai's wealth. Their marriage is arranged but on the wedding day, Pia elopes with Pushkar. To save the Dixit family's honor and mostly persuaded by Jai's cunning sister Jigyasa, Bani takes Pia's place at the altar and marries Jai. Jai is initially furious, but slowly comes to fall for Bani. They kiss after a family function arranged by Jai’s friend Roshni. Jai's younger nephew and Jigyasa's younger son Sahil falls for Rano and they get married.

Though Pia is married to Pushkar, after an argument with Pushkar she becomes interested in Jai's wealth and tries to steal him from Bani. Once Jai goes on a business trip, Pia follows him, spikes his drink, and sexually assaults him. This leaves Jai shaken.

On Bani and Jai's one-year anniversary, it is revealed that Pia is pregnant with Jai's child. Bani goes into trauma but later forgives them. Pia gives birth to a son, Veer while Rano gives birth a son, Varun. Sahil is killed and Pia frames Bani for Sahil's death and blackmails Jai: he can either let Bani spend life in jail or testify that she is mentally ill and she can spend only five years in a mental hospital. Jai, who is left with no option, rules that Bani is mentally ill and she is sent to a mental hospital.

At the hospital, she gives birth to twins Krishna and Atharva but they are taken away by Jai. Bani escapes from the hospital and is rescued by a man named Aparajit Deb who takes her under his wing. He takes an interest in her. He offers her to come with him abroad so she can get away from her past. Bani agrees but promises that she will return for her children.

Krishna and Atharva are now five years old. Pia does not take care of them. Bani, who has adopted the name Durga Dasgupta, returns to take her children and exposes Pia for what she has done and take revenge against Jai. Later she learns that Jai has done nothing and he testified against her only to save her. Pia is thrown out of the house. Pia meets with an accident and is left in a wheelchair. Bani and Rano forgive her and help her.

It is revealed that Bani had a twin sister Anamika and she is dead. Her husband Daksh Randheria became mentally unstable after that. He only acts normal when he is with Bani. Krishna and Atharva are kidnapped and murdered in front of Bani and Jai. Struck by the loss of his children and instigation by Jigyasa, Jai kicks Bani out of the house. Jai's aunt supports Bani and leaves the house. Bani, feeling like she has nothing left, tries to kill herself but is saved. She is revealed to be pregnant and finds hope in her life again. Daksh is cured.

Bani lives by the name of Maithili with Jai's aunt and her 5-year-old daughter Ganga in Meerut. Daksh is helping Bani. Jai has moved on and made his business flourish. He has remarried to Meera Khandelwal. Jai meets Ganga and has a good connection with her, not knowing that Ganga is his daughter. Later he learns that Ganga is his daughter. Ganga is revealed to have blood cancer and the only way she can survive is by a bone marrow transplant that can only be donated by family. This makes Jai and Bani come together to save Ganga. Jai learns the truth that Bani was never having an affair with Daksh and apologizes to her. Jigyasa is revealed to have gotten the Walia twins kidnapped. Jai sends Jigyasa to jail but Bani does not believe that Jigyasa killed them. Jigyasa is taking the blame for the murder because the actual killer has blackmailed her that they would kill Jigyasa's elder son Ranbir if she didn't take the blame.

Bani gives birth to another set of twins, who are named after Krishna and Atharva. Ganga undergoes surgery and is cured. Daksh finds out who killed the twins but before he can reveal it, he is murdered. The family takes a trip to Bani's maternal home in Mount Abu. Pia is revealed to be fine and had been pretending to be handicapped to save Bani because the real killer is one of their family members. Pushkar takes Pia and Veer with him. It is revealed that Krishna and Atharva's killer is Meera. Meera confesses her crimes to Bani and sets Bani on fire. Bani falls off a cliff, burning, into the lake. She is declared dead, which leaves Jai and the family devastated.

Bani is revealed to be alive. She is saved by a man named Partho Mitra. She loses her memory and her face is severely damaged. She gets a new face with plastic surgery. Partho adopts her and moves to Kolkata with her.

Bani and Jai's children, Krishna and Ganga are grown up. Bani lives as Pronita Mitra and has hazy nightmares of the night Meera tried to kill her. Soon, she meets Jai in Mount Abu but Jai does not recognize her because of her new face. She also completes Ganga's painting in a painting exhibition. Bani is invited to a party at the Walia mansion where she sees Meera and regains her memory. She vows to take down Meera. She learns that Meera has spoilt her children and her own son. She exposes Meera in front of Jai. Meera accepts all the allegations and tells Jai the truth that she spoilt his children because Ganga and Krishna are Bani's daughters and if he divorced her she will claim her share in the property. Jai and Bani decide to teach her a lesson. Jai pretends to apologize to Meera and asks for their second marriage. Jai and Bani trick Meera into signing divorce papers and Bani sits in the mandap and they marry. They also teach their children a lesson. Jai and Meera's son also learns about Meera's truth and disowns her. It is revealed that Partho had been working with Jigyasa and Jigyasa was the one who saved her when Meera tried to kill her 16 years ago.

Meera tries to ruin Ganga's life by having her marry Pratyush Mittal. Mittals are bankrupt and Pratyush is pretending to be in love with Ganga. Bani learns about it and with the help of Ganga's friend Rishi Tyagi and her hired actress Sonali expose Pratyush and Mittal family on the day of marriage. The Mittal family is arrested and Rishi who had fallen in love with Ganga makes a proposal in front of Walia family of marrying Ganga. Ganga initially refuses but later agrees. They then marry. Bani tries to scare Meera pretending to be Bani's ghost/spirit/soul. Meera learns that Bani is alive and tries to kill her. Bani is saved by Jigyasa. Jai stops Meera from attacking Jigyasa. He is so furious that he tries to kill Meera but he is stopped by Walia family. Meera is exposed and sent to jail. Jigyasa reunites with her family. Jigyasa lies to Walia family that she had hired Pronita to expose Meera. Rano and Pia come to know that Pronita is actually Bani and with help of Pushkar prove that Pronita is actually Bani. Ganga falls in love with Rishi. Jai and Pia's son Veer comes to Mumbai. He is unaware of Jai, Bani, Pia's past because he is raised by Pia and Pushkar. He thinks Pushkar is his father. When he learns about Jai, Bani, and Pia's past, he, after Jigyasa's instigation, starts planning and plotting against Bani. Jigyasa then creates a rift between Jai and Meera's son Vicky and Ganga, and due to this stress, Jai has a heart attack and is paralyzed. The Walia family then make peace and Jigyasa apologizes to Bani for everything.

The family has relocated to Mount Abu, Bani and Jai come to their family during the festival of Holi and they celebrate with the whole family. Jai is completely well. The three sisters talk about how they started their journey here in Mount Abu, they are happy together with their family and all ends well.




It was remade in Sinhala in Kindurangana in Sri Lanka

Little Germany, Bradford

Little Germany is an area of particular historical and architectural interest in central Bradford, West Yorkshire, England. The architecture is predominantly neoclassical in style with an Italian influence. Many individual buildings are listed, and Little Germany is also protected as a Conservation Area.

The buildings within Little Germany date back to the 19th century, developing from 1855. Most of the buildings were constructed for the use of textile businesses, although are also a few non-commercial buildings, for example Baptist and Methodist chapels. The commercial buildings are the legacy of merchants from mainland Europe, many of them Jewish, who spent large sums of money constructing imposing warehouses for the storage and sale of their goods for export. A large proportion of the merchants came from Germany hence the name Little Germany.
Bradford became more attractive as a centre of international trade in the aftermath of the Franco-Prussian War, which disrupted commercial relations between France and Germany.

Architectural practices included Milnes & France, Lockwood & Mawson, Andrews & Delaunay and J.T. Fairbank building in italianate style. An 1871 building by George Corson for Scottish clients is in Scottish baronial style. Caspian House (61 East Parade) was built in 1873, as the warehouse of D. Delius and Company; the senior partner in the business was the father of the composer Frederick Delius.

Little Germany is also the home of the Bradford Playhouse, which has a mural on the back of the building that commemorates the centenary of the founding of the Independent Labour Party in Bradford in 1893.

Scenes for the second season of the Channel 5 TV series "All Creatures Great and Small" were filmed in the area in April 2021.

The area was also used to portray Moscow during Queen Elizabeth's visit of Russia in the season 5 of Netflix series "The Crown."
Little Germany is still one of Bradford's busiest commercial areas, with over 110 businesses and organisations with 3,000 workers. It attracts around 100,000 visitors each year. The local authority is currently promoting plans to regenerate the area by renovating and converting the interior of the old buildings into housing, hotels, offices, whilst preserving the originally Victorian distinctive architecture.

Ham Construction undertook the redevelopment of Eastbrook Hall in Little Germany. The project cost an estimated £11 million and converted the building into 63 high-quality apartments as well some commercial usage on Leeds Road. The project included a refurbishment of the exterior and roof of the listed building which had suffered extensive fire damage. The hall was built in 1903 and was originally used as a Methodist mission. The redevelopment was being funded through a public private sector funding agreement, as well as the Prince's Regeneration Trust. Work was finally completed in 2008, some months after the original projected finish date was set.

The Gatehaus is an 11-storey glass building constructed within the Little Germany district. Construction began in 2005 and was completed in 2007 with a total cost of £22 million. The project was originally proposed as a 17-storey landmark but was changed due to a rethink after suggestions that its height was incompatible with the surrounding Victorian buildings. The scheme was developed by Asquith Properties.

In April 2012 retail giant Freeman Grattan Holdings, now a German-owned company, secured a deal to open a new head office and house around 300 staff in a Grade-II-listed former wool warehouse in Little Germany.


 

Union Chapel, Islington

Union Chapel is a working church, live entertainment venue and charity drop-in centre for the homeless in Islington, London, England. Built in the late 19th century in the Gothic revival style, the church is a Grade I-listed building. It is at the north end of Upper Street, near Highbury Fields.

Union Chapel hosts live music, film, spoken word and comedy events. There are around 250 events per year. It was voted London's Best Live Music Venue by readers of "Time Out" magazine in 2002, 2012 and again in 2014. It has a reputation for excellent acoustics, due to its design.

The Margins Project, based in the Union Chapel, provides a range of support services to people facing homelessness, crisis and isolation. It operates a twice-weekly drop-in that provides advice around accessing benefits, support showers and laundry facilities. There is a Supported Employment Programme which provides opportunities for people who have experienced homelessness and crisis to get back into employment. There is also a Winter Night Shelter and support services such as access to therapy.

Union Chapel is a Congregational church and part of the Congregational Federation. The church describes itself as "An open community exploring and revitalising the faith in challenging times" and meets every Sunday for worship. The church meets every Sunday at 11am and is committed to encouraging social justice.

The congregation first met in 1799 in a house in Highbury Grove as a union of evangelical Anglicans and non-conformists. Between 1805 and 1809 a new chapel was built by Henry Leroux on the present site in Compton Terrace, just off Upper Street, and the congregation moved to it in 1806. The new chapel was a two-storeyed building in the classical style with a central pediment, and with two houses on either side. A girls' school was founded in 1807 and a boys' founded in 1814. The Rev. Thomas Lewis, the father of the historian Samuel Lewis, was minister of the chapel from 1804–52, and lived next door at number 19.

His successor, the Rev. Henry Allon, was minister from 1852 to 1892 and greatly increased the congregation as the local population grew. The building became "inconveniently crowded", and by the 1870s the Chapel had been enlarged and given a colonnaded façade.

It was replaced by the current building in the Victorian gothic style of architecture, designed by James Cubitt of Loughton and built between 1874 and 1877, with further additions from 1877 to 1890. Its Gothic style is uncommon among non-conformist churches, and its plan is based on the church of Santa Fosca in Torcello. It provided seating for 1,700 worshippers, and a Sunday School Hall for 1,000 children. Behind the church, the large Sunday School was built on the Akron Plan. Two Liberal prime ministers, William Ewart Gladstone and H. H. Asquith, were at different times members of the congregation. The solid tower was completed in 1889.

The chapel building was first listed in 1972 and is Grade I listed. The former Sunday school, lecture hall and vestry block was separately Grade II* listed in 2011.

The chapel was used for a major scene in the 1982 film, "Who Dares Wins". Since 1982 and facing demolition the charity Friends of Union Chapel has helped conserve the buildings. The charity Union Chapel Project established in 1991 organises activities including gigs and events to help raise money for the building and open it up.

The Organ at Union Chapel was designed and built specially for the size and acoustics of the new Chapel building in 1877 by master organ builder Henry "Father" Willis. Neither James Cubitt, the architect of the Chapel, nor Rev Henry Allon, the minister at the time, wanted the congregation to be distracted by the sight of an organ or organist: they wanted the music itself to be the focus during worship. The organ is therefore deliberately hidden behind ornate screens under the rose window, which itself actually hints at the organ's importance, with its depiction of eight angels all playing different musical instruments. 

It is one of just two organs left in the United Kingdom, and the only one in England, with a fully working original hydraulic (water powered) blowing system, which can be used as an alternative to the electric blowers.

The organ was restored in 1946 by Monk & Gunther; and by Harrison & Harrison in 2013.


Organ "Re"framed, launched in 2016, is an annual music festival at Union Chapel with an experimental approach to the use of the organ. It is curated by composer and Music Director of the organ at Union Chapel, Claire M Singer. Partners include London Contemporary Orchestra and Spitfire Audio. Commissions have included work from Éliane Radigue, Low, Hildur Guðnadóttir, Adam Wiltzie, Phil Niblock, Darkstar, Philip Jeck, Sarah Davachi, and Mark Fell.




Henry C. Schadeberg

Henry Carl Schadeberg (October 12, 1913 – December 11, 1985) was a member of the United States House of Representatives from Wisconsin from 19611965 and 19671971. He was a Republican.

Born in Manitowoc, Wisconsin, Schadeberg graduated from Lincoln High School, Manitowoc, Wisconsin. He earned a bachelor of arts degree in 1938 from Carroll College, Waukesha, Wisconsin and a bachelor of divinity degree in 1941 from Garrett Biblical Institute, Evanston, Illinois.

He served as a chaplain in the United States Navy during World War II and the Korean War and then served in the U.S. Naval Reserve until his retirement, with the rank of captain, in 1969.

He represented Wisconsin's 1st congressional district in the 87th, 88th, 90th, and 91st United States Congresses.

Following his departure from Congress, he resided in Rockbridge Baths, Virginia, until his death there on December 11, 1985.


Roman Catholic Diocese of Frosinone-Veroli-Ferentino

The Diocese of Frosinone-Veroli-Ferentino () is a Latin Church ecclesiastical territory or diocese of the Catholic Church in Italy. It has existed since 1986. In that year, the Diocese of Ferentino was united into the Diocese of Veroli-Frosinone, which was the name of the historic Diocese of Veroli from 1956. It is immediately exempt to the Holy See and not part of an ecclesiastical province.

Veroli was only fifty-two miles from Rome, and therefore an excellent benefice for a prelate who was employed in the Roman Curia.

In a bull of 18 June 1081 Pope Gregory VII confirmed the extent of the territory of the diocese of Veroli for Bishop Albert. Pope Urban II confirmed the possessions of the Church of Veroli in a bull of 2 July 1097, and the provisions of the bull were repeated by Pope Paschal II in a bull of 4 September 1108, written for the benefit of Bishop Albert.

Pope Alexander III, in exile from Rome, lived with his Court at Veroli from 16 March 1170 to 10 September 1170. At some point during his reign, Pope Alexander determined that the number of Canons in the Cathedral of Saint Andrew in Veroli should be sixteen.

Pope Lucius III left Anagni and sought refuge in Veroli, from 27 March 1184 to 28 May 1184.

On 8 September 1351, Veroli was shaken by a major earthquake, while the clergy were singing Vespers in the cathedral. The co-cathedral of S. Salome was completely ruined, and the saint's remains were buried in the rubble for more than six weeks. The entire city of Veroli was heavily damaged.

The first steps toward the foundation of an episcopal seminary in the diocese of Veroli were taken by Bishop Girolamo Asteo (1608–1626), forty-eight years after the Council of Trent had decreed that every diocese ought to have a seminary for the education of the clergy. The first students did not enter the institution until 1652.

On 15 May 1863, Pope Pius IX paid a formal visit to Veroli, "to raise the morale of the inhabitants of the area."

In 1818, when the diocese of Fondi was suppressed and its territory handed over to the diocese of Gaeta, immediate protest were lodged by the town of Vallecorsa, who wished to belong to the Papal States and the civil province of Rome, a protest which was entered again and again over the following century. Finally, on 21 March 1921, Pope Benedict XV issued the bull "Sedis Apostolicae", removing Vallecorsa from the archdiocese of Gaeta and annexing it to the diocese of Veroli.

Bishop Ortensio Battisti (1567–1594) presided over two diocesan synods between 1568 and 1593. Bishop Eugenio Fucci (1594–1608) held a diocesan synod. A diocesan synod was held by Bishop Eugenio Fucchi between 1596 and 1608. A diocesan synod was held by Bishop Fortunato Maurizi (1856–1868) on 28–30 June 1863.

By 1956, the Vatican had become aware of changing settlement and employment patterns in cities and towns throughout Italy. In central Lazio, Frosinone had long since become the largest city, as well as the regional capital and seat of magistrates and public services (from the early 19th century). Pope Pius XII, therefore, authorized the Consistorial Congregation in the papal government to issue a decree, adding the name of Frosinone to that of the diocese of Veroli. The decree of 29 February 1956 ordered that the title of the diocese and the title of the bishop should be "Verulanus-Frusinatensis".

The Second Vatican Council, in order to ensure that all Catholics received proper spiritual attention, decreed the reorganization of the diocesan structure of Italy and the consolidation of small and struggling dioceses, in particular those with financial and personnel problems. It also decreed that the natural population units of people, together with the civil jurisdictions and social institutions that compose their organic structure, should be preserved as far as possible as units.

On 18 February 1984, the Vatican and the Italian State signed a new and revised concordat. Based on the revisions, a set of "Normae" was issued on 15 November 1984, which was accompanied in the next year, on 3 June 1985, by enabling legislation. According to the agreement, the practice of having one bishop govern two separate dioceses at the same time, "aeque personaliter", was abolished. This applied to the dioceses of Veroli and Frosinone. The Vatican therefore continued consultations which had begun under Pope John XXIII for the merging of dioceses. On 30 September 1986, Pope John Paul II ordered that the dioceses of Veroli, Frosinone, and Ferentino be merged into one diocese with one bishop, with the Latin title "Dioecesis Frusinatensis-Verulana-Ferentina". The seat of the diocese was to be in Frosinone, whose cathedral was to serve as the cathedral of the merged dioceses. The cathedrals in Veroli and Ferentino were to become co-cathedrals, and the cathedral Chapters were each to be a "Capitulum Concathedralis". There was to be only one diocesan Tribunal, in Frosinone, and likewise one seminary, one College of Consultors, and one Priests' Council. The territory of the new diocese was to include the territory of the former dioceses of Veroli, Frosinone, and Ferentino.

"Erected: 8th Century"<br> 

"Name Changed: 29 February 1956"


"United: 30 September 1986 with the Diocese of Ferentino"


Fencing at the 2006 Asian Games

Fencing was contested at the 2006 Asian Games in Doha, Qatar from December 9 to December 14. Men's and women's competition took place in the Sabre, Foil, and Épée. Team competition also took place. All competition took place at Al-Arabi Indoor Hall.

A total of 222 athletes from 21 nations competed in fencing at the 2006 Asian Games:

Sparlösa Runestone

The Sparlösa Runestone, listed as Vg 119 in the Rundata catalog, is located in Västergötland and is the second most famous Swedish runestone after the Rök runestone.

The Sparlösa Runestone was discovered in 1669 in the southern wall of the church at Sparlösa, now part of Vara Municipality. Before their historical value was understood, many runestones were used as construction material for roads, walls, and bridges. Following a fire at the church in 1684, the runestone was split in rebuilding the wall. It was removed from the wall in 1937 and the two sections reunited.

The stone is 1.77 metres tall and it is dated to about 800 AD based upon its transitional use of rune forms from both the elder and younger futhark, but it has a probably younger line added to it saying "Gisli made this memorial after Gunnar, his brother". The dating is based on the style of the images, such as a ship, which suggest the 8th century, like similar images from Gotland. However, a sail on the ship suggests a later dating than the 8th century.

The runestone is famous for its depictions and its tantalizing and mysterious references to a great battle, the names "Eric" and "Alrik", the "father who resided in Uppsala" and the text "descending from the gods". The stone provides an early attestation of the place name Uppsala, and the two personal names Eric ("complete ruler") and Alrik ("everyone's ruler") are both royal names, known to have been worn by the semi-legendary Swedish Yngling dynasty at Uppsala. Moreover, the mention of a great battle is suggestive of the equally semi-legendary Swedish-Geatish wars that are mentioned in "Beowulf".

The words "runaʀ ræginkundu" meaning "runes of divine origin" are also in the runic text on the Noleby Runestone and would appear in stanza 79 of the "Hávamál" of the "Poetic Edda" several centuries later.

The runestone has imagery on four of its sides that apparently is unrelated to the runic text and in one interpretation predates it. One side has a building at the top that is over a crescent ship with a sail marked with a cross and with two birds, possibly peacocks, on its yardarms. At the bottom is a man on horseback hunting a stag and using a hunting leopard, which is not native to Sweden. The next side has an owl, with a head reminding of a lion's, and a goose fighting a snake. One side has a man and a cross band. One suggested interpretation is that the images on the stone are a memorial to Theodoric the Great, king of the Ostrogoths from 471 to 526 AD, with the building depicted on the stone a representation of his mausoleum. The other images, such as the crescent ship and the lion fighting the snake, can be interpreted as iconography of the Arian Christian faith.


This link replaces the link to the article on the depictions of the Sparlösa Rune stone in Pyrenae http://www.historieforum.se/437619567 

Simon Watson Taylor (surrealist)

Simon Watson Taylor (15 May 1923 – 4 November 2005) was an English actor and translator, often associated with the Surrealist movement. He was born in Wallingford, Oxfordshire and died in London.

He was secretary for the British Surrealist Group and edited the English language surrealist review "Free Unions / Unions Libres" but later became a key player in the "science" of Pataphysics. He was educated in England, France, Switzerland, Germany and Austria. Taylor lived in Paris in 1946-7, working for the English section of Radiodiffusion Française.

Taylor's extensive work as a translator of modern and avant-garde French literature and books about art included "Surrealism and Painting" by André Breton and plays by Boris Vian including "The Empire Builders", "The Generals' Tea Party" and "The Knackers' ABC". Others were "The Cenci" by Antonin Artaud, "Paris Peasant" by Louis Aragon and numerous works by Alfred Jarry. His collection of Jarry's "The Ubu Plays" (Methuen, London, 1968) included translations by himself and Cyril Connolly and remains in print.

In 1968 Taylor edited "French Writing Today", published in the United Kingdom by Penguin and in 1969 by Grove Press in the United States.

Taylor was an editorial advisor and frequent contributor to the London-based magazine "Art and Artists" and was the guest co-editor (with Roger Shattuck) of a special issue (May–June 1960) of the American literary magazine "Evergreen Review;" titled "What is Pataphysics?"

With Shattuck he also edited "The Selected Works of Alfred Jarry" (Methuen & Co, London, 1965).

Taylor's papers are in a collection at The University of Tulsa.


Filippo Savi

Filippo Savi (born 29 January 1987) is an Italian former footballer who played for A.C. Fidenza 1922 as a midfielder.

Born in Parma, Emilia–Romagna, Savi started his career at hometown club Parma. Savi made his Serie A debut on 23 April 2005, losing to A.C. Milan 0–3. He was the starting midfielder and replaced by Renato Olive after receiving a caution. He also played the next match, winning Livorno 6–4. He came off the bench in the first half to replace Jorge Bolaño in that match. That season Parma almost relegated.

Savi also played for Parma at 2004–05 UEFA Cup, which he made his professional and European debut on 14 April, a 0–0 draw with Austria Wien. He also played the next two matches, the semi-finals. The team finished as losing semi-finalists to CSKA Moskva.

In 2005–06 Serie A, Savi made 8 appearances. Due to 2006 Italian football scandal, Parma qualified to UEFA Cup again. The club chose a squad rotation tactics, which Savi played all 6 European matches in the first half of the season, including 4 starts in group stage. However, he did not play any game in 2006–07 Serie A, only 4 matches in the cup. In January 2007 he left for Monza.

Savi joined Monza in January 2007. He only played 9 games in Italian third division.

In July, he joined fellow "Serie C1" club Arezzo (but in another group). He made a double figure appearances before returned to Parma.

In July 2008 he moved back to "Lega Pro Prima Divisione" (ex- "Serie C1") for SPAL, at first on loan. On 2 February 2009 the deal became a co-ownership deal. However, in June Parma bought back Savi.

He then injured and left for "Lega Pro Seconda Divisione" club Carpenedolo in August 2009. Savi did not play any league match that season.

After 6 months inactive in football, Savi left for another L.P. second division club Crociati Noceto, located 12 km away from the city of Parma. He only played once.

Savi moved abroad in 2011–12 season. In August 2011 it was reported that Savi was finalizing a deal to Maltese club Valletta. However, on 8 September he was signed by Belgian Second Division club FC Brussels, rejoining Parma team-mate Sulaiman Sesay Fullah and numbers of Italian trained players. Savi made his debut on 13 November 2011.

After the end of the 2011–12 season, Savi intended to retire due to a cruciate ligament tear in the knee but eventually decided to continue challenging the world of professional football. In August 2012, he joined Serie D side A.C. Fidenza 1922.

Savi had played for "Azzurrini" from under-16 to under-20 level. He was the member of U-17 team at 2004 UEFA European Under-17 Football Championship qualification, wore no.10 shirt. In the elite round he changed to wear no.13. He played all 6 competitive matches in that tournament as starter The team finished as the runner-up in the elite round group 3, failing to advance. In the 2006 UEFA European Under-19 Football Championship qualification, he wore no.8 shirt and also played all 3 matches as starter. "Azzurrini" finished as the third in group 6. Since then Savi followed the team-mate promoted to Italy U-20, a bridging team between U-19 and U-21 in November 2005. However Savi failed to earn any cap since November 2006. His last call-up, however in January 2008. Savi played 3 times in total in Four Nations Tournament, in 2005–06 and 2006–07 edition.


Roman Catholic Diocese of Vicenza

The Diocese of Vicenza () is a Latin diocese of the Catholic Church in Italy. It is located in the region of the Veneto, and is the capital of the Province of Vicenza, approximately 60 km (37 mi) west of Venice, and around 45 km (28 mi) east of Verona. The diocese was in existence before 590. Vicenza was a suffragan of the Patriarchate of Aquileia until 1751. In 1751 it was transferred to the ecclesiastical province of Udine. In 1818, upon the dissolution of the ecclesiastical province of Udine, Vicenza was made it a suffragan of the Patriarchate of Venice.

The city of Vicenza honors among its patron saints, St. Leontius, bishop and martyr, and St. Theodore and St. Apollonius, bishops and confessors of the fourth century. A Christian cemetery, discovered near the Church of Sts. Felix and Fortunatus, dates from the earlier half of the fourth century, and these two men may have been martyred under Diocletian.

The first bishop of whom there is any certain record is (H)orontius (590), who was involved in the struggles of the Schism of the Three Chapters. 

On 19 July 1001, the Emperor Otto III issued a charter to Bishop Hieronymus, granting him and his successors possession of the entire County of Vicenza, with all the rights of jurisdiction. The grant was confirmed by Henry II in 1008. According to Ughelli, Bishop Girolamo was deposed by Emperor Henry II as a perjurer and apostate.

Other bishops were: Torengo (c. 1113–1117), who ruled Vicenza both in spiritual and temporal affairs, against the nobles and magistrates who rebelled against episcopal authority, disturbing the city for a quarter century. In March 1116, the Emperor Henry V held a judicial assize in Vicenza in an attempt to settle the differences. On 3 January 1117, Bishop Torengo was present when the Emperor issued a charter taking the church of S. Severus of Mundiburdio under his protection.

Bishop Uberto (1204–1212) was deposed by the papal legate, Bishop Sighard of Cremona, as a despoiler of church property. After having been given several opportunities to present himself to the legate and explain his conduct, and having failed to do so, his deposition by the legate was confirmed by Pope Innocent III. Pope Innocent specified that the canons of the cathedral should elect a successor within a month, but the canons did not do so. Pope Innocent responded by appointing Bishop Nicolaus Maltraversi on 8 April 1213. Bishop Gilberto, who was elected by the canons on 3 June 1219, was forced by the tyranny of Ezzelino to live in exile.

During the administration of Bishop Emiliani (1409–1433) took place the alleged apparition of the Blessed Virgin on Monte Berico which led to the foundation of the famous sanctuary. The church was made a minor basilica in 1904, by Pope Pius X.

Pietro Barbo (1451–1459) was afterwards elected Pope Paul II.

Cardinal Giovanni Battista Zeno (1470–1501), a grand-nephew of Pope Eugenius II and nephew of Pope Paul II, was distinguished for his learning, but although he was named Bishop of Vicenza in 1470, he did not take possession of the diocese until 1478. Matteo Priuli (1565–1579) founded the seminary.

The cathedral was administered and served by a corporation called the Chapter, which consisted of three dignities (the Provost, the Archdeacon, and the Archpriest) and twelve canons. The dignity of Provost was suppressed in the 1343, when Pope Benedict XI ordered the reduction of canons to ten. Two of the canons served as Theologus and Penitentiarius, in accordance with the decrees of the Council of Trent.

In February 1839, ominous sounds were heard coming from the vaulting of the cathedral; when it was heard twice again, it became necessary to close the cathedral. After extensive restoration, the building was reopened to the public on 25 March 1848.

Bishop Matteo Priuli (1565–1579) held a diocesan synod in 1565, and another on 2 December 1566, citing the decree of the Council of Trent that diocesan synods should be held annually. In 1583, Bishop Michele Priuli (1579–1603) presided over a diocesan synod in Vicenza. Bishop Dionisio Delfino (1606–1626) presided over a diocesan synod in Vicenza in 1611. He held another synod on 2–3 October 1623. On 8 May 1647, Cardinal Marcantonio Bragadin (1639–1655) held a diocesan synod. Bishop Giuseppe Civran (1660–1679) held a diocesan synod in the cathedral in 1666.

Bishop Giambattista Rubini (1684–1702) held a diocesan synod in Vicenza on 5–7 May 1689.

The diocese of Vicenza was suffragan of the Patriarchate of Aquileia until 1751. The ecclesiastical province of Aquileia was subject to repeated troubles, both internal and external, due partly to the fact that the eastern dioceses of the province (Istria) were politically subject to Austria, while the western dioceses (Veneto) were subject to the Venetian Republic. Both powers had repeated clashes with the Papacy in policy and administration. The War of the Austrian Succession (1740–1748) produced a crisis, since both Venice and the Papacy supported Charles Albert of Bavaria, while Austria supported Maria Theresa, daughter of Charles VI, Holy Roman Emperor. The Austrian government retaliated by sequestering all church benefices in its territories. At the conclusion of the war, both Austria and Venice demanded a resolution of the ecclesiastical problems. Pope Benedict, in letters of 29 November 1749 and 27 June 1750, invited the two parties to come to an agreement, while for the moment the present arrangements would remain in effect. On 6 April 1751, replies from Austria and Venice were presented to the pope, in the form of a convention between the parties, with the demand that the pope implement it. The patriarchate of Aquileia was abolished, as Article I of their convention required, and was replaced by two ecclesiastical provinces and two archbishoprics on equal footing: Udine and Gorizia. It was agreed that Cardinal Daniele Delfino would retain the title of Patriarch of Aquileia for his lifetime. Benedict XIV granted the empress of Austria and her successors the right to nominate the archbishop of Gorizia, and the doge of Venice and his successors the right to nominate to a vacancy at Udine. Vicenza was transferred to the ecclesiastical province of Udine.

The violent expansionist military policies of the French Revolutionary Republic had brought confusion and dislocation to the Po Valley. Following the redistribution of European territories at the Congress of Vienna, the Papacy faced the difficult task of restoring and restructuring the Church in various territories, according to the wishes of their rulers. Padua and Venice were under the control of Austria, and therefore a Concordat had to be negotiated with the government of the Emperor Francis. One of the requirements of the Austrian government was the elimination of several metropolitanates and the suppression of a number of bishoprics which were no longer viable due to the bad climate (malaria and cholera) and the impoverishment of the dioceses due to migration and industrialization; it was expected that this would be done to the benefit of the Patriarchate of Venice.

Pope Pius VII, therefore, issued the bull "De Salute Dominici Gregis" on 1 May 1818, embodying the conclusions of arduous negotiations. The metropolitan archbishopric of Udine was abolished and its bishop made suffragan to Venice. The dioceses of Caprularum (Caorle) and Torcella were suppressed and their territories assigned to the Patriarchate of Venice; Belluno and Feltre were united under a single bishop, "aeque personaliter", and assigned to Venice; Vicenza became a suffragan of Venice. In the adjustment of diocesan boundaries made necessary by the suppression and realignment of dioceses, Vicenza gained ten parishes from the diocese of Padua, but also lost seven parishes to Padua.

Around 1700, the city of Vicenza had a population of c. 34,000 people, with 15 parishes, 18 houses of male religious, and 14 houses of female religious. In an official report to the Congregation of the Council in the Roman Curia on 9 August 1741, the diocese of Vicenza claimed responsibility for 217, 963 persons. Around 1900, the diocese had 219 parishes, with 477,000 members; 699 secular and 39 regular priests; 10 houses of male religious and 52 sisters; 4 schools for boys, and 52 for girls. The Catholic Press comprised "Il Berico" (tri- weekly, Vicenza), "La Riscossa" (tri-weekly, Breganze), and six other periodicals.




Alianza de Cutral Có

Club Social y Deportivo Alianza, usually known as Alianza de Cutral Có, is an Argentine football club based in the city of Cutral Có in Neuquén Province. The team currently plays in the Torneo Argentino B, the regionalised 4th level of Argentine football league system.


Marcantonio Colonna (disambiguation)

Marcantonio Colonna (1535–1584) was an Italian aristocrat who was an admiral of the Papal fleet at the Battle of Lepanto.

Marcantonio Colonna may also refer to:


Schur–Zassenhaus theorem

The Schur–Zassenhaus theorem is a theorem in group theory which states that if formula_1 is a finite group, and formula_2 is a normal subgroup whose order is coprime to the order of the quotient group formula_3, then formula_1 is a semidirect product (or split extension) of formula_2 and formula_3. An alternative statement of the theorem is that any normal Hall subgroup formula_2 of a finite group formula_1 has a complement in formula_1. Moreover if either formula_2 or formula_3 is solvable then the Schur–Zassenhaus theorem also states that all complements of formula_2 in formula_1 are conjugate. The assumption that either formula_2 or formula_3 is solvable can be dropped as it is always satisfied, but all known proofs of this require the use of the much harder Feit–Thompson theorem.

The Schur–Zassenhaus theorem at least partially answers the question: "In a composition series, how can we classify groups with a certain set of composition factors?" The other part, which is where the composition factors do not have coprime orders, is tackled in extension theory.

The Schur–Zassenhaus theorem was introduced by . Theorem 25, which he credits to Issai Schur, proves the existence of a complement, and theorem 27 proves that all complements are conjugate under the assumption that formula_2 or formula_3 is solvable. It is not easy to find an explicit statement of the existence of a complement in Schur's published works, though the results of on the Schur multiplier imply the existence of a complement in the special case when the normal subgroup is in the center. Zassenhaus pointed out that the Schur–Zassenhaus theorem for non-solvable groups would follow if all groups of odd order are solvable, which was later proved by Feit and Thompson. Ernst Witt showed that it would also follow from the Schreier conjecture (see for Witt's unpublished 1937 note about this), but the Schreier conjecture has only been proved using the classification of finite simple groups, which is far harder than the Feit–Thompson theorem.

If we do not impose the coprime condition, the theorem is not true: consider for example the cyclic group formula_18 and its normal subgroup formula_19. Then if formula_18 were a semidirect product of formula_19 and formula_22 then formula_18 would have to contain two elements of order 2, but it only contains one. Another way to explain this impossibility of splitting formula_18 (i.e. expressing it as a semidirect product) is to observe that the automorphisms of formula_19 are the trivial group, so the only possible [semi]direct product of formula_19 with itself is a direct product (which gives rise to the Klein four-group, a group that is non-isomorphic with formula_18).

An example where the Schur–Zassenhaus theorem does apply is the symmetric group on 3 symbols, formula_28, which has a normal subgroup of order 3 (isomorphic with formula_29) which in turn has index 2 in formula_28 (in agreement with the theorem of Lagrange), so formula_31. Since 2 and 3 are relatively prime, the Schur–Zassenhaus theorem applies and formula_32. Note that the automorphism group of formula_29 is formula_19 and the automorphism of formula_29 used in the semidirect product that gives rise to formula_28 is the non-trivial automorphism that permutes the two non-identity elements of formula_29. Furthermore, the three subgroups of order 2 in formula_28 (any of which can serve as a complement to formula_29 in formula_28) are conjugate to each other.

The non-triviality of the (additional) conjugacy conclusion can be illustrated with the Klein four-group formula_41 as the non-example. Any of the three proper subgroups of formula_41 (all of which have order 2) is normal in formula_41; fixing one of these subgroups, any of the other two remaining (proper) subgroups complements it in formula_41, but none of these three subgroups of formula_41 is a conjugate of any other one, because formula_41 is abelian.

The quaternion group has normal subgroups of order 4 and 2 but is not a [semi]direct product. Schur's papers at the beginning of the 20th century introduced the notion of central extension to address examples such as formula_18 and the quaternions.

The existence of a complement to a normal Hall subgroup "H" of a finite group "G" can be proved in the following steps:


Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Warsaw

The Archdiocese of Warsaw () is a Latin Church ecclesiastical territory or diocese of the Catholic Church in Poland encompassing the Polish capital. It was erected on October 16, 1798. 
It was elevated to an Archdiocese on June 30, 1813.

A Metropolitan See, its suffragan dioceses are the Roman Catholic Diocese of Płock and the Roman Catholic Diocese of Warszawa-Praga.
According to the church's statistics, 30.4% of the dioceses population attended a church weekly in 2013. That is higher than a year earlier (29.8%) but church attendance may still be declining.

The current archbishop, Kazimierz Nycz, formerly Bishop of Koszalin-Kolobrzeg, Poland, was named on 3 March 2007. Following the abrupt resignation of Archbishop Stanisław Wielgus in January, Józef Cardinal Glemp had been named its Apostolic Administrator.

See List of bishops and archbishops of Warsaw for all ordinarily of this diocese, as well as auxiliary bishops.



Magic Weekend

The Magic Weekend (known as the Betfred Magic Weekend for sponsorship reasons) is an annual event organised by the Rugby Football League in which an entire round of Super League matches is played over a weekend at a single stadium to promote the sport of rugby league.

The event took place at the Millennium Stadium in Cardiff full 2007 to 2008, and again in 2011.
Subsequent events have taken place at Murrayfield Stadium in Edinburgh, from 2009 to 2010. the Etihad Stadium, Manchester, in 2012, 2013, and 2014. St James' Park, Newcastle, from 2015, 2016, 2017, to 2018, and again in 2021, 2022, and 2023, Anfield, Liverpool in 2019. Elland Road, Leeds, is set to host it for the first time for 2024 season.

Having established itself on the English rugby league calendar, the Magic Weekend formula has now been copied in other rugby league-playing nations: starting in France in 2017, and then in Australia, with the Magic Round in 2019.

The first Millennium Magic round was confirmed in September 2006 for the weekend of 5–6 May 2007. Richard Lewis, chairman of the RFL, cited both expansion and monetary reasons for the move to Wales, but the plan also allowed the Super League to be reduced by one round (critics had stated that the players were put under too much strain over the season). The event was funded and promoted by the Welsh Tourist Board, who were looking to build on the Challenge Cup finals which had taken place in Cardiff between 2003 and 2005 due to the rebuilding of Wembley Stadium. After the success of the first Millennium Magic in 2007, it became an annual fixture in the Super League calendar. The event was moved to Murrayfield Stadium in Edinburgh in 2009 following a bid from VisitScotland, and was renamed "Murrayfield Magic", and later just the "Magic Weekend".

Three Super League XII fixtures took place on Saturday 5 May 2007, and a further three on Sunday 6 May 2007.

The games played were, where possible, 'local derby' matches in an attempt to maximise interest in the event. The two 'non-heartland' clubs in Super League at that time, Catalans Dragons (France) and (London), were paired against each other. The teams would face their Millennium Magic derby opponents four times during the Super League XII season.

Celtic Crusaders opened the weekend against Oldham R.L.F.C. in a National League Two game on the Friday night (4 May) at Brewery Field, Bridgend. This match officially celebrated 100 years of club rugby league in Wales as Oldham were the first ever opponents to Merthyr Tydfil in the first professional game in Wales on 7 September 1907. In an eventful match, Oldham came back from 26-6 down to win 34–26 in front of 3,441 fans, a record attendance for a National League 2 match. It was also the first National League 2 game shown live on British television, covered by Sky Sports.

A 58,831 aggregate crowd saw the Magic event at the Millennium Stadium. Super League clubs agreed to repeat the event during the following season with Nigel Wood, the RFL's chief operating officer, saying: "The clubs and fans thoroughly enjoyed the day and our aim is to make next year's event even bigger and better."

As in 2007, three Super League XIII fixtures took place on the Saturday (3 May) and a further three on the Sunday (4 May).

The event again kicked off with the local south Wales team, Celtic Crusaders, but this time they were up against Featherstone Rovers at the Brewery Field, Bridgend in a National League 1 match. The Crusaders won the match by 28-point to 18. The match was held in front of a club record crowd of 6,152.

It was confirmed after the 2008 event that the weekend was to be moved in 2009 to Murrayfield Stadium in Edinburgh, Scotland. The event included matches based on a seeded draw, using finishing positions from Super League XIII.

The 2010 Magic weekend took place on 1–2 May 2010 at Murrayfield. After fan criticism of the seeded draw, The RFL decided to ask all 14 Super League clubs whether they would like to revert to derbies. The result favored a seeding again where the top 8 teams faced each other, and the bottom six would play each other.

The Magic Weekend returned to its original location at the Millennium Stadium, and it saw the opening round of the 2011 Super League season on the weekend of 12–13 February 2011. The event also returned to the original format with the majority of the games being local rivalry games.

The 2012 event was held at the Etihad Stadium, home of Manchester City Football Club, and was the first time the Magic Weekend was held in England.

The date of the Magic Weekend was changed for 2012, reverting to a mid-season game week rather than as a season opener like 2011. However, unlike the first four Magic Weekends, the matches were played over a weekend at the end of May (after the end of the football season) rather than during the May Day bank holiday weekend at the start of May. Although the last weekend of May is usually the Late Spring Bank Holiday weekend, the Spring bank holiday in 2012 was moved back a weekend as part of the Diamond Jubilee.

Following the premise of previous Magic Weekends, the majority of the fixtures were local rivalry games. 2012 was the first time that Widnes Vikings participated in the Magic Weekend. The aggregate attendance of the weekend was 63,716 (the largest ever).

The 2013 Magic Weekend was once again held at the Etihad Stadium, Manchester, on Saturday 25 and Sunday 26 May.

As in 2012, the 2013 Magic Weekend took place after the end of the football season in May, on the late Spring bank holiday weekend.

As in previous years, some of the matches were local rivalries with Castleford playing Wakefield Trinity and Hull F.C. Hull Kingston Rovers, both repeat fixtures from 2012. The other four matches were new fixtures for the Magic Weekend and included St. Helens playing Warrington and Bradford vs Huddersfield, continuing the tradition of having local rivalry matches at the Magic Weekend.

On 31 May 2013, less than a week after the 2013 Magic Weekend, the RFL announced that the Magic Weekend would once again return to the Etihad Stadium, Manchester for 2014, with matches being played on Saturday 17 and Sunday 18 May.

On 23 January 2014, the fixtures were announced with, in a repeat of the 2013 fixtures, four matches set to take place on the Saturday with the remaining three scheduled for Sunday, including four local derbies (Huddersfield-Bradford, Hull Kingston Rovers-Hull FC, Wakefield Trinity-Castleford and Warrington-St Helens R.F.C.) plus the meeting of the last two winners of the Super League Grand Final, Wigan Warriors and Leeds Rhinos. The other matches consisted of Widnes vs Salford and London vs Catalans Dragons.

Controversy was created in the city of Hull following the announcement that the 2014 FA Cup Final was to take place at exactly the same time and date as the fixture between Hull FC and Hull KR, this being the first FA Cup final Hull City had qualified for. The RFL announced on 15 April 2014 that they would not be changing the fixture.

The aggregate attendance of 64,552 was the highest ever for a Magic Weekend, while the Saturday attendance of 36,339 was the highest ever single-day figure until both records were surpassed the consequent year in Newcastle-upon-Tyne.

In 2015, the Magic Weekend was forced to move due to construction at the Etihad Stadium, which would commence immediately after the 2014–15 Premier League season had concluded, which meant the Magic Weekend was due to be changed, with Coventry's Ricoh Arena and Newcastle upon Tyne's St James' Park being considered by the RFL. Blake Solly had confirmed that the Etihad and Super League did have a good partnership, but there were alternatives available to host the event. On 10 September 2014, it was confirmed that the Magic Weekend had been awarded to Newcastle for 2015, and would be played 30 and 31 May 2015. With the Super League Reformatting in 2015, the Magic Weekend featured twelve teams and six matches, as opposed to the seven games in previous years.

The event was considered the most successful to date, with a record aggregate attendance of 67,788, a record single-day crowd of 40,871 on the Saturday and an estimated benefit of £4.2 million to the Newcastle economy.

After a successful event in Newcastle in 2015, the Magic Weekend returned to St James' Park for the second year running with most fixtures being based upon last season's league standings rather than local derbies. The top four from last season play each other; Leeds Rhinos v Wigan Warriors and St. Helens v Huddersfield Giants. Continuing with this trend, 5th placed Castleford Tigers play 6th placed Warrington Wolves and the two teams in the bottom four last season, Widnes Vikings and Salford Red Devils, play in a repeat of last year's fixture. Last season's bottom placed Wakefield Trinity Wildcats play Catalans Dragons: as the Dragons struggle away from home, this fixture is to give both teams a chance of winning. The only derby this year is the Hull Derby at the end of the weekend.

For the third consecutive season, Magic Weekend returned to Newcastle. This is the Leigh Centurions' first time playing at the Magic Weekend. This is because Magic Weekend first made an appearance in 2007, two seasons after Leigh's relegation.

For a fourth year in succession, Magic Weekend took place in Newcastle. As a curtain raiser, the first game to be played on the first day was a Championship fixture between Toronto Wolfpack and Toulouse Olympique.
Anfield was chosen as the venue for the 2019 Magic Weekend after two test matches were played there in 2016 and 2018. After previously choosing games that were local derbies or competitive games, in 2019 the fixtures were determined by the previous season's league position.

Robert Elstone, Super League Chief Executive, said "On behalf of the Super League clubs, we’re delighted to be taking the Dacia Magic Weekend to one of the most famous stadiums in the world.

The 2020 event was due to return to Newcastle's St James' Park, however it was cancelled due to the COVID-19 pandemic in addition to wider implications for the 2020 season.

The Super League's Magic Weekend saw a belated return to Newcastle for the 2021 season. Fixtures for the event were announced on 23 February with matches scheduled to be played during the weekend of 4–5 September.

The Super League's Magic Weekend stayed in Newcastle, for the 2022 season. Fixtures for the event were announced on 23 February with matches played during the weekend of 9–10 July.



Daniele Paponi

Daniele Paponi (born 16 April 1988) is an Italian footballer who plays as a forward for club Fermana.

Paponi started his career with Ancona, playing into the "biancorossi" youth ranks. In the summer 2004, following the folding of his club, Paponi became a free agent; he then accepted an offer from Parma and joined the "ducali" youth team.

He made his Serie A debut at the age of 17 on 22 October 2005, then also making his debut at the European level in the 2006–07 UEFA Cup, scoring also two goals. His first Serie A goal came in an away league match played against Messina on 20 December 2006, and ended in a 1–1 draw: Paponi's equaliser goal, a reversed bicycle kick immediately dubbed as "scorpion kick", was saluted among the finest scored in the league season. Nevertheless, Paponi struggled to find space in the first team in the following 2007–08 season, and in January 2008 he accepted a loan move to Serie B's Cesena, where he scored two goals in 21 games.

For the 2008–09 season he returned to Parma, then in Serie B, playing seven games and scoring twice, but in January 2009 he was loaned out again, this time to Rimini as part of the deal that brought then-Serie B topscorer Daniele Vantaggiato to join the "gialloblu".

On 10 June 2010 Parma exchanged the 22-year-old striker with Gabriele Paonessa of Bologna in co-ownership deal. Both players' 50% registration rights was valued €600,000. Paponi signed a 5-year contract worth €120,000 in net annually plus bonuses. The deal never a successful deal on the field as both players failed to take part in the first team, but a successful financial deal that both club had a player selling profit of €1.2 million in 2009–10 season but only would counter-weight by the amortization of the buying cost of the same amount in next 5 seasons (2010 to 2015, the contract length of both players) plus VAT. Paponi also became a financial burden of the club for his wage in 2013. Paponi only played once in 2011–12 Serie A. In June 2012, Paonessa was definitively under contract with Parma as well as Paponi to Bologna.

In 2012–13 Paponi missed a few games due to injuries. However, his own quality had limited his chance to play: only 3 games in 2012–13 Serie A, all as substitutes. In April 2013 he left for Canada to have a trial with Montreal Impact.

On 19 April 2013 Paponi joined Montreal Impact on loan until 31 December 2013. He has officially scored his first goal for Montreal Impact on 29 June 2013 in an MLS match against Colorado Rapids, where he actually went on to score a brace.
On 4 August 2014 he was signed by the third-tier club Ancona in temporary deal.

On 20 August 2015 Paponi was signed by U.S. Latina Calcio for free, with Marco Crimi moved to opposite direction. for €730,000. Paponi signed a 2-year contract.

Paponi left Latina for Juve Stabia on 20 January 2017. He renewed the contract on 11 August. He was part of the first team squad for the entire 2017 pre-season.

On 1 August 2019, he signed with Piacenza.

On 1 September 2020 he joined Padova on a 2-year contract.

On 1 September 2021, Paponi joined Serie C club Bari.

On 6 January 2023, Paponi signed with Imolese.

On 20 September 2023, Paponi signed a one-season contract with Fermana.

Montreal Impact

Bari


Winston Anglin

Winston Anglin (27 August 1962 – 5 September 2004) was a Jamaican international football player.

Nicknamed "Twinny Bug" he played for local sides Wadadah F.C., Waterhouse F.C. and Village United F.C. He was one of the island's most consistent, but sharp-tempered midfielders of the 1980s.

He also played 83 times for the Reggae Boyz and scored one goal in Jamaica's 2–0 victory over Trinidad and Tobago in the final of the Shell Caribbean Cup in 1991. Also, he scored twice in a World Cup qualifier against Puerto Rico in 1988.

However, his career as a national team player ended in 1995 after he was given an 18-month sentence in the US for cocaine trafficking. Anglin was held at New York's JFK International Airport with 103 ballons of the drug in his stomach. He returned to Jamaica shortly after being released on parole and continued to play club football, doing so well that his supporters waged numerous calls for his return to the national team. But his drug conviction and several battles with match officials forced national coaches to ignore his claims for a recall.

Like other former Reggae Boyz stars Stephen Malcolm and Peter Cargill, Anglin was killed in a road accident near Discovery Bay. He died in St Ann's Bay hospital after the car he was travelling in overturned on a rural and unlit highway on Jamaica's north coast, hit a rock and landed upside down. He was returning home after watching Jamaica's World Cup qualifier against Panama at the National Stadium in Kingston. According to police reports, he died from severe trauma to the head and body.


Red Frogs

Red Frogs Australia is a Christian Youth charity run by volunteers known as the 'Red Frogs Crew'. The volunteers participate in many events that are attended by school leavers and university students such as schoolies week. Since 1997, Allens' has donated over 24 tonnes of the red frog confectionery every year. The Crew's vision is to "safeguard a generation" that is outworked through education, early intervention and harm minimisation.

In 1997, founder Andy Gourley attended schoolies week on the Gold Coast with some of his friends and had an impression that a large amount of binge drinking and illicit drug use were taking place. Gourley gathered a select group of young volunteers to provide chaplaincy support for the school leavers. The sponsorship arrangement with Allen's Red Frogs gave the volunteers confectionery to use as a conversation starter, then Gourley and his friends would offer to help walk intoxicated people home. In a 2010 interview, Gourley stated: "Schoolies to me... really [is] safeguarding a generation of Australia's next leaders... It's building a fence at the top of the cliff, rather than being an ambulance at the bottom."

Schoolies week is the Red Frog Crew's main event of the year in which they take part. The event is notorious for the amount of drinking and acts of violence that occur during the two-week period of celebrations and partying.

The Red Frogs Crew start involvement with the university year from the Orientation Week. In an attempt to keep a good relationship with university students, the Crew members keep a stall during orientation week in which they handout approximately 60,000 University Planners, 10,000 donuts, 5,000 icy poles, and 6 tonnes of Red Frogs.

Red Frogs have since expanded internationally into countries such as New Zealand, South Africa, United Kingdom, Canada and USA.

Abrasion (geology)

Abrasion is a process of erosion that occurs when material being transported wears away at a surface over time, commonly happens in ice and glaciers. The primary process of abrasion is physical weathering. Its the process of friction caused by scuffing, scratching, wearing down, marring, and rubbing away of materials. The intensity of abrasion depends on the hardness, concentration, velocity and mass of the moving particles. Abrasion generally occurs in four ways: glaciation slowly grinds rocks picked up by ice against rock surfaces; solid objects transported in river channels make abrasive surface contact with the bed and walls; objects transported in waves breaking on coastlines; and by wind transporting sand or small stones against surface rocks. Abrasion is the natural scratching of bedrock by a continuous movement of snow or glacier downhill. This is caused by a force, friction, vibration, or internal deformation of the ice, and by sliding over the rocks and sediments at the base (that also causes an avalanche) that causes the glacier to move. 

Abrasion, under its strictest definition, is commonly confused with attrition and sometimes however, the latter less commonly so. Both abrasion and attrition refers to the wearing down of an object. Abrasion occurs as a result of two surfaces rubbing against each other, resulting in the wearing down of one or both of the surfaces. However, attrition refers to the breaking off of particles (erosion) which occurs as a result of objects hitting against each other. Abrasion leads to surface-level destruction over a period of time, whereas attrition results in more change at a faster rate. Today, the geomorphology community uses the term "abrasion" in a looser way, often interchangeably with the term "wear".

Abrasion in a stream or river channel occurs when the sediment carried by a river scours the bed and banks, contributing significantly to erosion. In addition to chemical and physical weathering of hydraulic action, freeze-thaw cycles, and more, there is a suite of processes which have long been considered to contribute significantly to bedrock channel erosion include plucking, abrasion (due to both bedload and suspended load), solution, and cavitation.
In terms of a glacier, it is a similar principal; the moving of rocks over a surface wears it away with friction, digging a channel that, when the glacier moves away, is called a U-shaped valley.

Bedload transport consists of mostly larger clasts, which cannot be picked up by the velocity of the streamflow, rolling, sliding, and/or saltating (bouncing) downstream along the bed. Suspended load typically refers to smaller particles, such as silt, clay, and finer grain sands uplifted by processes of sediment transport. Grains of various sizes and composition are transported differently in terms of the threshold flow velocities required to dislodge and deposit them, as is modeled in the Hjulström curve. These grains polish and scour the bedrock and banks when they make abrasive contact.

Coastal abrasion occurs as breaking ocean waves containing a sand and larger fragments erode the shoreline or headland. The hydraulic action of waves contributes heavily. This removes material, resulting in undercutting and possible collapse of unsupported overhanging cliffs. This erosion can threaten structure or infrastructure on coastlines, and the impact will very likely increase as global warming increases sea level rise. Seawalls are sometimes built-in defense, but in many locations, conventional coastal engineering solutions such as sea walls are increasingly challenged and their maintenance may become unsustainable due to changes in climate conditions, sea-level rise, land subsidence, and sediment supply.

Abrasion platforms are shore platforms where wave action abrasion is a prominent process. If it is currently being fashioned, it will be exposed only at low tide, but there is a possibility that the wave-cut platform will be hidden sporadically by a mantle of beach shingle (the abrading agent). If the platform is permanently exposed above the high-water mark, it is probably a raised beach platform, which is not considered a product of abrasion but may be undercut by abrasion as sea level rises.

Glacial abrasion is the surface wear achieved by individual clasts, or rocks of various sizes, contained within ice or by subglacial sediment as the glacier slides over bedrock. Abrasion can crush smaller grains or particles and remove grains or multigrain fragments, but the removal of larger fragments is classified as plucking (or quarrying), the other major erosion source from glaciers. Plucking creates the debris at the base or sides of the glacier that causes abrasion. While plucking has generally been thought of as a greater force of geomorphological change, there is evidence that in softer rocks with wide joint spacing that abrasion can be just as efficient. A smooth, polished surface is left behind by glacial abrasion, sometimes with glacial striations, which provide information about the mechanics of abrasion under temperate glaciers.

Much consideration has been given to the role of wind as an agent of geomorphological change on Earth and other planets (Greely & Iversen 1987). Aeolian processes involve wind eroding materials, such as exposed rock, and moving particles through the air to contact other materials and deposit them elsewhere. These forces are notably similar to models in fluvial environments. Aeolian processes demonstrate their most notable consequences in arid regions of sparse and abundant unconsolidated sediments, such as sand. There is now evidence that bedrock canyons, landforms traditionally thought to evolve only from the fluvial forces of flowing water, may indeed be extended by the aeolian forces of wind, perhaps even amplifying bedrock canyon incision rates by an order of magnitude above fluvial abrasion rates. Redistribution of materials by wind occurs at multiple geographic scales and can have important consequences for regional ecology and landscape evolution.

Selection

Selection may refer to:






Lynn E. Stalbaum

Lynn Ellsworth Stalbaum (May 15, 1920June 17, 1999) was an American farmer, businessman, and Democratic politician from Racine County, Wisconsin. He served one term in the United States House of Representatives, representing Wisconsin's 1st congressional district in the 89th Congress from 1965 to 1967.

He previously served ten years in the Wisconsin Senate. His elder brother, Merrill E. Stalbaum, served in the Wisconsin State Assembly.

Stalbaum was born on a farm in the town of Norway, Wisconsin, near Waterford, in Racine County. He attended the rural public schools and graduated from the Racine County Agricultural School in 1936. He was employed with the United States Department of Agriculture in Racine County from 1936 to 1944, working on the New Deal Agricultural Adjustment Act program, and serving as administrative officer from 1937.

In 1944, he enlisted in the United States Navy, in the midst of World War II. He served in the Pacific War aboard a U.S. Navy destroyer and participated in the invasion of Luzon in 1945. He was discharged after the end of the war, in 1946, and returned to Wisconsin, where he worked for several years as a feed salesman.

He was secretary-treasurer of the Racine Milk Producers Cooperative Association and manager of the Harmony Dairy Co. from 1951 to 1964.

In 1954 he was elected to the Wisconsin State Senate (reelected in 1958 and 1962), where he served as caucus chairman in 1957, 1959, and 1961, and as assistant minority leader in 1963.

In 1964, Stalbaum announced that he would challenge incumbent Republican congressman Henry C. Schadeberg. He faced a competitive primary and defeated former state senator Gerald T. Flynn with 55% of the vote. He then went on to upset Schadeberg in the 1964 general election, receiving 51.5% of the general election vote in a Democratic wave year.

During his service in the 89th Congress (January 3, 1965January 3, 1967) he sponsored bills on consumer protection, clean water, and GI benefits.

Stalbaum ran for re-election in 1966 and faced a rematch with former congressman Henry C. Schadeberg. The political climate in 1966 was far less favorable for Democrats, and Stalbaum was narrowly defeated, receiving 49% of the vote.

Two years later, Stalbaum made one final attempt to return to office, challenging Schadeberg again. He prevailed in another competitive primary, and the general election rematch produced another close result, but Schadeberg retained his seat, winning just under 51% of the vote. The Vietnam War was a major issue in the 1968 election. Stalbaum had been a reluctant supporter of President Lyndon Johnson's war policies during his term in office, but was advocating a change in strategy in 1968. His primary opponent, Racine teacher Jerald Maiers, a supporter of Eugene McCarthy, asserted that Stalbaum's previous support for the war was disqualifying.

After losing in 1968, Stalbaum remained in the Washington, D.C., area and resided in Bethesda, Maryland, for the rest of his life. He worked as a legislative consultant to rural electric and dairy cooperatives from 1968 until his retirement in 1985.

Lynn Stalbaum was the youngest of three children born to John Martin and Amanda ("" Ebert) Stalbaum. Both parents were natives of Wisconsin, and the Stalbaum farm had belonged to the family since 1854. Lynn's older brother, Merrill E. Stalbaum, also served in the Wisconsin Legislature as a member of the Wisconsin State Assembly and overlapped with Lynn Stalbaum's service during the 1961 and 1963 legislative sessions, making them the only siblings to serve together in the Wisconsin Legislature until Scott and Jeff Fitzgerald in 2001–2013. Unlike the Fitzgerald brothers, Merrill and Lynn Stalbaum had opposing political beliefs and often clashed.

Lynn Stalbaum married Alice Gunderson on April 29, 1950. They had two sons and two daughters and were married for 34 years before her death from cancer in 1984.

Lynn Stalbaum died at George Washington University Hospital in Washington, D.C., on June 17, 1999, due to complications from leukemia.

The Refreshments

The Refreshments may refer to:


The Feeling discography

The discography of The Feeling, a British rock/pop band, consists of six studio albums and twenty two singles.

Their debut album, "Twelve Stops and Home" was released in 2006, and reached number 2 on the UK Albums Chart. The album produced five top-forty singles. Their second album, "Join with Us", produced four singles and reached number 1 on the UK Albums Chart. Their third album "Together We Were Made" reached number 22, but did not produce any singles in the top 100 of the UK Singles Chart. The Feeling's fourth studio album "Boy Cried Wolf" reached number 33 on the UK Albums chart. The band released their self-titled fifth album in March 2016. Predominantly during the Covid-19 2020 lockdowns in London, they recorded and self-produced their sixth studio album "Loss. Hope. Love" to be released early May 2022. In September 2021, as a taster for the new album, they released their version of "This Was Me", which Dan Gillespie Sells wrote for the film adaptation of the West End musical "Everybody's Talking About Jamie".


Golf at the 2006 Asian Games

Golf was contested at the 2006 Asian Games in Doha, Qatar. Men's and women's individual and team events were played at the Doha Golf Club over four rounds from 8 to 11 December. The men played at 7181 yards with a par 72. The Ladies played at 5751 yards with a par 73.

A total of 93 athletes from 18 nations competed in golf at the 2006 Asian Games:


Stephen Kijak

Stephen Kijak (; born 3 October 1969) is an American film director. He is known for films about music and musicians, most notably the feature documentaries (2006), "Stones in Exile" (2010), "We Are X" (2016), "If I Leave Here Tomorrow" (2018), and "Sid & Judy" (2019). His collaborators and subjects include such musical legends and icons as David Bowie, Scott Walker, The Rolling Stones, Jaco Pastorius, Rob Trujillo, Backstreet Boys, X Japan, Lynyrd Skynyrd, Judy Garland, and The Smiths.

Kijak studied with the film scholar and John Cassavetes expert Ray Carney, as well as the late Mel Howard at Boston University's College of Communication. He wrote, directed and produced his debut feature film "Never Met Picasso" (1996) which starred Margot Kidder, Alexis Arquette and Don McKellar (with music by Kristin Hersh). It won awards for both Best Screenplay and Best Actor (for Arquette) at the 1997 Outfest film festival. He went on to make the documentary "Cinemania" (2002), a fascinating look at New York City’s manic-obsessive film buffs in collaboration with German film director Angela Christlieb. The film became a film festival favorite, playing over 25 film festivals worldwide including Locarno International Film Festival, International Film Festival Rotterdam, Edinburgh International Film Festival, SXSW, Tribeca Film Festival, Melbourne International Film Festival, Seattle International Film Festival, Sheffield Documentary Festival, and the Hamptons International Film Festival where it won the Golden Starfish Jury Award for Best Documentary. "Cinemania" grew out of a short film Kijak made called "Movie Madness: The Passion of Jack Angstreich" for John Pierson's show Split Screen that ran on IFC.

His next film was a documentary on musician Scott Walker. The film, titled "" was executive produced by David Bowie, and featured Radiohead, Brian Eno, Sting, Damon Albarn and Jarvis Cocker, and provided a look inside Scott Walker’s creative process over a 40-year career as Walker was completing work on his first album in a decade, "The Drift". The film had its world premiere on October 31, 2006, at the 50th London Film Festival, and premiered internationally at the 2007 Berlin International Film Festival and became one of the most critically acclaimed documentaries released in the UK that year.

"Stones in Exile", a film he directed that was commissioned by The Rolling Stones to tell the story of the making of their 1972 album "Exile on Main St.", had its world premiere at the 2010 Directors' Fortnight in Cannes, followed by broadcast premieres on BBC 1's "Imagine", and on a special edition of "Late Night with Jimmy Fallon" on NBC. The film would be the first of five of Kijak's films to be produced by two-time Academy Award-winning producer John Battsek for his company Passion Pictures. 

In 2012, he teamed with Passion Pictures again and Rob Trujillo from Metallica (making his debut as a film producer) on a feature doc about the late, great legend of the electric bass, Jaco Pastorius.

On February 11, 2013, "The Hollywood Reporter" announced that Kijak would be directing a feature documentary about the biggest-selling boy band of all time, The Backstreet Boys. The film, titled "" was produced by Mia Bays (who produced Kijak's Scott Walker film) and Pulse Films.

"We Are X", a documentary on the heavy metal band X Japan and its leader Yoshiki, was premiered in the World Documentary Competition at the 2016 Sundance Film Festival. Kijak remarked about the film "I might have to quit music films after this one. The story is so unreal, I don't know where else I could go after this." The film was awarded the Special Jury Award for Editing. It then went on to play at SXSW where it won an Audience Award for Excellence in Title Design. It has continued to screen at festivals around the world, including Seattle International Film Festival, BEAT Festival in Moscow, and the Shanghai International Film Festival. It was released theatrically in the US by Drafthouse Films, a division of Alamo Drafthouse Cinema and has been released to great acclaim all around the world, from the UK to Japan and most recently on 100 screens across Russia.

On March 13, 2018, Kijak's documentary "If I Leave Here Tomorrow: A Film About Lynyrd Skynyrd" had its world premiere at the SXSW Film Festival, prior to its US broadcast debut on Showtime on August 18, 2018. Another Showtime documentary followed in 2019: the highly acclaimed "Sid & Judy", a fresh take on the life of Judy Garland framed by the story of Judy's marriage to her third husband Sidney Luft.

Kijak's next project was acting as showrunner of the 4-part docu-drama series "Equal" (2020) for HBO Max. Produced by Scout Productions, Greg Berlanti, and Jim Parson's That's Wonderful Productions, "Equal" tells the stories of the LGBTQ rights movement in the years leading up to the 1969 Stonewall Uprising and the first Pride marches. He directed three of the series' four episodes, with acclaimed filmmaker Kimberly Reed directing one.

His return to narrative filmmaking, "Shoplifters of the World", based entirely around the music of The Smiths, was released in the thick of the COVID pandemic in March of 2021 by RLJ Entertainment and received its first major public screening at the SeeYouSound Film Festival in Turin, Italy in February 2022 as part of a retrospective dedicated to Kijak's music films.

On November 6, 2020 The Hollywood Reporter announced that Kijak's next film would be a documentary about American actor Rock Hudson.



Helotiales

Helotiales is an order of the class Leotiomycetes within the division Ascomycota. The taxonomy within Helotiales has been debated. It has expanded significantly as genomic techniques for taxonomical identification have become more commonly used. , the order is estimated to contain 30 accepted families, 519 genera, and 6266 species.

Helotiales is the largest order of non-stromatic discomycetes that usually, but not always, have brightly coloured apothecia. Many members of the family have obviously cup-shaped ascomata with little or no stipes. They are usually found fruiting on coarse or large wood debris as well as on other organic matter.
Part of these discomycetes are limited to a specific host range, this goes as far as to not just being limited to one particular plant, additionally 
some species need a particular part of that plant.





Great Oakley, Northamptonshire

Great Oakley is an outer suburb of Corby, in the civil parish of Corby Town, in the North Northamptonshire district, in the ceremonial county of Northamptonshire, England. It is situated approximately two miles south west of the town centre and five miles from Kettering. It was represented on Corby Borough Council by one councillor. The population of the Great Oakley Ward of Corby Borough Council at the 2011 Census was 2,248.

Great (and Little) Oakley lie in the upper reaches of the Harpers Brook on a narrow strip of limestone, sandstone and clay where the valley has cut down through the extensive boulder clay capped plateau. This permeable geology presumably provided a narrow strip of open pasture, the oak ley, along the valley within a broad tract of woodland on the boulder clay either side. The townships extended across the boulder clay to tributaries of the Harpers Brook on the south and of the Willow Brook on the north west, where it abutted extensive woodland which lay in the forest.

The name 'Oakley' means 'oak-tree wood/clearing'.

In 1086 there was one manor of Great Oakley held by Launcelin and in the 12th century this was held of the Honour of Huntingdon by de Houton. During the medieval period the main manor can be traced via various families, including the de Lyons in the 14th century. The manor was later divided but brought back together after 1495 by the Brooke family and much of Great Oakley has been in the ownership of the Brooke family, including the De Capell Brooke baronets, since then. The present lord of the manor is Hugh de Capell Brooke, who lives with his family in Great Oakley Hall, which was extensively renovated in the 1960s.

The earliest enclosure recorded in Oakley is in 1505-6 when the Abbot of Pipewell enclosed 26 acres called Oldfald field and expelled five people.

In 1647 a dispute occurred with William Brighunt, keeper of the forest, for trespass by Thomas Brooke by taking conies from the common at Snatchall and collecting tithe wool from lambs that Brighunt had there. Thomas also took wood for his own use during 1625-1695. At the enclosure of the Rockingham Bailiwick in 1833, Great Oakley was considered to be part of Rockingham Forest.

The South Fields were enclosed privately in 1786. A notebook contains great detail of the items to consider and ‘errors to avoid’; it lists the number of yardlands and beast commons, describes fencing and other costs, discussed what the tenants required, took advice from nearby parishes that had been recently enclosed (e. g. Brixworth), as well as giving retrospective information about cropping in the old enclosures and noting that conditions of tenancy had been to supply coal to the Hall.

Great Oakley was also the home of the famous Jack Russell named Roger Moore.

In 1931 the parish had a population of 189. On 1 April 1935 the parish was abolished to form Oakley, On 1 April 1967 Great Oakley became part of Corby when Oakley was abolished.

The present day village is bisected by Great Oakley Park which surrounds the hall. The greater part of the village lies to the north, with Woodlands Lane (forming the rest of the village) to the south. In the centre of the village is the village hall. This was erected in 1921 by Sir Arthur R. de Capell Brooke for the villagers to use for social activities. Next to the hall is the old vicarage, in the grounds of which there is a large grass mound. Rumour has it that a vicar once had this made so that he could feel nearer to Heaven! The original village hall has now been replaced by a new hall adjacent to the cricket club off Lewin Road, behind Lovap Way.

In the grounds of the Hall is St Michael's Church, Great Oakley, which was built of stone in the 13th century. The nave roof is built of Collyweston stone slate. Both the nave and the small tower, which houses three bells, were added to the church in the 16th and 17th centuries. The church register dates from 1718. Inside the church there are several monuments to the Brooke family, and the oak choir stalls are said to have come from the Cistercian abbey at Pipewell. The church is a grade II* listed building.

Harpers Brook flows through the village and this stream was once the boundary of Rockingham Forest. There is a well in the village called Monk's Well. This was mentioned in the Domesday Book, and at one time the villagers used it as their water supply. It can still be seen, and is situated in the grounds of Bridge Farm in Brooke Road.

The old school building remains opposite the old vicarage and the wall-mounted post box in Woodlands Lane may denote the old post office but there is no sign of the former public house or baker's shop.

Although in recent years extensive new housing has been built on land heading towards Corby, much of Great Oakley remains unchanged. A preservation order exists on all trees and stone houses in the village, and this will help to ensure that the character of Great Oakley remains for future generations.

Home of naturalist and environmentalist Marcell Peters. 

St Michael and All Saints Church

Roman Catholic Diocese of Wiener Neustadt

The former Roman Catholic Diocese of Wiener Neustadt in Lower Austria existed from 1469 to 1785. In 1990, it was re-established as a titular see which is held by the bishop for the Military Services in Austria.

Upon the request of the Emperor Frederick III, the diocese was created by Pope Paul II on 14 January 1469, and was immediately subject to the Holy See. At first it was coterminous with the town of Wiener Neustadt.

In 1769 the new parish of Theresienfeld was added and in 1784 its territory was extended from Wiener-Neustadt to the boundary of Styria. On 21 April 1785, the see was incorporated in the Archdiocese of Vienna by Emperor Joseph II. Its last bishop, Johann Heinrich von Kerens, S.J. (1775–1785), and his cathedral chapter were transferred to the newly erected Diocese of Sankt Pölten.

The Late-Romanesque "Dom" or cathedral was consecrated in 1279 and remained the cathedral from 1469 to 1785. The choir stalls and transept, in Gothic style, are from the 14th century. In the late 15th century 12 statues of the Apostles were added in the apse, while the bust of Cardinal Melchior Klesl is attributed to Gian Lorenzo Bernini.





Jüri Tarmak

Jüri Tarmak (21 July 1946 – 22 June 2022) was an Soviet Union high jumper who competed for the Soviet Union.

Tarmak took up athletics in 1963, following his father Aadu Tarmak, who was the Soviet champion in the discus throw in 1943–44. In 1970 he became a member of the Soviet national team. He won a silver and a bronze medal at the European Indoor Championships in 1971 and 1972, and an Olympic gold medal in 1972. Tarmak was the last Olympic champion who used the straddle technique. In 1974 he retired from competitions, and next year graduated in economics from the Saint Petersburg State University. In 1985 he defended a PhD in economics and from 1985 to 1990 lectured at the same university. After the breakup of the Soviet Union he returned to his native Estonia where in 1990 founded an investment company. He later became a vice-president and consultant with the Tallinn Stock Exchange. He remained involved with sport and between 2001 and 2012 headed the sports club Tallinna Kompass.

Drop C tuning

Drop C tuning is an alternative guitar tuning where at least one string has been lowered to a C, but most commonly refers to CGCFAD, which can be described as D tuning with a 6th string dropped to C, or drop D tuning transposed down a whole step. Because of its heavier tone, it is most commonly used in rock and heavy metal music.





Hanuman Garhi Temple

Hanuman Garhi is a 10th-century Hindu temple of Hanuman in Uttar Pradesh, India. Located in Ayodhya, it is one of the most important temples in the city along with other temples such as Nageshwar Nath. This shrine is under the charge of Bairagi Mahants of Ramanandi Sampradaya and Nirvani Akhara.

The subsequent rulers, including Safdarjung and Shuja-ud-daulah, supported the temple's construction with additional revenue land grants. The temple's completion, however, occurred under Diwan Tikait Rai during the governorship of Asaf-ud-daulah in 1799 CE. 

Hanuman Garhi temple is located near Ram Janmabhoomi. In 1855, the Nawab of Awadh granted land revenue to build the temple. Historian Sarvepalli Gopal has said that the 1855 dispute was not for the Ayodhya temple dispute but for the Hanuman Garhi temple.

Hanuman Garhi Temple is shaped like a four-sided fort with circular ramparts at each corner, housing shrines dedicated to the primary deity Hanuman. There are 76 stairs to reach the main temple, where the garbha griha, adorned with silver carvings, awaits. The central has three intricately designed doors leading to the inner chamber. Within, a 6-inch deity of Hanuman, depicted in his youthful (Bal) form, is positioned on the lap of his mother Anjani. A silver tulsi garland, inscribed with the name of Rama is adorned by Hanuman. The verses of the Hanuman Chalisa are inscribed on the temple walls. The temple features a Victory Pillar, known as Vijay Stambh. 



Little Noise Sessions

The Little Noise Sessions was a series of acoustic charity concerts held annually at the Union Chapel, and at St. John at Hackney from 2011 in November, although one was held in Exeter in December 2009. The proceeds of ticket sales were donated to the charity, Mencap. The concerts were hosted by Jo Whiley.

The line-up varies for each night (headline act in bold).










Starship (disambiguation)

A starship is a theoretical vehicle for interstellar travel.

Starship may also refer to:







Sōshi-kaimei

It consisted of two parts. The first was the 1939 Ordinance No. 19, which required "sōshi", literally "creation of a ; see "bon-gwan". The second was the 1940 Ordinance No. 20, which permitted (change of one's given name). These ordinances, issued by Governor-General Jirō Minami, effectively reversed an earlier government order which forbade Koreans to take up Japanese names.

In 1909, the Korean Empire established a civil registration law, starting the creation of a modern family registry system. With regard to the recording of details about women such as the father's surname, age, and connection to the registry holder, due to attention that needed to be given to avoiding conflict with Korean customs, the drafting of the law was not completed until April 1910, just before the annexation of Korea. By that time, a portion of Koreans had already registered Japanese-style names and the like, which generated confusion. As a result, on the basis of memoranda such as Order No. 124, "Document regarding name changes by Koreans" issued by the Governor-General of Korea on November 11, 1911, the use by Koreans of "names which might be mistaken for those of native Japanese" was no longer permitted, and strict controls were placed on the registration of Japanese-style names for newborn children. Additionally, Koreans who had registered Japanese-style names there were required to revert to their original names.

In 1939 and 1940, a new name-change policy came into effect by means of Ordinances No. 19 and 20. Originally, as in Taiwan, the new name-change policy was intended simply to allow change of surname ("sei"/"seong") and given name, but because Korea had a long-established custom (recently abandoned) whereby people of the same "bon-gwan" (surname and clan) were not allowed to marry each other, in order that this custom could continue, it was decided that the policy would be implemented by leaving the clan name and "sei" the same in the family register while permitting a new family name ("shi"/"ssi") to be registered. On the other hand, in Taiwan, which was also under Japanese rule in the same period, but did not have an analogous custom, the policy was not described as the "creation of a "shi"", but was simply .

With regard to the creation of a family name ("shi"), there were both and . In the half-year between February 11 and August 10, 1940, those who provided notification could create a "shi" of their own choosing, while those who did not provide any notification would have their "shi" defined by the clan name ("sei") of the head of the household. After the "creation of a family name", a Korean had three names which are a family name "shi", a clan name "sei", and a personal name "mei" (first name), all of which are recorded in a person's family register along with the origin place of the clan, "bon-gwan". Since all members of a family share the same family name "shi", the wife's "shi", and hence the first character in her legal name, would be the same as her husband's, which differed from the traditional Korean clan name "sei", whereby a wife kept her original "sei" even after marriage (see table). Besides that, selection of a "shi" with a Japanese-style reading could also be approved; to go along with such a "shi", it was also permissible to change one's given name to a Japanese-style name; as the change of given name was voluntary, a fee would be charged for it. Additionally, at the same time, the "mukoyōshi" system, i.e. an , which up until then had been forbidden under Korean law, was also introduced. This case was also included in the "sōshi-kaimei" policy.

Declaration of individually selected "shi" and changes of given name initially (in February 1940) were conducted on the basis of voluntary notification. However, at the April prefectural governors' meeting, because of instructions such as "Special consideration should be taken so that the "shi" registration of all households can be completed by the coming July 20" the administration began to seriously promote the policy, and as a result, starting from April, the number of households registering individually selected "shi" began to rise sharply. As of April, only 3.9% of all households had provided notification for the creation of a "shi", but by August 10, that figure had risen to 80.3%. Also, statements opposing the policy of "sōshi-kaimei" were censored according to the internal security laws. 

There are several viewpoints regarding this sudden increase. Most argue that official compulsion and harassment existed against individuals who would not create a new Japanese-style "shi", but disagree whether this was the result of individual unauthorized practices by low-level officials , the policy of some regional government organizations, or an overall intention of the colonial government. Others argue that Koreans seeking to avoid discrimination by the Japanese voluntarily created Japanese-style family names.

Regardless, of Koreans living in Korea, the proportion of those who changed their given name reached only 9.6%. Among Koreans living in mainland of Japan, the proportion of those who created a new "shi" by individual selection reached 14.2％.

After the liberation of Korea from Japanese rule, the Name Restoration Order was issued on October 23, 1946, by the United States military administration south of the 38th parallel, enabling Koreans to restore their Korean names if they wished to. However, not all Koreans returned to using their original names, especially Koreans living outside of Korea. Many Zainichi Koreans chose to retain their Japanese names, either to avoid discrimination, or later, to meet the requirements for naturalization as Japanese citizens, while some Sakhalin Koreans who had taken Japanese names were registered by Soviet authorities under those names (which appeared on their Japanese identity papers) after the Red Army liberated South Sakhalin, and up to the have been unable to revert their legal names to their original Korean ones.





Pontifical Council for the Pastoral Care of Health Care Workers

The Pontifical Council for the Pastoral Care of Health Care Workers was a pontifical council set up on 11 February 1985 by Pope John Paul II who reformed the Pontifical Commission for the Pastoral Assistance to Health Care Workers into its new form in 1988. It was part of the Roman Curia.

Effective 1 January 2017, the work of the Council was assumed by the Dicastery for Promoting Integral Human Development.

The Apostolic Constitution "Pastor Bonus" describes the work of the council as:

Its tasks also include coordinating the activities of different dicasteries of the Roman Curia as they relate to health care. The Pontifical Council explains and defends the teachings of the Church on health issues. The Council also follows and studies programs and initiatives of health care policy at both international and national levels, with the goal of extracting its relevance and implications for the pastoral care of the Church.




A Bullet in the Heart

A Bullet in the Heart (, translit. Rossassa Fel Qalb) is a 1944 Egyptian drama film directed by Mohammed Karim starring Egyptian actresses Raqiya Ibrahim, Faten Hamama, musician Mohamed Abdel Wahab and actor Seraj Munir. It is based on a novel by Tewfik El-Hakim which was depicted in the 1964 play under the same starring Salah Zulfikar.

Mohsen is a ladies' man. He has a close friend who is a polite doctor. Mohsen meets a lady, Fifi, and falls in love with her. He later discovers that she is engaged to his friend, the doctor. Although she wants to be Mohsen's lady, not the doctor's, Mohsen abandons her—he refuses her love and remains loyal to his friend.




Concerto 1

Concerto 1 is a submarine telecommunications cable system in the North Sea connecting the UK, Netherlands and Belgium. Concerto 1 was built in 1999 by Alcatel for Flute ltd, part of the Interoute group.

It is a triangular system with three submarine segments - Concerto 1 North, Concerto 1 South and Concerto 1 East

Concerto 1 North has landing points at:<BR>
1. near Thorpeness, England, United Kingdom<BR>
3. near Zandvoort, Netherlands

Concerto 1 South has landing points at:<BR>
1. near Thorpeness, England, United Kingdom<BR>
2. near Zeebrugge, Flanders, Belgium

Concerto 1 East has landing points at:<BR>
3. near Zandvoort, Netherlands<BR>
2. near Zeebrugge, Flanders, Belgium

Note that there are two landing points at each location - the landing points are not at exactly the same points.

Love Minus Zero Recordings

Love Minus Zero Recordings is the second subsidiary record label created by siblings Richard and Stephanie Reines (Co-Owners of Drive-Thru Records and Rushmore Records).

Love Minus Zero's was incepted in celebration of Drive-Thru's 10th anniversary. It specialises in the field of Singer-Songwriter music.

November 2006 saw the launch of the labels website and MySpace profile.





Lloyd McGrath

Lloyd McGrath (born 24 February 1965) is an English retired professional footballer.

A hard-working midfielder, McGrath made his senior debut for Coventry City on 28 April 1984 in one of their heaviest defeats ever - an 8-2 Football League First Division defeat at Southampton. However, three years later he took part in the biggest success of their history so far - the 1987 FA Cup Final triumph over Tottenham Hotspur. He set up the winning goal with a cross that was deflected off the knee of Gary Mabbutt.

By the time of his departure to Portsmouth at the end of the 1993-94 season, when the Sky Blues finished 11th in the FA Premier League, he had played 214 league games for the club and scored four goals.

He played for Pompey for the rest of his professional career, retiring in 1997. He now has business interests in the north of Coventry as licensee of the Hawkes Mill Sports and Social Club.

Sir M. Visvesvaraya Institute of Technology

Sir Mokshagundam Visvesvaraya Institute of Technology (commonly referred to as Sir MVIT) is an Indian educational institution located in Bengaluru, Karnataka. The institute is affiliated to Visvesvaraya Technological University and approved by All India Council for Technical Education, New Delhi. Sir MVIT is an certified institution. It offers programs in the field of technical education.

The institute was founded and established in 1986 by the "′Sri Krishnadevaraya Educational Trust′". It was named after Indian scientist Mokshagundam Visvesvaraya.

Sir M Visvesvaraya Institute of Technology is spread out on of barren land along NH 7, near Air Force Station, Yelahanka, in North Bangalore, close to Bengaluru International Airport ( from Bangalore City Junction). Although it is far from the city centre, it is accessible as BMTC buses ply within walking distance, and some pass through the college campus itself, like 283A.

Sir M. Visvesvaraya Institute of Technology has on its campus, men's and women's hostels, 100-bed general hospital, ladies amenities center, staff quarters, guest house, cafeteria, outdoor sports facility spread over and an indoor games complex. Apart from the Engineering College, there's a M.B.A department, Sir M V School of Architecture (B.E) and a Dental College (Krishnadevaraya College of Dental Sciences and Hospital) as well, where all students and working staff can get the treatment done with concessions of 50%. The institute power requirements are met by a dedicated HT power connection from BESCOM and captive power generating units. The institute is connected to all the parts of the city by its own fleet of buses. All the students admitted to the institute are covered by insurance for life and medical care.




"Kalanjali" is an annual inter-collegiate cultural festival of the college that sees participation from students at institutes all across the state. It is usually two- to three-day festival that showcases the college's talent and competitive spirit with students competing statewide. The events normally include:

College also hosts "′Aisiri′" (meaning: richness) an annual cultural event, in the month of March, starting from 2011. the main objective of event is to promote & showcase the rich culture & heritage of Karnataka to all its students, especially non Kannadigas. The event includes performance by various famous artists of Karnataka like Pranesh, Narasimha Joshi, Mysuru Anand, Prof. Krishne Gowda, Indushree, Magician Kudroli Ganesh etc.
"Verve" is an intra-college festival of the same joyous spirit as "Kalanjali" but on a smaller scale. "Kalanjali" counts as the biggest celebrations event at Sir M. Visveswaraya Institute of Technology (Sir M.V.I.T). It is held in October. Apart from that, various other festivals like Technofest, E-fest, Susanskruti & Department level Fests like Zuesville, Aadhar and Petrichor are organized at the college.



Machetazo

Machetazo was a Spanish grindcore/goregrind band from A Coruña formed in 1994. They were one of the few surviving bands from the Spanish underground extreme music scene of the nineties.

Machetazo were formed in A Coruña in 1994 as a side project of two other death metal bands from the area. Initially, they were more noisecore-oriented than grindcore. They recorded two demos, "46 Cabezas Aplastadas por un Yunque Oxidado" in 1995, and "Realmente Disfruto Comiendo Cadáveres" in 1997. The latter was an international underground success, and in 1999 was remastered by the American label Fudgeworthy Records.

At this point Machetazo stopped being a side project and became a band in its own right, although line-up problems forced them to continue with only two members. They recorded their first album "Carne de Cementerio" in 1999, which was released by Razorback Records. After this they released numerous split singles. With Dopi as the sole surviving original member together with the new guitarist Rober, Machetazo recorded their second full length, "Trono de Huesos" (2002). In this work the band gives tribute to the seminal grind sound in a work in the vein of bands like Carcass or Repulsion. After the recording of "Trono de Huesos" Machetazo created a more stable line-up, that still exists today: Dopi (drums and vocals); Carlos "Cadaver" (bass and vocals); and Rober (guitar).

After testing this line-up with two singles, Machetazo released their third full-length album in 2005, "Sinfonías del Terror Ciego", a concept album about the Spanish filmmaker Amando de Ossorio. This record brought them to a wider audience and 2006 was a year of intense touring and projects. They released a split single with Total Fucking Destruction on the American label Relapse Records in 2006. In late 2008, Carlos Cadaver left the band. Santi from the grindcore band Nashgul is the current bass player.



Machetazo's members have developed some side projects over the years:

Dopi is the drummer, bassist and guitarist of Deadmask, a classic doom band influenced by Saint Vitus, Pentagram and Trouble. The other member in the band is the vocalist Nuria. Deadmask released "Under Luciferian Wings", their first MCD in November 2008 with the label PsycheDOOMelic Records.

Dopi is also the vocalist of Dishammer, an old-school thrash crust band with members of Moho, Looking For An Answer and Disnation. They released "Vintage Addiction", their first LP, in December 2008.

Rober is the guitarist and bassist of Banished From Inferno, an old-school death metal trio. The other band members are Roger "Rogga" Johansson, vocalist of Paganizer, Ribspreader or Putrevore; and the drummer Phlegeton, member of Wormed, Human Mincer, Godüs or Unsane Crisis. They released "Banished From Inferno", their first MCD in August 2008 on the label Ibex Moon Records.

Santi is also vocalist in the grindcore band Nashgul, although this is not a side project.

Carlos Cadaver is currently the bassist of the heavy metal band Sister Moon.

Machetazo have released material mainly on two labels: Razorback Records has released its three albums on CD, while the Asturian label Throne Records has released them on vinyl.

Machetazo has also had its material released on many small underground international labels, like Al Pacino Records, Scurvy Records, First Blood Family, Frigidity Records, Goryfied Productions, Hells Headbangers, Irony Records, Last House On The Right Records, Relapse Records, Sterilized Decay Records and Upground Records.



The Refreshments (Swedish band)

The Refreshments are a multiple gold and platinum album selling Swedish rock group formed in 1989 in Gävle, whose works have been nominated for Grammy Awards.

During their first years they mainly played covers of 1950s rock and roll songs. They originally started playing as "The King-Cats," but changed their name to The Refreshments in 1991. Their 1995 first album, "Both Rock'n'Roll", was followed by 1997's "Trouble Boys". Both albums were produced by Billy Bremner, who also played in the band for a few years.

Eleven of the band's fourteen original songs (as of 2011) have been written by bass player Joakim Arnell. Since piano player Johan Blohm joined the band, they have also played an occasional country song. Two of their biggest hits are "Miss You Miss Belinda" and "One Dance, One Rose, One Kiss". The band's 2003 album "Rock'n'Roll X-mas" placed number 1 on the Swedish music chart. 

The Refreshments have also worked with Dave Edmunds, a collaboration that resulted in the live album "A Pile Of Rock". In addition, the band has featured the legendary British guitarist Albert Lee.


With other artists:




The Wedding (miniseries)

The Wedding is a 1998 television film directed by Charles Burnett. Based on the 1995 novel by Dorothy West and written for television by West and Lisa Jones, it stars Halle Berry, Eric Thal, and Lynn Whitfield, and was produced by Oprah Winfrey's production company, Harpo Productions. The story touches on the subjects of marriage, race, prejudice, class, and family in 1950s Martha's Vineyard.

The film aired on ABC on February 22 and February 23, 1998.

Shelby Cole (Halle Berry) returns to Martha's Vineyard and the Cole family home, in a section of town known as 'The Oval', to wed her white fiancé, jazz pianist and composer Meade Howell (Eric Thal). While her black high-society parents initially accept the pair, even arranging the wedding to be held at the mansion, they have growing misgivings as to the pair's ability to withstand the racial prejudice of the time, only made stronger after Meade admits that his own middle-class parents will not be attending the wedding because of their prejudice against their daughter-in-law-to-be. Through frequent flashbacks throughout, we see the racial, societal and class choices made by Shelby's white great-grandmother on her mother's side (Shirley Knight), her grandparents and parents to insure the family's standing, even while those choices may have robbed them of the very happiness they sought. While Shelby dismisses and even rebuffs much of their advice, her own doubts grow as she and Meade go through their own current experiences of racism and racial expectations. Seeing her growing misgivings, Lute McNeil (Carl Lumbly), local architect, father and neighbor of the Coles, sees an opportunity to try to win Shelby's heart, having loved her from afar for some time. With Lute's persistent, sometimes unwanted, attentions, Shelby starts to question her marrying Meade. After a racist incident at a local restaurant, Shelby even confesses to Meade that she doesn't want to spend the rest of her life defending their relationship and asks him to give her time to finally decide.

Meanwhile, Shelby's mother Corinne (Lynn Whitfield) is battling her own demons within her marriage. Through the flashbacks, we see that her doctor husband Clark (Michael Warren) married her not for love, but for her lighter-skinned looks and status. In the present, Corinne discovers that Clark is having an affair, planning to leave her for his longtime nurse-assistant, Rachel (Charlayne Woodard) after the wedding. However, his inability to resolve his guilt about his marriage and children over the years, and several badly-timed phone calls during the wedding to her leave Rachel sadly resigned to the belief that he will never leave Corinne and she leaves him to marry another. On hearing this, Clark decides to try to spark the love in his marriage again with Corinne.

At the same time, Shelby's sister, Liz (Cynda Williams) has her own tribulations with her darker-skinned husband, Dr. Lincoln Odis (Richard Brooks). Lincoln's parents were disinvited from Liz and Lincoln's own wedding by Corinne. Corinne cites Lincoln's parents' discomfort with the local community as the reason, but in actuality Corinne disliked Lincoln's parents' working-class status. That act remains a true bone of contention between Lincoln and Corinne, and he initially refuses to attend Shelby's wedding. With prodding, however, from Liz re-affirming her love for him and explaining that her mother's actions, while horrid, were not at all her own feelings, he finally agrees to come.

Meanwhile, Lute has insisted his wife (Patricia Clarkson) give him a divorce because of her family's prejudice against him and her own ambivalence. Lute's wife has returned from New York to plead her case for reconciliation, suspecting that his request for a speedy divorce in Mexico is spurred by his desire to wed another woman. Lute in a rage forces her out of their home and tries to drive her to the ferry out of town, but in the process accidentally hits his youngest daughter with his car. The noise of their argument has brought out the surrounding neighbors, including Shelby, who, shocked by Lute's vehemence, feels that she 'finally can see who Lute really is', accepting that good character and heart, not race or class, make the human being and turns her heart back to Meade. The two marry in the end.

Alanson M. Kimball

Alanson Mellen Kimball (March 12, 1827May 26, 1913) was an American politician who served as a member of the United States House of Representatives from Wisconsin's 6th congressional district. He also served one term in the Wisconsin Senate, representing Adams, Juneau, and Waushara counties.

Born in Buxton, Maine, Kimball moved to Wisconsin in 1852 and engaged in agricultural and mercantile pursuits, later serving in the Wisconsin State Senate in 1863 and 1864. He was elected as a member of the Republican Party to the United States House of Representatives in 1874 as part of the 44th Congress representing Wisconsin's 6th congressional district. Following his defeat for re-election in 1876, he became involved in the lumber business and served as a delegate to the 1884 Republican National Convention in Chicago.

Kimball died in Pine River, Waushara County, Wisconsin, on May 26, 1913. He is interred at Pine River Cemetery. He was preceded in death by his wife, Frances, and his first son, Charlie.

The town of Kimball, Wisconsin, in Iron County, is named in his honor.

Maurizio Ciaramitaro

Maurizio Ciaramitaro (born 16 January 1982) is a former Italian football midfielder.

A Palermo youth system product, Ciaramitaro was however never constantly included into the first team and was instead often sent out on loan throughout his career: he had spells of such kind at Avellino, Livorno (also co-ownership deal), Cesena (co-ownership deal in second season), Parma and Chievo.

He was bought back from Cesena in June 2006 by terminated the co-ownership agreement but sent to Parma as part of Fabio Simplicio and Mark Bresciano's deal. Igor Budan also left for Parma from Palermo. He returned to Palermo in January 2007. He then left for Chievo on loan with first-option to sign. In January 2009 he left for Salernitana with option to co-own the player.

In July 2009 he was loaned out again, this time to Swiss Super League side AC Bellinzona.

He returned to Palermo in June 2010 after his loan to Bellinzona ended, but the Sicilian club did not find a good destination for him in the summer, thus forcing Ciaramitaro to stay at the team, but without being included into the first team.

On 6 January 2011, he terminated his contract with club and joined Modena on free transfer.


Clean Slate

Clean Slate may refer to:



Vice-captain

Vice-captain, alternate captain (ice hockey) or vice-skip (curling) may refer to a role in a number of sports immediately below the role of captain. The vice-captain may have a number of different roles, including substituting as captain when the regular captain is injured or unavailable, or becoming the new captain if the original captain can't actually "be" the captain anymore. In some instances, vice-captain can be a similar role to a co-captain, in which there are at least two people who equally share the responsibilities of being the vice-captain. For more information on the role in particular sports, see:


Gymnastics at the 2006 Asian Games

Gymnastics was contested at the 2006 Asian Games in Doha, Qatar. Artistic gymnastics took place from December 2 to December 6. Rhythmic gymnastics took place on December 9 and 10, while Trampoline was contested on December 11 and 12. All Gymnastics events took place at Aspire Hall 2.

A total of 167 athletes from 23 nations competed in gymnastics at the 2006 Asian Games:


Christmas ship

Christmas Ship may refer to:


Renal fascia

The renal fascia is a dense, elastic connective tissue envelope enclosing the kidney and adrenal gland, together with the layer of perirenal fat surrounding these two.

The renal fascia separates the adipose capsule of kidney from the overlying pararenal fat. The deeper layers deep to the renal fascia are, in order, the adipose capsule (or perirenal fat), the renal capsule and finally the parenchyma of the renal cortex. At the renal hilum, the renal capsule extends into the renal sinus.

The renal fascia was originally described as consisting of two distinct structures: the anterior renal fascia (Gerota's fascia), and posterior renal fascia (Zuckerkandl's fascia); these two fasciae were said to fuse laterally to form the lateroconal fascia. Understanding of the structure of the renal fascia has subsequently evolved.


Barak hound

The Barak or Bosnian Broken-haired Hound (Bosnian,), is a hunting dog breed developed in Bosnia. The breed is a scenthound, originally used to hunt large game. Other names include Bosnian Rough-haired Hound and Bosnian Rough-coated Hound. These names refer to the texture of the shaggy coat, usually called "broken-haired" or "hard" in English dog fancier jargon.

Today's breed is descended from indigenous dog types, crossed with an Italian gun dog in the 1890s. "Local hunters, wanting to produce an efficient scent hound, developed this breed in the nineteenth century, using the available stock of dogs." The early type of today's smaller Istrian Shorthaired Hound may also have contributed to the Bosnian Coarse-haired Hound.

The Bosnian Coarse-haired Hound was first recognised by the Fédération Cynologique Internationale in 1965 under the name of "Illyrian Hound". The name was changed to more accurately describe its area of origin in Bosnia. The breed is in Group 6, Scenthounds, Section 1.1 Large-sized Hounds, and is breed number 155. It is also recognised by the United Kennel Club (US) as the "Barak", in the Scenthound Group. The breed is not recognised by any other major kennel clubs in the English speaking world, although many minor kennel clubs, internet dog registry businesses, and rare breed registries promote and register it as a unique pet.

The most striking feature of the Bosnian Coarse-haired Hound is its shaggy, hard coat of yellowish (wheaten or red) or greyish colours, often with a white blaze on its head along with other white marks. The standard calls for a body length ten percent greater than height; these proportions are given to differentiate the Bosnian Coarse-haired Hound from other hounds of the area which are "a bit low on leg" Height ranges from at the withers, and weight is between . The dog normally carries its tail curved slightly upward, and its face has a bushy moustache and beard.

The breed standard describes its behaviour as lively, as well as courageous and persistent.


Sir Walter Calverley, 1st Baronet

Sir Walter Calverley, 1st Baronet (1670 – 15 October 1749) was an English aristocrat.

He was the only son of Walter Calverley of Calverley, Yorkshire, and Frances Thompson, daughter and heiress of Henry Thompson of Esholt, Yorkshire. He was baptised on 16 January 1670 at Calverley, and matriculated at Queen's College, Oxford, on 30 June 1687, aged 17.

He married Julia Blackett, eldest daughter of Sir William Blackett on 7 January 1707 at Newcastle. In about 1709, he completed the building of a new house at Esholt Hall, Esholt.

He was created a baronet on 11 December 1711. His wife died on 17 September 1736; he died on 15 October 1749, aged 79, and was buried at Calverley. He was succeeded by his son Walter.


Marshall Caifano

Marshall Joseph Caifano (born Marcello Giuseppe Caifano; July 19, 1911 – September 6, 2003) was an Italian-American mobster who became a high-ranking member of the Chicago Outfit in Las Vegas.

Caifano was born on July 19, 1911, in Sicily, and immigrated to Chicago in the 1920s where he became affiliated with the Chicago Outfit and mobster Paul Ricca. Caifano was a boxer in his youth. In the 1940s, Caifano was sent to Los Angeles. According to author Gus Russo, Bugsy Siegel, who was building a gambling establishment in Las Vegas, was at Virginia Hill's Beverly Hills home with Caifano associate Alan Smiley when another man arrived; Siegel was shot to death, and soon after Gus Greenbaum, the Chicago Outfit's chief Nevada bookie, arrived at Siegel's Flamingo Hotel in Las Vegas and said, "We're taking over." In 1943, Nick Circella, Caifano's associate, was tried for extortion of his girlfriend, Estelle Cary who was about to testify against him until her burned and stabbed body was later found. Caifano was suspected of the murder, but the case was never solved; he was also suspected of several other unsolved killings, including the 1950 murder of former Chicago Police Lt. William Drury, the 1952 strangulation of mobster "Russian Louie" Strauss, and the 1973 shotgun slaying of mobbed up former police officer Richard Cain. In the early 1950s, the Outfit moved in on the highly profitable illegal gambling business of African-American organized crime figure Theodore Roe, and tried to kidnap him, but Roe fatally shot Caifano's brother Fat Lenny during the botched kidnapping attempt in 1951. Roe was tried, but was acquitted based after proving he acted in self-defense, but a year later, Roe was shotgunned to death outside his home; Caifano and Giancana were questioned but were never charged.

In 1964, Caifano was convicted of extorting $60,000 from oilman Ray Ryan, who testified against him. The conviction was upheld in 1966, and Caifano was sentenced to 10 years in prison. Caifano was sentenced to a further 12 years in prison, in 1967, for defrauding a lumber dealer of $42,000. When Caifano was released from prison in the 1970s, Ryan reportedly offered him $1 million in restitution, however, in 1977, Ryan was killed in a car bomb; no one was charged in the murder. In 1980 Caifano was sentenced to 20 years for fencing stolen stock certificates.

A few years after Caifano was released from prison, he died of natural causes on September 6, 2003.


Gerd Wessig

Gerd Wessig (, ; born 16 July 1959 in Lübz, Mecklenburg-Vorpommern) was an East German high jumper who won the gold medal in the 1980 Summer Olympics, the first man ever to set a world record in the high jump at the Olympics.

Wessig, a professional chef, trained with the SC Traktor Schwerin under trainer Bernd Jahn. He attended the John Brinckmann School in Goldberg.

Wessig was 2.01 metres tall and, while he was competing, weighed 88 kilograms (6' 7", 194 lbs). Shortly before the 1980 Olympics, he surprisingly became East German champion, setting a new personal best result of 2.30 metres and was subsequently nominated for the East German Olympic team.

At the 1980 Olympic Games in Moscow, the 21-year-old was thus amongst the mild favourites, but the heavy favorite was the defending champion, Jacek Wszoła, of Poland: at the 1976 Olympics in Montreal, Wszola had established a new Olympic record of 2.25 metres. Early in the 1980 outdoor season, Wszola set a new world record of 2.35 on Sunday 25 May (in Eberstadt, Germany), and this mark was tied the next day by 18-year-old West German Dietmar Mögenburg, at a competition in Rehlingen, Germany. Because of the western nations' boycott of the Moscow Olympics, Mögenburg did not compete. Of the 16 finalists in the men's high jump (all having qualified with jumps of 2.21 on 31 July), thirteen used the Fosbury flop style, and three used the classic straddle.

Wessig not only out-dueled Wszoła for the gold during the finals on 1 August, the two shattered the 1976 mark several times, with clearances at 2.27, 2.29, and 2.31. Wessig began the competition at 2.15, and was flawless until 2.29, when he needed two attempts. That proved to be the decisive height: of the 7 men who cleared the then-new Olympic record of 2.27, only 4 managed to scale 2.29. Those four, the Polish champion versus the entire East German team of Wessig, 18-year-old sensation Jörg Freimuth, and 22-year-old Henry Lauterbach, would now battle for the medals. With the other three men having all cleared 2.29 on their first attempts, Wessig's first miss at that height dropped him to fourth place, out of the medals. But, he leaped back into first place, all alone, with his first attempt clearance of 2.31.

Wessig then out-jumped Wszoła at 2.33 to secure the gold medal. Wessig cleared on his second attempt, with Wszoła just barely brushing the bar off on the third and final attempt. Wessig continued to jump, alone, setting a new world record with his jump of 2.36 metres. He set the new record on his second attempt, with a sensational clearance. Wessig, having taken 11 jumps during the competition through 2.36, then took three attempts at 2.38. He thereby became the first high jumper who had managed to improve on the men's high jump world record at the Olympic Games. The previous world record holder, Wszoła, won the silver medal. Wessig's effort in Moscow was the acme of his career; his world record would stand for three years, and the Olympic record would not be broken until the 1988 games in Seoul.

After the Olympic Games, Wessig tried his luck as a decathlete (best performance: 8015 points, 23 May 1983 in Neubrandenburg; the equivalent of 7974 points according to the scale introduced in 1985). He turned back to the high jump following frequent injuries. In 1985, he came in second at the World Cup. In 1986, he reached seventh place at the European Championships. He became East German champion again 1988 and 1989.

Since the end of his active athletics career, he has been running an enterprise in Lübstorf-Rugensee, Mecklenburg-Vorpommern which sells sport equipment, sport and leisure systems, as well as park and garden systems. He married the long jumper Christine Schima (best performance: 6.96 metres, 1984; seventh place at the 1982 European Championships).


Chlorociboria

Chlorociboria is the type genus of in the fungal family Chlorociboriaceae within order Helotiales. The genus includes 23 species.

Two common temperate zone species, "Chlorociboria aeruginascens" and "Chlorociboria aeruginosa", can only reliably be distinguished by microscopic examination. "Chlorociboria aeruginosa" has larger spores (9–15 µm × 1.5–2.5 µm) and the worm-like cells of the outer surface are rough, unlike the commoner "C. aeruginascens", of which the spores are 6–10 µm × 1.5–2 µm.

The hyphae and fruit bodies of all species make xylindein, a secondary metabolite that stains the substrate wood blue-green, with "green oak" being a valued commodity in woodworking. The blue-green pigmented wood is featured in Tunbridge ware.

Blue-green stain is evident year-round, with ascocarp production occurring from summer to fall.




James Squillante

Vincent James Squillante, also known as Jimmy Jerome (June 7, 1919 – disappeared September 23, 1960), was an American New York mobster who belonged to the Gambino crime family and was known as "king of the garbage collection racket". Squillante also worked as an assassin for mob boss Albert "Mad Hatter" Anastasia.

Squillante was born to Luigi and Bedelia Alberti, one of two sons, the other being Nunzio and seven sisters. He married Theresa Scialabba in 1949 and fathered one child, Bedelia. He divorced Theresa in 1951 and married Olivia Hughes and fathered two daughters with her, Donna and Olivia. He is the uncle to mobster Jerry Mancuso. In 1963, Government informant Joe Valachi claimed that Squillante participated in the 1957 slaying of Anastasia underboss Frank "Don Cheech" Scalise. After the murder, Scalise's brother Joe publicly declared that he would avenge Frank's death. However, the Gambino family did not support Joe's declaration, possibly due to Anastasia's opposition. As a result, Joe was forced into hiding for several months until the family ostensibly forgave him. On September 7, 1957, according to Valachi, Squillante invited Joe to his house. Once Joe arrived, Squillante and several others murdered him, dismembered his body, loaded the remains onto one of Squillante's garbage trucks, and dumped them.

In fall 1960, Squillante was indicted on extortion charges. Reportedly, the Gambino family worried that Squillante could not handle the upcoming trial and probable prison sentence. So, to "put him out of his misery," the family ordered Squillante's death. On September 23, 1960, Squillante disappeared. According to some accounts, Squillante was handcuffed alive to the steering wheel of a rusty Chevrolet and the car was moved into a baling press type compactor. The metal was then melted down in an open hearth furnace. However, some newspaper accounts of that period claim that Squillante was seen on September 30 at 2 a.m. driving around the Bronx in his brother-in-law's car. Squillante's body was never found and no murder suspects were ever arrested.





Chris Lawn

Chris Lawn is a former Gaelic footballer who played for the Tyrone county team. He was on the substitutes bench for the entirety of the 2003 final, and came on as a substitute in the 2005 final, for the injured Joe McMahon. He has All-Ireland medals from 2003 and 2005. He was nominated for an All-Star award in 1995, but did not win. He also, until this day, has been a long serving stalwart of the Moortown team, including a brief stint as manager.

After championship success in 2005, he, along with Peter Canavan, announced his retirement from inter-county football.

Until recently he managed the Cookstown Fr. Rock's club side and led them to promotion and an intermediate all-ireland club championship in 2009.

William White (gangster)

William Jack "Three Fingers" White (1900-January 23, 1934) was a Prohibition gangster and member of the Chicago Outfit. 

His nickname was related to a childhood accident after a falling brick from a construction site had crushed his right hand, resulting in the loss of two fingers. Self-conscious of his deformed hand, White would wear a white glove in public with cotton stuffed in the empty fingers. 

In 1919, he was convicted of robbery and served a prison sentence in Joliet Correctional Center until winning parole within four years.

An early member and much respected gunman of Johnny Torrio-Al Capone organization, White would be declared a public enemy in the Chicago Crime Commission's first published report in 1923 of those ""who are constantly in conflict with the law"" along with James "Mad Bomber" Belcastro, Edward O'Donnell, Jake Guzik, and Al Capone. The following year, White was twice convicted for the murder of Forest Park policeman Edward Pflaume and, despite being released on appeal by the State Supreme Court, he was imprisoned for several years.

Following his release, White returned to work for the Chicago Outfit as a labor racketeer competing against rival mobster Roger Touhy (eventually planning the murder of Touhy supporter Teamsters International Vice President Paddy Barrel). In 1933, White and Frankie Rio were supposedly sent to Florida by Paul Ricca to oversee the assassination of Anton Cermak, appearing with Franklin Roosevelt, by Giuseppe Zangara. However, they were held in custody and searched by Chicago police while waiting with politician Harry Hockstein in the main terminal of a Chicago train station on February 13.

According to the testimony of Roger Touhy to the Illinois Parole Board in 1957, White and Rio began shooting at Zangara however hit several bystanders instead before disappearing into the crowd dressed in police uniforms of the Cicero Police Department.

In May 1933, he was convicted on weapons charges and served a year in jail as well as issued a $300 fine although an appeal was later taken.

His body was found in his Oak Park apartment, suffering gunshot wounds to the head and body, after a gunfight with two unidentified gunmen seen fleeing from the building on the night of January 3, 1934.

He would later be portrayed by Gavin MacLeod as "Three Fingers" Jack White on the original television series "The Untouchables".

In a 1935 letter to the FBI director J. Edgar Hoover, amateur investigator Frank Farrell identified White as the organizer of the Saint Valentine's Day Massacre. According to Farrell, White perpetrated the massacre as a revenge against Frank Gusenberg and Peter Gusenberg for the murder of his cousin William Davern Jr the previous year. Farrell's theory is generally discarded, mainly on the grounds that there is strong evidence that White had still been in jail at the time of the massacre. 




Palais Nikaïa

Palais Nikaïa () is an indoor concert hall and multi-purpose facility located in Nice, France. It opened on 4 April 2001, and is located five minutes' drive from Côte d'Azur International Airport. The name Nikaïa derives from the ancient Greek settlement, predecessor of today's Nice. In addition to concerts, Palais Nikaïa can host variety shows, sporting events and conventions.

On its own, Palais Nikaïa has seats for between 1,500 and 6,250 persons depending upon configuration, with an upwards maximum of 9,000 capacity including those standing. However, in a unique arrangement, it is located next to the outdoor Stade Charles-Ehrmann, with sliding glass doors to operate between them, and the two in combination can be used to host very large concerts with up to 50,000 or more in attendance.

Palais Nikaïa was built in 2000 and 2001 by the architects André Grésy and Serge Grésy, who had previously participated in the plans of the Zénith de Toulouse, as well as by Louis Chevalier. It was inaugurated on 4 April 2001 in the presence of Albert, Hereditary Prince of Monaco and Elton John. The latter then gave the first concert in the venue. From 2001 to 2009, the palace was managed by  and Denis Thominet via the . In June 2009, the municipality chose as its new delegate the Vega Group associated with the French subsidiary of the Live Nation group in an operating structure called , and 70% owned by Vega.

Following the death of Johnny Hallyday on 5 December 2017, two days later the Mayor of Nice Christian Estrosi proposed that the venue be renamed in Hallyday's honour. Finally, the municipal council decided that only the forecourt of the performance hall would be renamed with the name of the singer.

Depeche Mode performed at the venue on May 4, 2013, during their Delta Machine Tour, in front of a recording-breaking sold-out crowd of 9,904 people. The venue hosted the 2013 Jeux de la Francophonie which took place in Nice from 6 to 15 September 2013. The disciplines practiced in this venue were judo and freestyle wrestling.

The venue hosted the Junior Eurovision Song Contest 2023, which took place on 26 November 2023.


Chrysler Classic

The Chrysler Classic was a golf tournament held in Australia from 1973 to 1976. Prize money was A$50,000. Bob Shearer won the event twice in the four years it was held.

In 1976 Shearer won at the first extra hole.

Cecil Gould

Cecil Hilton Monk Gould (24 May 1918 – 7 April 1994) was a British art historian and curator who specialised in Renaissance painting. He was a former Keeper and deputy director of the National Gallery in London.

Born in London in 1918, Gould was the son of Admiralty Lieutenant-Commander Rupert Gould, the restorer of John Harrison's chronometers and well-known panellist of the BBC's "Brains Trust" programme during WWII, and Muriel Estall. Gould was educated at Kingswood House preparatory school, near Epsom, and then at Westminster School. When he was nine, Gould's mother permanently separated from his father and raised Cecil and his sister Jocelyne. After leaving school he began studying at the Courtauld Institute in 1939, although he was not able to complete his degree due to the outbreak of World War II.

During the Second World War he served as Pilot Officer Gould in R.A.F. Intelligence, first in Egypt from 1941 to 1943 and then in Normandy, France. In early 1945 he was transferred to the Monuments, Fine Arts, and Archives program under the Civil Affairs and Military Government Sections of the Allied armies, which was established in 1943 to help protect cultural property in war areas during and after World War II. The group of approximately 400 service members and civilians, known commonly as the "Monuments Men", worked with military forces to safeguard historic and cultural monuments from war damage, and as the conflict came to a close, to find and return works of art and other items of cultural importance that had been stolen by the Nazis or hidden for safekeeping. During the war Gould's sister Jocelyne worked at Bletchley Park.

After the war, he joined the National Gallery staff in 1946 and worked there until his retirement in 1987. He was Keeper and deputy director for the last five years of his tenure. Upon retiring from the National Gallery he moved to Thorncombe in West Dorset. He was a prolific author, publishing many books and articles during his career.

In 1970, Gould established that the National Gallery's "Portrait of Pope Julius II" was the prime version by Raphael and not a copy, as had previously been thought. He was also responsible for a new attribution of a work to Michelangelo.

In his last years Gould lived with his younger sister Jocelyne Stacey in the village of Thorncombe, Dorset. Towards the end of his life, with his health declining, Cecil was made a "correspondant" (foreign associate) of the Institut de France. He developed a brain tumour and, after a short illness, died on 7 April 1994. Gould never married and was survived by Jocelyne.

A collection of Gould's large-format black-and-white photographs of Islamic architecture in Cairo, taken during World War II, is in the RIBA library. Other photographs taken by Gould are held in the Conway Library at the Courtauld Institute and are currently being digitised.

Gould was portrayed during his childhood in the 2000 Channel 4 television drama about John Harrison's chronometers, "Longitude". He was played by child actor Joe Williams.




Ferdinando Sanseverino, Prince of Salerno

Ferdinando (Ferrante) Sanseverino, Prince of Salerno (18 January 1507 – 1568) was an Italian condottiero with "Renaissance prince" ideals.

Born in Naples, he was the son of Roberto II Sanseverino ( ) and a noble girl from a Salerno family. Fernando Sanseverino was the fourth and last of the Sanseverino Princes of Salerno.

He fought for Emperor Charles V in Germany and France. He took part to Charles' incoronation in Bologna (1530), and was also present at the Conquest of Tunis (1535).

He was one of the imperial leaders in the fourth war against Francis I of France and fought at the battle of Ceresole (1544). Returning to Naples, he clashed with the Spanish viceroy Pedro de Toledo, due to his opposition to the institution of Holy Inquisition tribunals in the Kingdom of Naples. He therefore moved to France at the court of King Henry II, embracing the Huguenot faith. His Italian fiefs were given to the Gonzaga family.

Ferdinando Sanseverino died at Avignon, in France, in 1568.

He was a passionate supporter of contemporary theatre, and had one built within his palace in Naples.

His refusal to accept the Inquisition inside his possession in Salerno created a break between him and the Spanish government in southern Italy. Mainly as a consequence of this, Fernando Sanseverino was forced to exile in France.

There, he organized a naval attack of French ships against Naples and Salerno, but it failed because the allied Turkish fleet didn't show up.

His legacy in the Principality of Salerno was to bring to the southern Italian city (and the surrounding area) the ideas of the Italian Renaissance. He brought to Salerno Torquato Tasso for some years.



KVNA (AM)

KVNA (600 AM) is a radio station broadcasting a sports format. Licensed to Flagstaff, Arizona, United States, the station serves the Flagstaff area. The station is currently owned by Yavapai Broadcasting Corporation.

KVNA is also heard on FM translator K284BO at 104.7 MHz broadcasting from Mt. Elden and serving the greater Flagstaff area, giving the station the "Sunny 104.7" identification. KVNA has been granted an FCC construction permit to move to a different transmitter site and increase the night power to 70 watts.

Today's KVNA started as KEOS, which used the slogan "Service in Sound in Northern Arizona" in the 1950s and 1960s. The station was owned by Flagstaff businessman Jack Bird and licensed to Thunderbird Broadcasting Company; the call letters stood for the initials of the first owner, E.O. Smith. KEOS ("Chaos") was a 1,000-watt daytimer signing off at sunset each day on the 1290 AM frequency.

In 1963, the second radio station to operate in Flagstaff failed. KGPH signed on December 6, 1950, from studios in the Weatherford Hotel. The station would relocate from 1230 kHz to 690 in 1953. KGPH was bought by a part-owner of Phoenix's KOY in April 1956; the new owners changed the callsign to KVNA. In June 1963, KVNA was sold to Frontier Television for $95,000. KVNA was described as defunct by that September, and in October, KEOS filed to take over the superior 24-hour facilities that belonged to KVNA. The application was approved in 1966, but it was not until the station completed construction of its new studio facilities, on September 8, 1969, that it moved to 690. The new KEOS broadcast with 1,000 watts day and 500 watts night, DA-2. The station later changed its call sign to KZKZ after it was sold in 1981.

After Communications Ltd. (Ed Raabe and Paul Seyler) purchased the station in 1986, they changed the call sign from KZKZ to KVNA (returning the callsign to the frequency for the first time since 1963), and paired it with a new FM station at 97.5 MHz (KVNA-FM).

On July 14, 1988, the station that had been recognized as Northern Arizona's news and sports station, KCLS at 600 kHz, shut down when its owner opted to convert the land into a mobile home park. KVNA moved to acquire on-air talent, including the former KCLS general manager, and sports rights including Los Angeles Dodgers baseball and Flagstaff High School football. In the mid-1990s, under new ownership, KVNA would acquire the dormant KCLS license in order to relocate KVNA to 600 kHz.

On December 30, 2014, the "Sunny" AC format of KVNA-FM moved to KVNA and its FM translator as "Sunny 104.7". KVNA flipped to sports talk in 2019.

owned no other radio stations
owned no other radio stations
owned stations in Kansas along with 97.5 KVNA-FM and was to sign on current KMGN
owned sister stations KZGL-FM, KVNA-FM along with stations in Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, California, New Mexico and Minnesota
currently owns KQST-FM, KVNA-FM, KVRD-FM, KKLD-FM, KYBC-AM

Some notable radio personalities have worked at either KVNA or KCLS earlier in their careers. Tim Hattrick of the well known Phoenix morning team of Tim and Willie (who have worked at KMLE and KNIX) started at KZKZ while in college at Northern Arizona University. Jim Sharpe, who has worked mornings in several major markets, including Los Angeles spent some of his early radio career at KCLS in the early 1980s. Some other notable personalities and shows to appear on either station were:



Burr W. Jones

Burr W. Jones (March 9, 1846January 7, 1935) was an American lawyer, politician, jurist, and law professor. He was a member of the United States House of Representatives in the 48th Congress, and a justice of the Wisconsin Supreme Court.

Born in the Town of Union, in Rock County, Wisconsin Territory. His father and mother had migrated to the Wisconsin Territory from Western Pennsylvania and Western New York, respectively. His father, William Jones, died in 1855, and his mother then married Levi Leonard, a pioneer of Rock County.

Jones was raised on a farm and attended the Evansville Seminary, in Evansville, Wisconsin. He then taught at the school for three years to pay for his university education. He graduated from the literary department of the University of Wisconsin in 1870, and then from the law department in 1871. After leaving the university, he studied law in the office of William Freeman Vilas and was admitted to the State Bar of Wisconsin that year. Near the end of 1871, he began practicing law in Portage, Wisconsin, but within a year moved to Madison. While in Madison, he went through a series of partnerships, with Alden Sprague Sanborn, A. C. Parkinson, F. J. Lamb, and E. Ray Stevens.

In November 1872, Jones was elected district attorney for Dane County, Wisconsin. He was then re-elected in 1874. In 1882, he was elected to the 48th Congress (March 4, 1883 – March 3, 1885) on the Democratic Party ticket in Wisconsin's 3rd congressional district. He was defeated seeking re-election in 1884. In Congress, he served on the House Committee on War Claims, and served as acting Chairman when the chairman was unavailable with a long illness.

Jones returned to Madison and became a professor of law at the University of Wisconsin for the next thirty years of his life. He remained involved in local affairs and government, serving as City Attorney in 1891, and as chairman of the first Wisconsin Tax Commission in 1897 and 1898.

In 1894 he served as attorney for University of Wisconsin professor Richard T. Ely during the effort to remove Ely for discussing socialism and allegedly holding unpopular views, the controversy which led to the sifting and winnowing statement.

He also remained active with the Wisconsin Democratic Party. He was chairman of the Democratic State convention in 1892, and represented Wisconsin as a delegate to the 1896 Democratic National Convention at Indianapolis, where he was chosen to nominate Edward S. Bragg for president.

In 1920, he was appointed to the Wisconsin Supreme Court by Governor Emanuel L. Philipp, to fill the vacancy created by the death of justice John B. Winslow. In April 1922, Jones was elected to fill the remainder of Winslow's term, which expired in 1926. He did not seek re-election in 1925, and in January 1926 he was replaced by his former law partner E. Ray Stevens.

Jones returned to the practice of law.

Jones married Olive L. Hoyt in December 1873. They had one daughter together. After the death of his first wife in 1906, he married Katharine McDonald, who survived him.

After thirty years as a professor at the University of Wisconsin Law School, he was conferred a LL.D. in 1916. He was chairman of the Dane County Bar Association and, in 1908, was President of the State Bar Association. In 1896, he published a treatise on the law of evidence in civil cases, followed by two subsequent volumes.

Jones died in a hospital in Madison, on January 7, 1935. He was interred at Madison's Forest Hill Cemetery.

One of the Kronshage dormitories at the University of Wisconsin–Madison is named after him, as well as a Madison city park on the Yahara River.

The television series "Profiles in Courage" did an episode in 1964 titled "Richard T. Ely" about the "sifting and winnowing" incident. Jones was played by Leonard Nimoy.


Elvin A. Kabat

Elvin Abraham Kabat (September 1, 1914 – June 16, 2000) was an American biomedical scientist and one of the founding fathers of quantitative immunochemistry. Kabat was awarded the Louisa Gross Horwitz Prize from Columbia University in 1977, National Medal of Science in 1991, and American Association of Immunologists Lifetime Achievement Award in 1995. He is the father of Jon Kabat-Zinn.

Elvin A. Kabat was the president of the American Association of Immunologists from 1965 to 1966, a member of the National Academy of Sciences, and a fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. He designed the eponymous Kabat numbering scheme for numbering amino acid residues in antibodies based on their variable regions. In 1969, he started collecting and aligning the amino acid sequences of human and mouse Bence Jones proteins and immunoglobulin light chains.

While working under Michael Heidelberger at the Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, Kabat studied the carbohydrate chemistry of embryonic-state-specific antigens and markers of white blood cells. Additionally, he discovered the chemical basis of the ABO blood group system.

During World War II, Kabat worked for the National Defense Research Committee on developing a meningitis vaccine, accurate syphilis test, and detectors for neutralizing the plant toxin ricin.

Kabat is best known for discovering the structural and genetic basis for the specificity of antibodies. After showing that antibodies are gamma globulins, he used oligosaccharides of different lengths to interfere with antibodies attempting to bind to the blood plasma substitute dextran, accurately estimating the size and shape of antibody-binding sites before the development of X-ray crystallography.

During his career, Kabat served on advisory panels for the National Research Council, Office of Naval Research, National Science Foundation, National Multiple Sclerosis Society, American Foundation for Allergic Diseases, New York Blood Center, Roche Institute of Molecular Biology, Institute of Cancer Research, and Gorgas Memorial Laboratory, Panama. Additionally, he was a member of the World Health Organization's Advisory Panel on Immunology from 1965 to 1989.

Kabat's parents arrived in the United States from Eastern Europe toward the end of the 19th century, changing their last name from Kabatchnick to Kabat. The bankruptcy of his family's dress manufacturing business during the Great Depression led to Kabat's life-long miserly attitudes toward personal and laboratory expenditures. Elvin began high school in New York City at the age of 12. Graduating in three years, he started at the City College of New York at the age of 15, graduating in 1932 with a major in chemistry at age 18.

In January 1933, Kabat began working in Michael Heidelberger's laboratory by conducting routine lab chores at the Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, introduced through Heidelberger's wife Nina, a customer of the Kabat family's dress business. Kabat started work on his Ph.D. in the Department of Biochemistry by taking night courses to graduate in only four years.

As part of a post-doctoral fellowship funded by the Rockefeller Foundation, Kabat studied new methods of ultracentrifugation and electrophoresis alongside Arne Tiselius and Kai Pederson in Theodor Svedberg's Uppsala University lab in Sweden to research Immunoglobulin G (IgG). In 1938, he returned to New York City to take up a position as an instructor of pathology at Cornell University Medical College, working there for three years.

Kabat spent the majority of his career as a faculty member of the Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons. Hired as a research associate by the department of biochemistry in 1941, he joined the faculty of the department of bacteriology as an assistant professor in 1946. Kabat became an associate professor of bacteriology in 1948, and a professor in the newly renamed department of microbiology in 1952. He was named the Higgins Professor of Microbiology in 1983, and Higgins Professor of Microbiology Emeritus in 1985. Aside from publishing over 470 articles and many textbooks while affiliated with Columbia University, he also taught future Nobel Laureate Baruj Benacerraf.

Following President Harry S. Truman's 1947 Executive Order 9835 mandating loyal screenings of all federal employees, Kabat was reported by Swedish biochemist James B. Sumner for supposedly being a Communist sympathizer. Kabat was dismissed from his research position at the Bronx Veterans Administration Hospital, interfering in his study of the histochemical localization of enzymes. Additionally, he was stripped of his passport and prevented from attending international conferences until the US District Court for the District of Columbia's 1955 ruling in "Boudin v. Dulles" that passports could not be denied over undisclosed information.

After being selected by the National Institutes of Health as a Fogarty Scholar in 1974, Kabat continued to conduct government research alongside his teaching at Columbia University well after his 1985 emeritus appointment, maintaining a working research laboratory and remaining an active member of the Department of Microbiology until his death.

In 1942, Kabat married Sally Lennick, a young Canadian art student. They had three children, one of whom is the American developer of mindfulness-based stress reduction (MBSR), Jon Kabat-Zinn. Since 2001, the families of Michael Heidelberger and Kabat have worked with Columbia University's Department of Microbiology and Immunology to organize a roughly annual Heidelberger-Kabat Distinguished Lecture in Immunology.

Coketon, West Virginia

Coketon is an unincorporated community and coal town in Tucker County, West Virginia, United States. Coketon lies at the confluence of Snyder Run and the North Fork Blackwater River, south of the town of Thomas.

The town was formed by the Davis Coal & Coke Company, led by Henry G. Davis, in the 1880s after large coal reserves were discovered in the area. In the company's prime, the town housed around 1,500 people, most of whom were immigrants. During each year from 1915 to 1921, the 15 mines near Coketon shipped over 1 million tons of coal, making it the sixth most productive operation in West Virginia at the time. The Davis Coal & Coke Company pioneered the "beehive" ovens, which were large sealed ovens which heated the coal to burn off impurities to make coke. The Davis Coal & Coke Company experimented with two of these ovens in 1887, and by 1900, there were over 600 beehive ovens. However, in 1915, a change in mining technology revolutionized the steel-making process, thereby eliminating the need for coke ovens at the mine site. By 1919, there was no coke production whatsoever in Tucker County, leaving the long banks of obsolete coke ovens unused.

Soon after, coal production in Coketon also began fading. From the 1920s to the 1940s, the underground coal supplies were gradually depleted. As the coal production slowed and the mines closed, the population slowly declined, and the facility slowly began to shut down. By 1950, only two mines were still working and tonnage had fallen to 100,000 by 1954. By 1956, underground mining had ceased altogether with a few surface mining operations producing coal through 1965.

The Coketon Colored School was the center of a Civil Rights case in 1892. When the all-white Tucker County Board of Education instructed the Coketon Colored School’s teacher Carrie Williams to shorten the school year and teach three months less than the county’s white schools, Williams continued teaching for the full eight-month schedule and demanded full pay. Her lawyer, J.R. Clifford, was a prominent civil rights activist and the first African American lawyer in West Virginia. The case started in the Tucker County Courthouse in Parsons, and eventually reached the West Virginia Supreme Court. Their eventual victory in court was the first civil rights case in the history of the United States to determine discrimination on the basis of color to be illegal.

Vladimir Kiselyov

Vladimir Viktorovich Kiselyov (; ; sometimes listed as Volodymyr Kyselyov 1 January 1957 – 7 January 2021) was a Soviet-born Ukrainian athlete who mainly competed in the shot put during his career.

He competed for the USSR in the 1980 Summer Olympics held in Moscow, Soviet Union where he won the gold medal in the men's shot put event.

In 1985, Kiselyov lost 25 kg (55 lbs) and almost died as a result of past use of prohibited substances, specifically testosterone.


Seton Sands

Seton Sands is a rocky beach to the east of Port Seton, East Lothian, Scotland. It is situated at the western end of Longniddry Bents and is part of the John Muir Way coastal walk.

Low tide reveals many rock pools, then a flat sandy bed to the north which runs about 200 yards out to meet the Firth of Forth.

South of the beach there is Seton Sands Holiday Park, a popular holiday destination in the summer months for many visitors, mostly families from the west coast of Scotland and the north of England.

At the western edge of the caravan park is a public footpath leading to the Historic Scotland property Seton Collegiate Church, referred to locally as Seton Chapel.

A regular bus service to Edinburgh terminates at Seton Sands (Lothian Buses no.26).



Rebecca Worthley

Rebecca Worthley (born 1981) is an English singer-songwriter from Exeter, Devon, England.

Worthley recorded her first album, "Myths and Elegies", in 2005. The album was voted one of the top 25 independent albums of 2006 by indie-music.com. The following year she met music producer Mark Hill who helped produce her 2006 eponymously titled EP. The acoustic version of Worthley's song "Consumed", which is recorded on both CDs, was used that year on a YouTube video about sweatshop labor. In April 2007, Worthley was the first musician to perform on SofaGig, an online music venue. She was the only musician from outside Plymouth invited to perform for The Still Sessions at Plymouth Gin Distillery for an acoustic compilation album. Rebecca has also received national airplay on BBC Radio 2, and performed a live session with Radio 2 producer Bob Harris on 17 February 2007. Her new album "Morning Comes to Those Who Wait" was released on Peppy Records in June 2008 and features two tracks by producer Sean Genockey.

In addition to singing, Worthley plays banjo, musical box, singing bowl and classical and acoustic guitars. Her musical style has been likened to that of Joni Mitchell.



Guelph Indians

The Guelph Indians were a Canadian junior ice hockey team in the Ontario Hockey Association from 1936 to 1940. After four seasons of play, the Guelph Biltmore Hat Company became the team's sponsors, and the team changed names to the Guelph Biltmore Mad Hatters. Guelph's best season was 1937–38, when they played in the OHA championship series for the J. Ross Robertson Cup, but lost to the Oshawa Generals.

Seven alumni from the Guelph Indians later played in the National Hockey League.
Season-by-season results.

Livonia (album)

Livonia is the debut album by His Name Is Alive. It was originally released by 4AD on June 25, 1990 in the United Kingdom and in 1992 on 4AD/Rykodisc in the United States.

"Livonia" is the debut LP by Livonia, Michigan's His Name Is Alive (or HNIA). Frontman Warren Defever began recording on a cassette tape 4-track recorder in his parents' basement while still in high school. As a result, this album is made up of material originally recorded from 1985 through 1989, rough versions of which appeared in 1988 on a self-released cassette called "I Had Sex With God."

In a 2006 interview, Defever recounts that he sent the cassette to 4AD label president Ivo Watts-Russell in 1988, who initially felt that Defever and his band "needed a lot of work." Ivo also said he wasn't interested in signing any more American bands, due to the difficulty of time zone differences and finding US distribution. He also suggested that Defever try Rough Trade's US branch. Defever responded that he had already been rejected by that label, and continued to submit cassettes to 4AD, with revised and improved versions of the songs appearing on each new tape.

Over time, Ivo and his This Mortal Coil partner John Fryer felt they could actually mix Defever's home recordings into something that 4AD could release, and the album finally appeared in the summer of 1990. Due to Ivo and Fryer's contribution, along with other superficial similarities, HNIA were often compared to This Mortal Coil during their early years.

The recordings originally consisted of Defever providing the bulk of the music, with Angie Carozzo providing vocals. Once Defever met Karin Oliver in college, he recruited her to become the band's primary vocalist. The album still credits Carozzo as a member, although very few of her vocals remain in the finished product (tracks 10 and 11), and she left the band shortly after the album's release.

The album was available in the United States only as an import until 1992, when Rykodisc reissued the album on CD, with an instrumental bonus track called "Livonia" appearing at the end of the album. That bonus track was available only on the Rykodisc pressing and was not included on any subsequent 4AD reissues.



In 2006, Defever released through his Silver Mountain Media record label a new version of "Livonia", with instrumental strings versions of most of the songs from the original album. In the interview referenced above, Defever said the strings project was originally conceived as a joke while still signed to 4AD. He tried to convince the label that he had originally intended the album to be done with strings and he should be given the chance to re-record the album as "originally intended."

4AD actually allowed Defever to move forward with the project, but has refused to release the recordings. Defever re-recorded the project sometime after leaving the label, although details are scarce. It was actually first released as disc 5 of the "Cloud Box " 10-CD box set on Time Stereo in 2004, under the name "Mystery Spot". While Defever gave detailed notes about each CD of this set, his notes on "Mystery Spot" only said "I don't wanna talk about it, but once you listen you can figure it out, if you're smart."

Defever also said his intentions for releasing the project was to show 4AD that there was still interest in "Livonia" in America, where the label is not keeping the album (along with the rest of HNIA's 4AD catalog) in print in the United States, despite nothing preventing them from doing so.

The strings CD release was a very limited edition; only 100 copies were made, which sold out very quickly. It is now currently available as a paid MP3 download from the Silver Mountain Media website.

Buck Privates Come Home

Buck Privates Come Home is a 1947 American comedy film directed by Charles Barton and starring the team of Abbott and Costello. It was released by Universal-International and is a sequel to their earlier film "Buck Privates" (1941).

This film marks the final role of veteran actor Nat Pendleton and the film debut of Russ Conway (in the role of an unnamed medic).

After serving in Europe during World War II, Herbie Brown and Slicker Smith return to the United States aboard a troop ship. Also on board is their old nemesis, Sgt. Collins. As the ship nears New York, Collins and his superiors search the men's belongings for contraband. Herbie accidentally activates a time bomb, made to look like a camera, that he picked up as a souvenir and has to throw it out the porthole.

A six-year-old French orphan, Evey, whom Herbie and Slicker befriended, is found in Herbie's duffle bag. She is handed over to Lt. Sylvia Hunter, who delivers her to immigration officials in New York. However, during a shift change at the office, Evey is mistaken for a neighborhood kid and set free. Meanwhile, Herbie and Slicker are back to their pre-war occupation of peddling ties in Times Square. Collins is also back at his old job—a police officer assigned to the same beat. He is about to arrest the boys when Evey shows up and helps them escape.

Herbie and Slicker attempt to adopt Evey, but are told that one of them must be married and have a steady income. Evey suggests that Herbie marry Sylvia. They show up at her apartment, but learn that Sylvia already has a boyfriend, Bill Gregory.

At one point, Herbie and Slicker purchase what seems to be an ideal home for $750, but the seller doesn't want to let them see the interior prior to purchase. Before Herbie can get the front door open, the seller gives a signal and a truck hauls off the façade, revealing that the boys had just purchased a broken-down old bus. The two have to fix it up to use as a home.

Bill is a midget car racer. He is sure he will win the $20,000 prize at the Gold Cup Stakes, but his car is being held at a local garage until past-due bills are paid. Herbie and Slicker use their separation pay and loans from their old service pals to get the car out of hock. Collins, however, has other plans. He had been demoted repeatedly to ever less desirable beats thanks to the boys' escaping from him. He stakes out the garage in hopes of catching them and returning Evey to the immigration authorities to get himself back in good favor with his boss. He eventually chases them to the track, where Herbie gets in Bill's race car and leads everyone on a wild chase through the streets of New York.

Herbie is eventually caught, but not before the head of an automobile company is impressed enough to order 20 of Bill's cars and 200 engines. With his financial future secure, Bill can now marry Sylvia and adopt Evey. Slicker and Herbie will be allowed to visit Evey if they get jobs. Collins' captain suggests that they join the police force, which they do—with Collins as their instructor!


It was filmed from November 18, 1946, through January 23, 1947. It was originally budgeted at $1,167,500 but came in $34,500 over budget, making it the most expensive Abbott and Costello vehicle produced at Universal. The leads were paid $196,133.

Arthur T. Horman, the writer for the original movie, "Buck Privates", wrote the first treatment for this sequel, titled "The Return of the Buck Privates", but it was not used.

There is a joke used in the film that is often attributed to Benjamin Franklin. Herbie says, "I'd rather marry a homely girl than a pretty girl anyway," to which Slicker replies, "Why?" Herbie responds, "Well, if you marry a pretty girl, she is liable to run away." Evey chimes in with, "But Uncle Herbie, isn't a homely girl liable to run away, too?" Herbie's response is simple, "Yeah, but who cares?" This gag is also used in their film "Pardon My Sarong".

When Costello drives the midget car through the rear of a movie theater, there is a poster that shows a fictional film, "Abbott and Costello in 'Romeo Junior" on the wall. Scenes of Abbott and Costello in 'Romeo and Juliet' outfits, with Betty Alexander as Juliet, were filmed and were intended to be playing on the screen of the theater, but the scene was deleted.


This film has been released three times on DVD. Originally released as a single DVD on April 8, 1998, it was released twice as part of two different Abbott and Costello collections. The first time, on "The Best of Abbott and Costello Volume Two", on May 4, 2004, and again on October 28, 2008 as part of "Abbott and Costello: The Complete Universal Pictures Collection".


Esm-artificial

Kennjiro Sakurai, better known as esm-artificial, is a Canadian street artist and graphic designer.

Originally from Vancouver, British Columbia, Sakurai graduated from the Emily Carr Institute of Art & Design in 1999. His work has been included in numerous exhibitions internationally.

Sakurai mass-produces screen printings on the topic of American and popular world culture. Specific subjects often include supermodels, cars, rock stars, song lyrics, and television personalities. Sakurai's work also often addressed commodification and consumerism. His design work is less text-based than his serigraphs and paintings and can be seen in many movies.



Deracoxib

Deracoxib (trade name Deramaxx) is a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) of the coxib class, used in dogs to treat pain associated with osteoarthritis, or to prevent pain following orthopedic or dental surgery. It is available as beef-flavored tablets.

Deracoxib is used in dogs for the control of pain and inflammation associated with osteoarthritis and for the prevention of pain following orthopedic surgery or dental procedures.

In cats, the use of deracoxib is not recommended.

Deracoxib is contraindicated for treatment of dogs with hypersensitivity to deracoxib or other NSAIDs, and dogs with gastro-intestinal ulcers, renal disease, hepatic disorders, hypoproteinemia, dehydration, or cardiac disease.

Dogs with renal disease may need dose adjustment (if the benefits of the medication outweigh the risks), while those on concurrent diuretic therapy are at increased risk for NSAID toxicity and should not be given this medication.

The concurrent use of deracoxib with steroids or other NSAIDs should be avoided. The safety of deracoxib has not been established in pregnant or nursing dogs or in dogs younger than 4 months of age.

The most common adverse effects of treatment with deracoxib are vomiting, anorexia, lethargy and depression. Other adverse effects of deracoxib are caused by its effects on the gastrointestinal tract, and include erosions or ulcerations of the lining of the stomach or intestines.

Serious adverse effects, including ulcers which perforate the gastrointestinal tract, have occurred in dogs administered higher than recommended doses of deracoxib, or dogs administered deracoxib at the same time as (or soon after) other NSAIDs or corticosteroid medications.

Documented adverse side effects include serious and sometimes fatal organ system damage or failure. Other side effects include increase in drinking or urination, jaundice, bloody or black stools, pale gums, hot spots, increased respiration (fast or heavy breathing), incoordination, and behavior changes.

Deracoxib is a coxib class nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID). Like other NSAIDs, its effects are caused by inhibition of cyclooxygenase (COX) enzymes. At the doses used to treat dogs, deracoxib causes greater inhibition of than of , but at doses twice those recommended for use in dogs, deracoxib significantly inhibits as well.

In dogs, the half-life of deracoxib at the recommended dose is three hours.

In the U.S., deracoxib was first approved for use in dogs in 2002, under the trade name Deramaxx chewable tablets, sold by Novartis Animal Health.

Stade Charles-Ehrmann

Stade Charles-Ehrmann is a multi-use stadium in Nice, France. For sporting events it seats 8,000 spectators. It is sometimes used by the OGC Nice, for practice or friendly matches, and by their reserves team the Eaglets. For large concerts, it is used in conjunction with the indoor concert hall Palais Nikaïa, whose doors are opened and permit large crowds of up to 50,000 to view the stage inside the hall.

American pop singer Madonna has performed at the stadium four times: during her Who's That Girl Tour in 1987, her Blond Ambition Tour in 1990 (which was aired on HBO and released exclusively on LaserDisc titled "Blond Ambition World Tour Live"), her Sticky & Sweet Tour in 2008 and her MDNA Tour in 2012.

Rock band U2 performed at the stadium when the first one was on August 5, 2005, during their Vertigo Tour, in front of a sold-out crowd of 51,900 people. The second one was on July 15, 2009, during their U2 360° Tour, in front of a sold-out crowd of 55,641 people. The performance of "City of Blinding Lights" from the 2009 show was recorded for the group's live album "U22".

Australian rock band AC/DC played at the stadium during their Black Ice World Tour with 40,000 people on June 15 2010. Another rock band performed at the stadium was Muse for their The 2nd Law World Tour on June 26 2013.

Pop superstar Michael Jackson performed at the stadium twice : during his Bad World Tour on August 14, 1988, in front of 35,000 people and during his HIStory World Tour on July 27, 1997, in front of 38,000 people.

Coldplay performed a sold-out concert at the stadium as part of their Mylo Xyloto Tour on May 22, 2012. The band came back to the stadium for their A Head Full of Dreams Tour on May 24, 2016 for a sold out crowd of 53,566.

Crime comics

Crime comics is a genre of American comic books and format of crime fiction. The genre was originally popular in the late 1940s and early 1950s and is marked by a moralistic editorial tone and graphic depictions of violence and criminal activity. Crime comics began in 1942 with the publication of "Crime Does Not Pay" published by Lev Gleason Publications and edited by Charles Biro. As sales for superhero comic books declined in the years after World War II, other publishers began to emulate the popular format, content and subject matter of "Crime Does Not Pay", leading to a deluge of crime-themed comics. Crime and horror comics, especially those published by EC Comics, came under official scrutiny in the late 1940s and early 1950s, leading to legislation in Canada and the United Kingdom, the creation in the United States of the Comics Magazine Association of America and the imposition of the Comics Code Authority in 1954. This code placed limits on the degree and kind of criminal activity that could be depicted in American comic books, effectively sounding the death knell for crime comics and their adult themes.

Petty thieves, grifters, and outright crooks have existed in American comic books and strips since their inception, while books and strips devoted to them and their activities are relatively rare. The comic strip "Dick Tracy" was the first to focus on the character and plots of a vast array of gangsters. Chester Gould's strip, begun in 1931, made effective use of grotesque villains, actual police methods, and shocking depictions of violence. It inspired many features starring a variety of police, detectives and lawyers.

As edited and mostly written by Charles Biro (with Bob Wood), "Crime Does Not Pay" was a 64-page (later 52-page) anthology comic book published by Lev Gleason Publications beginning in 1942 and running for 147 issues until 1955. Each issue of the series featured several stories about the lives of actual criminals taken from newspaper accounts, history books, and occasionally, as advertised, "actual police files." The stories provided details of actual criminal activity and, in making the protagonists of the stories actual criminals — albeit criminals who were eventually caught and punished, usually in a violent manner, by story's end — seemed to glorify criminal activity, according to several critics. An immediate success, the series remained virtually unchallenged in the field of non-fiction comic books for several years until the post-World War II decline in other of comic books, including superhero comic books, made it more viable to publish new genres.

Beginning in 1947, publishers began issuing new titles in the crime comics genre, sometimes changing the direction of existing series but often creating new books whole cloth. Many of these titles were direct imitations of the format and content of "Crime Does Not Pay".

In May, 1947, Arthur Bernhard's Magazine Village company published "True Crime Comics", designed and edited by Jack Cole. The first issue (#2) featured Cole's "Murder, Morphine, and Me", the story of a young female drug addict who became involved with gangsters. The story would become one of the most controversial of the period and samples of the art, including a panel from a dream sequence in which the heroine has her eye held open and threatened with a hypodermic needle, would be used in articles and books (like Geoffrey Wagner's "Parade of Pleasure") about the pernicious influence and obscene imagery of crime comics.

Later in 1947, the team of Joe Simon and Jack Kirby began packaging a pair of crime comics for the Prize Comics line. "Headline Comics" (with a cover date of March) was transformed from adventure to a crime theme. Published with a date of October/November, "Justice Traps the Guilty" was a full-fledged crime comic from the onset, and besides Simon and Kirby, featured art by Marvin Stein, Mort Meskin, and John Severin. At the same time, Simon and Kirby revitalized "Real Clue Comics" for Hillman Comics, giving the title a true-crime veneer and transforming it from a serial character-driven mystery title.

EC Comics began publishing "Crime SuspenStories" in 1950 and "Shock SuspenStories" in 1952. Both titles featured, in the manner of the EC horror comics, fictional noir-style stories of murder and revenge with stunning art and tightly plotted twist endings.

In 1949, spearheaded by the campaigning of MP Davie Fulton, crime comics were banned in Canada in Bill 10 of the 21st Canadian Parliament's 1st session (informally known as the Fulton Bill). The Criminal Code defined crime comics as "a magazine, periodical or book that exclusively or substantially comprises matter depicting pictorially (a) the commission of crimes, real or fictitious; or (b) events connected with the commission of crimes, real or fictitious, whether occurring before or after the commission of the crime" and made it an offence to produce, publish or distribute them. The provisions remained in the Criminal Code until December 2018 when Bill C-51 was adopted during the 42nd Canadian Parliament. Previously, crime comics also could be ordered forfeited by the provincial courts.

Mystery, crime, and horror stories appeared in a number of anthology titles from various publishers but it was not until the advent of Warren Publishing's "Creepy" and "Eerie" in 1964 that the occasional crime story with a modicum of the style or violence that marked the comics of the late 1940s and early 1950s appeared.

Meanwhile, the genre had developed substantially in the hands of European and Japanese creators. In Europe, creators like Vittorio Giardino, Jacques Tardi, José Muñoz, Carlos Sampayo, William Vance and Jean Van Hamme have devoted substantial portions of their oeuvres to crime comics, especially to stories concerned with the trappings of detective fiction and police procedurals, often with a cynical, existentialist bent. Japanese creators like Osamu Tezuka ("MW", "The Book of Human Insects"), Akimi Yoshida ("Banana Fish"), Takao Saito ("Golgo 13"), and Kazuo Koike ("Crying Freeman") have explored subject matter ranging from the criminal mind to Yakuza gangs in manga form.

American crime comics of the 1970s included Jack Kirby's "In the Days of the Mob" and Gil Kane's "Savage".

In the 1980s, Max Allan Collins and Terry Beatty created the "Ms. Tree" series about the adventures of a female private investigator. Collins would go on to write the "Road to Perdition" graphic novels about 1930s gangsters.

Beginning in the late-1980s and 1990s, several American and British comic book writers have created notable work in the crime comics genre, sometimes incorporating noir themes and novelistic storytelling into realistic crime dramas and even into superhero comics. These writers include Brian Azzarello ("100 Bullets", "Jonny Double"), Brian Michael Bendis ("Sam and Twitch", "Jinx", "Powers", "Alias"), Ed Brubaker ("Gotham Central", "Criminal"), Frank Miller, David Lapham, John Wagner ("A History of Violence", "Button Man"), and Paul Grist.


Westlife discography

Irish boy band Westlife have released twelve studio albums, sixteen video albums, one live album, three karaoke albums, thirty-eight singles, twenty-one promotional singles,Alexis nine compilation albums and fifty-four music videos. Formed on 3 July 1998, the group was made up of singers Nicky Byrne, Kian Egan, Mark Feehily, Shane Filan, and Brian McFadden (who quit the band on 9 March 2004). The band was signed under Simon Cowell, Clive Davis, and Jordan Jay and under record labels' BMG, S Records, Arista Records, Sony BMG, Syco Music, Sony Music Entertainment and RCA Records from 1998 to 2012 and currently on Universal Music Group and Virgin EMI Records from 2018. The last four members remained active until their last live concert performance in the Europe's third largest stadium Croke Park on 23 June 2012 and have reunited on 3 October 2018 for new music and tour. Based on the British Phonographic Industry certifications, the group have sold more than 26 million records and videos in the United Kingdom alone across their 20-year career–12.8 million singles, 13.5 million albums and 1.3 million videos. Their biggest selling album is their first "Greatest Hits" compilation, followed by "Coast to Coast", with seven of their albums selling one million copies or more. Their biggest selling video is "Where Dreams Come True", which has sold 240,000 copies to date.

In 2012, the Official Charts Company listed Westlife 34th amongst the biggest-selling singles artists in British music history. They are currently the sixteenth overall biggest group of all time. As of April 2018, the group has sold more than 55 million records worldwide.

They accumulated a total of 26 top ten hits including 15 number one singles as lead artist and as featured artist, 8 number one albums and 13 top 5 albums in the United Kingdom alone. 20 out of 29 singles as lead artist and as featured artist they have released in the United Kingdom have certifications from 1999 to 2022. They are also currently ranked twenty-fourth with most number ones albums of all time. They have had 36 number-one albums worldwide. This earned them the following "Guinness World Records": first to achieve seven consecutive number-one singles in the UK, most singles to debut at number one on the UK chart and top selling album group in the United Kingdom in the 21st century. Despite their success, Westlife never managed to break into the United States, achieving only one hit single in 2000, their debut single "Swear It Again", which peaked at number 20 on "Billboard" Hot 100 and was certified Gold.

However, "Swear It Again" was the band's first number-one single in the United Kingdom and Ireland followed by seventeen more number-ones from their succeeding singles "If I Let You Go", "Flying Without Wings", "I Have A Dream/Seasons in the Sun", "Fool Again", "Against All Odds (Take a Look at Me Now)", "My Love", "Uptown Girl", "Queen of My Heart"/"When You're Looking Like That", "World of Our Own", "Unbreakable", "Tonight"/"Miss You Nights", "Mandy", "Everybody Hurts", "You Raise Me Up", "The Rose", "Hello My Love", and "Dynamite" from 1999 to 2019.

The group's debut international self-titled studio album, "Westlife" (1999) was number-one in several countries which was followed by succeeding studio albums "Coast to Coast" (2000), "World of Our Own" (2001), "Unbreakable - The Greatest Hits Vol. 1" (2002) and "Turnaround" (2003), which continued the group's success worldwide. The four remaining member continued as a group to release their cover albums "Allow Us to Be Frank" (2004) and "The Love Album" (2006) and the studio albums "Face to Face" (2005) and "Back Home" (2007). After a one-year hiatus in 2008, they regrouped and released studio albums "Where We Are" (2009), and "Gravity" (2010) and compilation album "Greatest Hits" (2011). After eight years, the group reformed and released "Spectrum" (2019), followed by "Wild Dreams" (2021).

Notes




Yevgeny Samoylov

Yevgeny Valerianovich Samoilov (; 16 April 1912 – 17 February 2006) was a Soviet actor who gained prominence in youthful heroic parts and was named a People's Artist of the USSR in 1974. He was the father of Tatiana Samoilova.

Samoilov is not related to the famous Samoilov family that dominated the Maly Theatre in the 19th century. He was educated in Leningrad, starting his career at a local theatre. In 1934 he was noticed by Vsevolod Meyerhold who invited him to join his own troupe in Moscow. Samoilov worked with Meyerhold for four years. He got his most substantial roles in Meyerhold's theatre playing Hernani in Hugo's drama and Chatsky in "Woe from Wit".

When Meyerhold was arrested and purged in 1938, Samoilov was in the middle of rehearsing for Pushkin's "Boris Godunov" (the role of Grigory Otrepyev) and Ostrovsky's "How the Steel Was Tempered" (the role of Pavka Korchagin). His acting career seemed to be unhampered, however. Samoilov's appearance as the Soviet commander Shchors in Alexander Dovzhenko's film of the same name won him the Stalin Prize for 1941. He proceeded to become an iconic film actor of the Joseph Stalin era, playing against Lyubov Orlova in "Bright Path" and Marina Ladynina in "Six O'Clock in the Evening after the War" (1944 film; 1946 Stalin Prize). One of his favourite film roles was that of General Skobelev in "The Heroes of Shipka" (1955).

After the Meyerhold theatre was disbanded, Samoilov moved to Nikolay Okhlopkov's Mayakovsky Theatre, where he would work until the director's death in 1967. His role of Oleg Koshevoy in the first stage version of "The Young Guard" won him another Stalin Prize. One of the highlights of his career was Hamlet in Okhlopkov's production of 1954. It was the first post-war production of the play in the country and led to Okhlopkov's joint work with Peter Brook. In 1961, he was cast as Jason in the first-ever Russian production of "Medea" by Euripides. Six years later, he appeared in the role opposite Aspasia Papathanassiou of Greece.

In 1967 Samoilov rejoined his colleagues from the Meyerhold Theatre in the Maly Theatre. The greatest success of his declining years was the role of Prince Ivan Shuisky in "Tsar Fyodor Ioannovich" (1973). "It was a genuine Christian man, living in Christ; I have never seen anything like this", says Georgy Sviridov, who composed music for the production. Samoilov's last film roles came in the movies directed by Sergei Bondarchuk, such as "Waterloo" and "Boris Godunov". The actor celebrated his 90th birthday acting on the stage of the Maly Theatre in 2002.





Alessandro Andrei

Alessandro Andrei (born 3 January 1959) is an Italian former shot putter. He was born in Florence.

Andrei threw with his right hand, using the glide technique (at time many elite-level shot putters had switched to the spin/rotation style.) Andrei won the gold medal at the 1984 Summer Olympics held in Los Angeles, California. In 1987 he broke the world record three times in the same competition with successive throws of 22.72, 22.84 & 22.91 m (and finishing the sequence with a throw of 22.74 m). He was the first athlete in history to have a shot put series with all 6 throws over 22 meters, an accomplishment that wasn't repeated until 2020 by Ryan Crouser.

He is married to Agnese Maffeis.





Leo Vroman

Leo Vroman (April 10, 1915 – February 22, 2014) was a Dutch-American hematologist, a prolific poet mainly in Dutch and an illustrator.

Vroman, who was Jewish, was born in Gouda and studied biology in Utrecht. When the Nazis occupied the Netherlands on May 10, 1940, he fled to London, and from there he traveled to the Dutch East Indies. He finished his studies in Batavia. After the Japanese occupied Indonesia he was interned and stayed in several prisoner-of-war camps. In the camp Tjimahi he befriended the authors Tjalie Robinson and Rob Nieuwenhuys.

His uncle was the physician and medical researcher Isidore Snapper, who worked in New York City after emigrating from the Netherlands. (The mathematician Ernst Snapper was Vroman;s cousin.) After the war, Vroman went to the United States to work in New York as a hematology researcher. He gained American citizenship and lived in Fort Worth until his death in 2014, aged 98.

In 1946, he published his first poems in the Netherlands, and since then has won almost every Dutch literary poetry prize possible. In 1970 Vroman was awarded the Individual Science Award by Wayne State University in Detroit, Michigan. In 2003, his former high school, "de Goudse ScholenGemeenschap" (GSG), changed its name into "de Goudse ScholenGemeenschap Leo Vroman" (GSG Leo Vroman).

He was engaged to Georgine Marie Sanders from May 1940 until their marriage in September 1947. They had two daughters.


E.g.,



Search Engine Strategies

Search Engine Strategies (SES) is a conference series focused on search engine marketing and search engine optimization.

The conference was created by Danny Sullivan, founder and former lead editor of Search Engine Watch. The first SES conference was on November 18, 1999 in San Francisco, California and marked the first formal occasion that site owners had met with search engines.

The conference expanded internationally in 2000 when the first SES UK was held in London, England on April 27, 2000, followed by Denmark in 2001, Germany in 2002, and France, Sweden, Canada, Italy and China until 2006. The growth of the industry caused the creation of special niche SES Conferences such as SES Multimedia & Mobile Edition and SES Latino. Where SES Latino 2006 and 2007 was moderated by conference chair Nacho Hernandez.

Incisive Media purchased Search Engine Watch from MecklerMedia (now Jupitermedia) for $43 million in 2005 that year.

Just over a year after the purchase, Sullivan announced his resignation from guiding the series on August 29, 2006 after a contract dispute but later agreed to run two further shows in the US and speak at a third during 2007.

In 2015, Incisive Media sold SES, Search Engine Watch, and ClickZ to Blenheim Chalcot.

One of the highlights of the Search Engine Strategies San Jose event, is the party at Google headquarters in Mountain View, CA (Googleplex), dubbed "Google Dance".


Tony Wike

Tony Wike is a retired voice actor and broadcaster based in Omaha. Previously, he was morning anchor and reporter for radio stations KFAB-AM and KGOR-FM, where he won the Nebraska Broadcasters award for Best Newscast in 2010. He also anchored morning news for stations in Augusta GA, Columbus GA and Greenville SC, along with anchoring sports for the Georgia News Network.

Before that, he was morning anchor and reporter for radio station WDUN-AM in Gainesville, GA, where he won the 2008 Georgia AP award for Best Newscast in Class B. He also is a freelance voiceover announcer for clients such as Ringling Bros. Barnum & Bailey Circus, The Pee Wee Herman Show, Godfather's Pizza, Country Music Television and Lozier Inc.

In 2003, he was elected to the Nebraska Radio Personalities Hall of Fame.

He voiced characters in several animated series, including "Street Sharks", "Archie's Weird Mysteries" and "Liberty's Kids".

He also appeared in two movies, "Citizen Ruth" and "A Thousand Heroes".


San Agustín, Córdoba

San Agustín is a city in the center-west of the province of Córdoba, Argentina. It has 2,870 inhabitants per the , and is the head town of the Calamuchita Department. It lies on National Route 36, about 60 km south from the provincial capital Córdoba. The area has been used as a special stage in the 2014 Rally Argentina.


List of regions of Arizona

This is a list of regions of Arizona, United States

Gunnar Olof Hyltén-Cavallius

Gunnar Olof Hyltén-Cavallius (1818–1889) was a Swedish scholar of cultural history, librarian, theatre director, and diplomat.

Gunnar was the son of a clergyman from Vislanda, Småland, and the brother of the chemist Carl Erengisle Hyltén-Cavallius. While he was a student at the Uppsala University, he was impressed with the late currents of Gothicismus. He was an employee at the Swedish Royal Library in the period 1839–1856, the director of the Royal Theatres, 1856–1860, and the Chargé d'affaires in Empire of Brazil, 1860–1864.

Gunnar was early interested in the collection of fairy tales and legends, and together with George Stephens, he published the first collection of "Svenska folksagor och äfventyr" (Swedish Folktales and Adventures) in 1844–1849. His main work was "Wärend och Wirdarne" (1-2, 1863-1868), which was inspired both by Jacob Grimm's "Deutsche Mythologie" (1835) and evolutionist theories of Sven Nilsson. "Wärend och Wirdarne" can be seen as the foundation of Swedish ethnology.

During his last years, he lived in the parish of Skatelöv in Småland, and his collections were the foundation of the Museum of Småland in Växjö, the first Swedish province museum.


La Selva de Mar

La Selva de Mar is a municipality in the comarca of Alt Empordà in Catalonia, Spain. It is quite small with a population of about 197. The nearest town is El Port de la Selva, a common destination for beach-going tourists.


Antonio Bocchetti

Antonio Bocchetti (born 11 June 1980 in Naples) is an Italian retired footballer who played as defender.

Bocchetti started his career at Napoli. He played his first Serie A match on 3 December 2000. In July 2003, he was sold to Piacenza then in Serie B in a co-ownership deal; Vittorio Tosto moved to Naples in exchange.

He signed by Parma of Serie A in co-ownership deal in mid-2006, for €400,000. In June 2007 Parma bought Bocchetti outright for another €220,000. In mid-2007, he was sold to Frosinone of Serie B in another co-ownership deal for €450,000. In June 2008 Frosinone acquired Bocchetti outright for another €250,000.

Bocchetti was capped for the Italy U-20 team at the 2000 Toulon Tournament.

From 2016 until December 2017, Bocchetti worked as a coordinator for Paganese. From 8 December 2017, he was appointed as sporting director for the club. He worked for the club until the end of the 2017/18, where he joined Fano, also as a sporting director. On 11 March 2019, Bocchetti decided to resign.


Diocese of Concordia

(Roman Catholic) Diocese of Concordia may refer to the following Latin Catholic jurisdictions :


The Sadist (film)

The Sadist (also known as Profile of Terror and Sweet Baby Charlie) is a 1963 American exploitation film written and directed by James Landis, and stars Arch Hall, Jr. The film was distributed by Fairway International Pictures of the United States and Prima Film of Canada.

Three high school teachers, Ed (Richard Alden), Doris (Helen Hovey), and Carl (Don Russell), are driving through California's Antelope Valley on their way to a Dodgers game in Los Angeles. The group’s Chevrolet Bel Air has some trouble and they are forced to pull off to a gas station/junkyard on the side of the road. After examining the vehicle Ed concludes that the fuel pump will need to be replaced. Doris and Carl search the junkyard looking for the owner, but they cannot find him.

In the residence Carl finds a warm meal with a table set for four, but oddly enough nobody is in the house. The three realize this is very peculiar and start to seriously worry about their situation. At this point Charlie Tibbs (Arch Hall, Jr.), a young man wielding a Colt .45, and his semi-mute teenage girlfriend, Judy (Marilyn Manning), show up. Charlie and Judy have spent the past several days heading west from Arizona, leaving a trail of corpses behind them. Law enforcement is on the hunt for them, but Charlie has managed to stay a step ahead by changing vehicles frequently and then killing the people who offer their help.

Charlie demands that Ed finish repairing the car and informs him that he and Judy will be stealing the Bel Air and taking off when Ed is done. Charlie threatens that if the three don't cooperate "it'll be the end of them." During the next hour, Charlie and his girlfriend verbally and physically torment Ed, Doris, and Carl; Doris calls Charlie an inhuman monster, and he rips her dress and smacks her, then forces Carl to kneel in the sand and plead for his life until Charlie finishes a soda, after which he shoots Carl in the head.

Ed begins to try to work out how many shots Charlie has left in the gun, and asks Charlie a lot of questions about the people he's killed on the way to their current location. Charlie reveals he has two reloads left, and reloads the gun while taunting Ed gleefully. Doris hears the hum of a motor and thinks the police are coming, and Charlie becomes paranoid. He makes Ed hide in the trunk of a car while Judy holds Doris at knifepoint. Two police bikes pull in. After a tense few moments, Doris screams for help while Ed bangs on the lid of the trunk, but to no avail; Charlie has shot both cops dead.

Charlie continues to try and force Ed to fix the car; Ed formulates a plan to run Charlie over with the car. Charlie switches on the radio, and he and Judy begin to kiss as the music switches to updates from the baseball game the teachers were on their way to. Doris gets in the car to try to run it, but Ed's plan to run over Charlie backfires when Doris can't muster the courage to step on the gas pedal. Charlie continues to coerce Ed into fixing the car, then orders him to put gasoline in the carburetor. Ed sprays gasoline in Charlie's eyes, then flees, and Charlie's damaged vision causes him to shoot and kill Judy. After mourning Judy's death and screaming like an animal, he vows to murder Ed and Doris.

Doris and Ed are able to evade Charlie until Doris screams when she discovers two dead bodies of the junkyard owners next to her where she is hiding. As Charlie shoots at her while she flees, Ed approaches with a heavy tool to try to knock him out. They pursue each other until Charlie corners Ed and kills him with one of the cops' guns, as his own has run out of bullets. Charlie steals the car Ed had been working on and drives after Doris as she runs. However, the car stalls repeatedly in the sand, and the baseball game begins playing on the radio again as Charlie abandons the car and runs after Doris with a knife.

Doris spots a stone cottage in the distance and runs inside to hide. However, she soon sees Charlie approach, and runs out again. She ducks behind the walls of an unfinished house nearby, where she is discovered again by Charlie, but as she flees once more, Charlie falls into a pit of rattlesnakes, where he is killed. The film concludes with a traumatized Doris listening to a portion of the baseball game before turning and wandering up the trail into the desert.


The movie is loosely based on the killing spree of Charles Starkweather and his girlfriend Caril Ann Fugate, as are the later films "Badlands" (1973) and "Natural Born Killers" (1994). 

Shot by famed cinematographer Vilmos Zsigmond over a period of two weeks for $33,000, it was his first full-length film as a director of photography. He is credited as "William Zsigmond".

A member of the cast doubled as the film's production manager.

Alden recalled that the ammunition used in the film was real, in order to save money.

The snakes used in the final scene in the pit were live and venomous. Their mouths were temporarily sewn shut for filming. One day, the snake handler was late, and the film crew started without him. They put the snakes, which had been left on the set overnight, in the pit with Hall, and began shooting. The handler arrived soon after, and informed the crew that they had put the wrong crate of snakes, which did not have their mouths sewn, in the pit with their lead actor. The serpents were becoming agitated by this point, but the crew managed to pull Hall out of the pit before he was bitten.

On Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of based on reviews, with a weighted average rating of .

In a 2008 retrospective article on "Badlands" in "The Guardian", Ryan Gilbey mentioned that the story of Starkweather and Fugate had been dramatized previously in "The Sadist", "though hardly anyone remembers that one now."

The film is a favorite of director Joe Dante, who owns the 35mm print that has been the source for many of the DVD releases of this film.

In 2007, Apprehensive Films released "The Sadist" onto DVD.


Maudheim medal

The Maudheim medal ("Maudheimmedaljen") was instituted by King Haakon VII of Norway on 14 November 1951 in honor of the members of the Norwegian-British-Swedish Antarctic Expedition of 1949–1952, awarded to the participants of the expedition. This expedition was the first to Antarctica involving an international team of scientists. During the expedition, a base known as Maudheim was established on the Quar Ice Shelf along the coast of Queen Maud Land in February 1950. The medal itself is the same as the King's Medal of Merit in Silver with the addition of a silver buckle on the ribbon with the inscription "MAUDHEIM 1949-1952". Only 18 people were awarded with the Maudheim Medal.






Elective

Elective may refer to:


Scribbly gum

Scribbly gum is a name given to a variety of different Australian "Eucalyptus" trees which play host to the larvae of scribbly gum moths which leave distinctive scribbly burrowing patterns on the bark.

Trees often referred to as scribbly gums include:


Many other "Eucalyptus" trees have scribbles and are not known as "scribbly gums", such as "Eucalyptus pilularis" (blackbutt), "Eucalyptus saligna" (Sydney blue gum), "Eucalyptus stenostoma" (Jilliga ash), "Eucalyptus pauciflora" (snow gum) and "Eucalyptus fraxinoides" (white ash).

Weeds (short story)

"Weeds" (also known as "The Lonesome Death of Jordy Verrill") is a darkly humorous short story by Stephen King. It was first published in "Cavalier" magazine in May 1976.

On Independence Day, a backwoods hick farmer in New Hampshire named Jordy Verrill thinks his newfound discovery of a meteorite will provide enough riches to pay off the remaining $200 of his bank loan, but instead finds himself overcome by a rapidly spreading plant-like organism that arrives in the meteorite when he ends up coming in contact with it. It is mentioned that Jordy doesn't have much good luck.

After a rainstorm, Jordy sees that the organism has grown roundish grass around where the meteorite struck. Not only are the plants growing on anything he touches that is wet, but there are also plants growing on his fingers, his left eye, his penis, and his tongue, where he starts to get itchy. He can't go to his usual doctor, who is out of town on a fishing trip. Upon hearing the words "cold water" in his mind, Jordy gives in to the temptation and takes a bath to relieve the itching caused by the growing plants; however, the water only serves to accelerate the plants' growth on his body.

The next day, Jordy now resembles a plant creature with a roundish head with no visible neck and round shoulders. He can even hear the plants (that are now on his property) talking. Loading his shotgun, Jordy kills himself, saying he's "lucky at last". The grass continues to grow across his property and is making its way into the nearby town.

The story was adapted into the second segment of the anthology film "Creepshow" in 1982. The segment was titled "The Lonesome Death of Jordy Verrill", a reference to the Bob Dylan song "The Lonesome Death of Hattie Carroll". Stephen King himself plays Verrill in the adaptation, and the location of Verrill's farm is changed to Maine. The story includes Verrill's humorous daydreams about trying to sell the meteor to an imagined "Department of Meteors" at the community college and his decision not to seek medical attention, as he fears a doctor (portrayed by Bingo O'Malley) would amputate his fingers. Plant growth affects everything Jordy touches. As Jordy prepares a bath to soothe his itchy skin, the plants are covering his hands, jawline, chest, back, and an area that causes Jordy to declare, "Oh no, not there!" He is then visited by the ghost of his father (also portrayed by Bingo O'Malley), who appears in his mirror and warns him not to get in the tub as it is the water that the plants want. Believing he is doomed anyway, Jordy gives in. Over several hours, Jordy is transformed into a plant creature. He kills himself with a shotgun. A radio forecaster predicts long periods of rain and sunshine as the camera pans across Jordy's farm, now overrun with monstrous vegetation as some of it is starting to go down the road.


Hunting H.126

The Hunting H.126 was an experimental aircraft designed and built by British aviation company Hunting Aircraft.

The aircraft was developed in order to test the performance of blown flaps, which were commonly known in Britain as "jet flaps", At the time, they were a relatively unknown quantity, thus the Ministry of Aviation issued "Specification ER.189D" for an appropriate research aircraft to be developed. During 1959, Hunting Aircraft was selected, being awarded a contract to construct a pair of aircraft. The first aircraft, serial number "XN714", was completed during mid-1962 and initial ground testing commenced during the latter part of the year. This aircraft performed its maiden flight on 26 March 1963.

Only the single aircraft was ever completed, the second being cancelled mid-construction. Following the completion of preliminary flights, XN714 was used to conduct a series of one hundred test flights at the Royal Aircraft Establishment's Aerodynamics Flight at RAE Bedford, the last of which being performed in 1967. XN714 was transported to the United States during 1969, where it underwent wind tunnel testing by NASA; following its return to the UK, the aircraft was officially withdrawn in 1972. Presently, the preserved aircraft is on static display at the Royal Air Force Museum Cosford.

During the late 1940s, multiple British research institutions, including the National Gas Turbine Establishment (NGTE), the Royal Aircraft Establishment (RAE) and various aircraft manufacturers, became interested in the potential applications of the recent innovation of blown flaps, or as they were known in Britain, "jet flaps". Out of this work, it became recognised that a major benefit of jet flaps would be substantially lower take-off and landing speeds for aircraft. In 1951, the principle of the jet flap was successfully patented by the NGTE.

In order to greater explore and validate the "jet flap principle", the Ministry of Aviation issued "Specification ER.189D", which called for the development of a dedicated purpose-built aircraft with which to perform a full-scale investigation. During 1959, Hunting Aircraft was awarded a contract to construct a pair of aircraft. According to aviation periodical Flight International, a contributing reason for Hunting Aircraft's decision to respond to the Specification was the firm's existing experience in the operation of hot-gas ducting systems, which had been acquired by its previous research activities into helicopters.

Manufacture of the H.126 was completed during summer 1962, being formally rolled out in August of that year. After completing limited taxying trials at Luton Airport, the aircraft was dismantled and transported by road to RAE Bedford, where it was reassembled and readied for flight.

The Hunting H.126 is highly unorthodox aircraft; according to Flight, development "posed numerous aerodynamic, thermodynamic and structural problems... the ducting of hot gases, large changes of trim which occur with such a large variation in lift coefficient, and the inter-relation between control jets... and the conventional elevator and rudder controls". Despite this, several aspects of the aircraft, such as its fixed nosewheel undercarriage, were relatively conventional. There was a deliberate effort to avoid unnecessary complexity, partially as it was felt that testing of the jet flap concept should be carried out in several manageable stages.

The cockpit is situated directly above the engine compartment. While furnished with oxygen apparatus and a Martin-Baker-built ejection seat, the cockpit was unpressurized. Due to its use as a test plane, it was outfitted with extensive test instrumentation, much of the rear fuselage space was occupied by the instrumentation, sensors, and recording equipment; in particular, due to heat concerns, extensive temperature monitoring was carried out at various locations across the airframe. The flight controls, mainly the control column and rudder pedals, operated both the conventional control surfaces and the jet nozzles present in the aircraft's tail, the latter controlling both pitch and yaw. The wingtip nozzles, which controlled roll, were operated by an auto-stabilizer system. The variable-incidence tailplane is hydraulically actuated and was directly linked to the elevators to vary the tail unit's effective camber. The ailerons were able to droop, providing a full-span jet flap.

The H.126 was powered by a single Bristol Orpheus turbojet engine. All engine thrust was ducted through to a vertical distribution manifold, the top of which featured three ducts on each side leading into the wing to reach a total of eight fishtails, from which exhaust would be directed over the full span of both the flaps and ailerons; one of the wing ducts also supplies the roll-jet nozzle at the wing tip. The base of the manifold had an additional bifurcated duct that ran aft through either side of the fuselage, providing additional thrust to supplement the fishtails in the wing; these two jet nozzles could be furnished with pilot-controlled spoilers. A further duct from the manifold supplies the pitch and yaw control nozzles present in the tail unit, as well as another duct for a pitch-trim nozzle. The extensive ducting necessitated careful insulation and heat-shielding to safely contain the hot gasses; despite this, traditional lightweight alloys were used extensively across the main structure, save for a few critical points.
The fuselage is of conventional stressed-skin construction, the structuring being a mix of longitudinal members and vertical frames, reinforced at key areas such as the wings, undercarriage and engine mounting. The aircraft's shoulder-level wing featured a set of struts, not for support but in order to provide piping for the compressed air used in the blown flaps. The mainplanes used a two-spar construction approach, supported by a single strut and attached via pin-joints to the fuselage; both the wing and strut attachments were designed to facilitate two alternative dihedral angles (4° or 8°). Each aileron features five hinges, while cooling air was also circulated via slots in the leading and trailing edges; the flaps are of a similar construction. The two-spar tailplane was pivoted at its rear spar, while four elevator hinges were attached to the rear spar.

The rear control surfaces consisted of a fairly small triangular T-tail, similar to the one on the Gloster Javelin. The jet flap system consisted of a series of sixteen nozzles arranged along the trailing edge of the wing, which were fed about half of the engine's hot exhaust gases. A smaller amount, about 10%, was also fed into small nozzles on the wing tips to provide control thrust at low speeds. A similar system was later used on the Hawker Siddeley Harrier for similar reasons. This left little power for forward thrust, and the aircraft was limited to low speeds, but the takeoff speed was a mere , a speed most light aircraft would have trouble matching.

On 26 March 1963, the maiden flight of the first Hunting H.126, serial number "XN714", occurred. Flown from RAE Bedford (presently Bedford Aerodrome, it was piloted by S. B. Oliver, Hunting Aircraft's chief test pilot. Speaking shortly after this flight, Oliver stated that it was "A perfect, no-snags flight... Taking this plane off is an entirely new sensation; it just floats off the ground, and then you go up like a lift."

Prior to the XN714 being formally delivered to its owners, the Ministry of Aviation, Hunting operated the aircraft themselves for several months to conduct preliminary flying. It was painted overall yellow with a matt black anti-glare area on the nose in front of the cockpit. The second aircraft XN719 was never completed and was ultimately scrapped. The RAE's test flight programme were carried out between 1963 and 1967, during which valuable data on the concept was gathered across 100 separate sorties. During 1969, the aircraft was shipped to the United States, where it underwent further testing by NASA; it was subsequently returned to Britain in May 1970. For several years, it stayed in storage in case the aircraft would be needed for further research; during September 1972, it was formally "struck off charge" from the RAF records. In 1974, the aircraft was transferred to the RAF Museum; it has since gone on static display.<ref name="Cosford, A/C history XN714" ></ref>

When an Orpheus engine from a Folland Gnat was loaned to Donald Campbell, for his water-speed record hydroplane "Bluebird", the Rotax air starter, pressure bottles and ground APU intended for the second H.126 were 'borrowed' by the Bluebird team.




Konrad Grallert von Cebrów

Konrad Grallert von Cebrów (27 March 1865 – 1942) was a divisional commander in the Austro-Hungarian Army.

"Feldmarschall-Leutnant" Konrad Grallert von Cebrów was born as Konrad Karl August Grallert in Gumbinnen (East Prussia) to Joachim Grallert (a prominent watchmaker and jeweller) and Berthe Hoefler.

His family moved to Arad in the Transylvanian region of Hungary (now part of Romania) in 1867. He was a qualified general staff officer and certainly by his appointment at the cadet school at Kraków in 1901 was already a member of the general staff.

He was involved with the German attacks that were repulsed by the Russians on the Dvina and at Cebrow in Galicia on 9 March 1916. He was raised to nobility by Charles IV and received the right to use the name "of Cebrow” in 1917 or 1918.

Konrad's older brother inherited the family business and after the war Konrad moved to Papa, which is in Western Hungary today. He was the head teacher of a secondary school. He died in Budapest, 1942.




List of members of the Senate of Belgium, 2014–2019

This is a list of members of the Belgian Senate, arranged alphabetically by type, during the 54th legislature from 2014 until 2019. This was the first legislature following the sixth Belgian state reform, which abolished direct elections for the Senate and reduced its powers.


Evercreech

Evercreech is a village and civil parish in Somerset, England. The village is southeast of Shepton Mallet, and northeast of Castle Cary. The parish includes the hamlet of Stoney Stratton and the village of Chesterblade.

The village was recorded as Evrecriz in the Domesday Book of 1086.

Small Down Knoll (or Small Down Camp) is a Bronze Age hill fort above the village which rises to .

The parish was part of the hundred of Wells Forum.

War was declared on September 4, 1939, and later that month, the local village school received 215 children evacuees, 18 teachers and 6 helpers, from two schools in West Ham, East London. 

In 1941, 50 more children and their teachers arrived from Bristol after a bombing from Germany.

The children were welcomed into the homes of the villagers. However, rationing was a prominent issue event though many of the children had come with their own ration book.

Schools also had to adapt as their current teaching facilities and schedules could not accommodate and teach all of the extra students. The village town hall was used as an extra space and volunteers helped to look after the children and assist the teachers in the parish.

American soldiers had been arriving in Evercreech ever since 1942; however, in 1944, a group of African-American G.I.s were sent to the area. Most people in rural Somerset had never seen a Black person before, so seeing African-American soldiers was a novelty for the Evercreech population. However, the people of Evercreech welcomed the Black G.I.s in the same way they welcomed evacuees throughout the war, and the American presence was a boost to the morale of the British public. 

The troops helped out in schools and gave the children chocolates, fruits and chewing gum, which was a rarity in rationed Britain. Moreover, to raise money for the Spitfire funds, the village and the American soldiers held dances where they enjoyed American jazz music. Here, the African-American men could socialise and dance with white women, which was a novelty, and something forbidden in segregated America and often inter-racial relationships would be formed at these dances.

Overall, the Americans brought fun and friendship to Evercreech in an exceptional circumstance, and Evercreech welcomed them into their lives.

The parish council has responsibility for local issues, including setting an annual precept (local rate) to cover the council's operating costs and producing annual accounts for public scrutiny. The parish council evaluates local planning applications and works with the local police, district council officers, and neighbourhood watch groups on matters of crime, security, and traffic. The parish council's role also includes initiating projects for the maintenance and repair of parish facilities, as well as consulting with the district council on the maintenance, repair, and improvement of highways, drainage, footpaths, public transport, and street cleaning. Conservation matters (including trees and listed buildings) and environmental issues are also the responsibility of the council.

From 1894 to 1974, the village was part of Shepton Mallet Rural District, and from 1974 to 2023, it fell within the non-metropolitan district of Mendip. Mendip District Council was responsible for local planning and building control, local roads, council housing, environmental health, markets and fairs, refuse collection and recycling, cemeteries and crematoria, leisure services, parks, and tourism.

Somerset County Council is responsible for running the largest and most expensive local services such as education, social services, libraries, main roads, public transport, policing and fire services, trading standards, waste disposal and strategic planning.

The village falls in 'Creech' electoral ward. The area and population of this ward are stated above.

It is also part of the Somerton & Frome county constituency represented in the House of Commons of the Parliament of the United Kingdom. It elects one Member of Parliament (MP) by the first past the post system of election, and was part of the South West England constituency of the European Parliament prior to Britain leaving the European Union in January 2020. This constituency elected seven MEPs using the d'Hondt method of party-list proportional representation.

There are two pubs in the village: "The Bell Inn" and the "Pickled Inn" (formerly "The Shapway Inn"). "The Pecking Mill" is within a very short distance to the south. Historically, one of the local pubs, "The Brewers Arms", celebrated New Year's Eve with fireworks, but on New Years Day 2005 it announced that it had closed forever. Rumours were rife around the reasons for the closure (most likely due to the non-profitability of such a local enterprise) - popularly noting that the real estate value of the site was extremely high.

Cutterne Mill is an old watermill. which is now being used for electricity generation as part of the South Somerset Hydropower Group

The market cross dates from the 15th century. It stands on four steps and a high shaft. In the 19th century the cruciform head was restored. It is a Grade II* listed building and has been scheduled as an ancient monument.

Historic industries in Evercreech include quarrying of blue lias and clay; brick making; milk processing; and agriculture, which remains the leading industry today. From the late 18th century until just after World War I, silk processing was an important industry for Evercreech, a spillover from mills at nearby Bruton and Sherborne. The workforce for the village's three silk factories was made up almost entirely of young women and girls, some of whom started working as young as seven or eight years of age. Fulfilling orders from London, two of the factories were throwing mills which produced high quality spun silk thread. The third mill wove silk thread into cloth. Bales of raw silk were imported to the mills from France, Italy, and India by London merchants. 

Employment in the mills was erratic, driven by highly volatile demand for English woven silk. This volatility was caused by embargoes on imported woven silk, duty taxes, and then the lifting of import restrictions in 1860.

Evercreech Junction was a railway station on the Somerset and Dorset Joint Railway. It was replaced by Evercreech New railway station from 1874 to 1966, when it closed. Nowadays, the nearest railway stations to Evercreech are in Bruton and Castle Cary.

The Church of St Peter dates from the 14th century and is a Grade I listed building. The three-stage tower has set-back buttresses ascending to pinnacles, with a very tall transomed two-light bell-chamber with windows on each face The embattled parapet has quatrefoil piercing, with big corner pinnacles and smaller intermediate pinnacles. The four-light west window has extensively restored tracery. This tower is of the East Mendip type. On the north wall of the tower is a roll of honour to victims of World War I. It is within a rectangular wooden case with a glazed door crowned by a triangular pediment and plaque below.

The church's clock is unusual in that it is missing the 10th hour number, usually shown as the Roman numeral 'X'. The Roman numeral at the 10th hour position is XI (11) and it is followed by the Roman numeral for twelve (XII). Thus the numbers of the last quarter read IX (9) - XI (11) - XII (12) - XII (12). Local rumour suggests that the person who paid for the clock to be made, was instructed by his wife that he had to be home from the pub by 10 o'clock. Therefore, he ensured that the 10 o'clock numeral (X) was missing.

The sounds of the bells at Evercreech church were used in the opening credits of BBC's "Songs of Praise" for many years. There were many complaints.

At Chesterblade the tiny Church of St Mary dates from the 12th century.


Viktor Rashchupkin

Viktor Ivanovich Rashchupkin (, born October 16, 1950) was a Soviet/Russian athlete who competed mainly in the discus throw. He was born in Kamensk-Uralsky.

He competed for Soviet Union at the 1980 Summer Olympics held in Moscow, Soviet Union where he won the gold medal in the men's discus throw event.

With the death of Al Oerter on 1 October 2007, Rashchupkin is now the oldest surviving Olympic Champion in the Men's Discus. He is almost exactly 1 month older than 1976 Champion, Mac Wilkins.

Hassan Kamel Al-Sabbah

Hassan Kamel Al-Sabbah (; August 16, 1894March 31, 1935) was a Lebanese electrical and electronics research engineer, mathematician and inventor. He was born in Nabatieh in present-day Lebanon.

He studied at the American University of Beirut. In 1916, he was conscripted into the Ottoman army, and worked as a telegraph operator. He later taught mathematics in Damascus, Syria, and at the American University of Beirut.

In 1921, he travelled to the United States and for a short time studied at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology before joining the University of Illinois in 1923. He joined the vacuum tube department of the Engineering Laboratory of the General Electric Company at Schenectady, New York, in 1923, where he had engaged in mathematical and experimental research, principally on rectifiers and inverters. He received 43 patents covering his work. Among the patents were reported innovations in television transmission.

He died in an automobile accident at Lewis near Elizabeth Town, New York. His body was buried at the Nabatieh Cemetery in his hometown Nabatieh, Lebanon.

He was the nephew of linguist and writer Sheikh Ahmad Rida.

Mouth to Mouth (Levellers album)

Mouth to Mouth is the fifth studio album by the Levellers. It was released on the China label in 1997 and peaked at #5 in the UK album charts.


The 2007 re-issue of this album also contained the bonus tracks:



Hutteen SC

Hutteen Sporting Club () is a Syrian professional football club based in Latakia, Syria. The club was founded in 1945. The club's greatest achievement was winning the Syrian Cup in 2001. The club colours are blue and white. Their home stadium, Al-Assad Stadium, has a capacity of 28,000 spectators. The club is currently playing in Syrian Premier League.

It was founded in 1945 in the city of Latakia, although it sometimes plays at home in the capital Damascus. They have never won the Premier League title, their most important title being the Syrian Cup won in 2001 after beating Al-Jaish SC 1-0 in the final in four finals they have played.

At the international level they have participated in the AFC Cup Winners' Cup in 2001, in which they were eliminated in the second round by the Al-Shabab of Saudi Arabia and in the 2001 Arab Club Champions Cup, where they were eliminated in the first round.

Huteen, one of the most popular club in Latakia, plays his home matches with the Tishreen Club at Al-Assad Stadium. Their second stadium is sometimes Latakia Sports City Stadium.



"Accurate as of 12 June 2022"


"Accurate as of 12 June 2022"



Vasily Rudenkov

Vasily Vasilyevich Rudenkov (; ; 3 May 1931 – 2 November 1982) was a Soviet athlete who competed mainly in the hammer throw. He was born in Zhlobin.

Rudenkov competed for the USSR in the 1960 Summer Olympics held in Rome, Italy in the hammer throw where he won the gold medal. It was his only Olympics appearance.

He trained at Dynamo in Moscow and became an Honoured Master of Sport of the USSR in 1960, along with being awarded the Order of the Red Banner of Labour the same year.

Sports Reference

František Švantner

František Švantner (January 29, 1912 in Bystrá, present day Slovakia – October 13, 1950 in Prague, present-day Czech Republic) was a naturalist Slovak prose writer.

He was born in Bystrá in a family of a manual worker. He studied in his birthplace, later in Podbrezová and Banská Bystrica. After finishing his studies, he worked as a teacher in different places (Mýto pod Ďumbierom, Podbrezová, Nová Baňa, Hronský Beňadik), until he became a principal of school in Hronov for a short time. He also worked for a local organization of Matica slovenská and became a member of Umelecká beseda slovenská. He died of a brain tumor in Prague.

He started writing during his studies in Banská Bystrica, where he published his short story in the periodical "Svojeť". Švantner gained inspiration from archaic myths and ballads. He was influenced by writers such as Edgar Allan Poe, Émile Zola, Victor Hugo, Charles Ferdinand Ramuz, Fyodor Dostoyevsky, and from Slovak authors, mainly Margita Figuli, Ľudo Ondrejov and Dobroslav Chrobák. Švantner's prose celebrates nature; he was a naturalistic writer. He used elements of irrationality and fantasy, but he mainly explored the boundaries between life and death.


Northrup-King

Northrup-King Seed Company was founded in Minneapolis, Minnesota in 1896, and was based there until it was acquired and moved to Golden Valley, Minnesota in 1986. It is now a division of Syngenta.

Northrup, King and Co. was founded in 1884 as Northrup, Braslan and Company. Its founders, Jesse E. Northrup and Charles E. Braslan, moved to Minneapolis from the Eastern United States. They chose Minneapolis because they believed seeds grown in the North were resilient and productive, and because they viewed Minneapolis as an ideal distribution center. They published their first illustrated seed catalog in 1885. It used striking full-color lithographs that made a strong impression.

During the 1880s, Northrup and Braslan expanded their business but soon experienced trouble. In 1887, Northrup and Braslan invited A.H. Goodwin to partner with them. The men renamed the business Northrup, Braslan and Goodwin Company and expanded its reach; but, after the economic Panic of 1893 and a fire in the company building, the business could not pay back its debts.

In 1894, they sought relief from Colonel William S. King and his son Preston. The Kings' assistance was not enough, however, and in May 1896, Northrup, Braslan and Goodwin Co. went bankrupt. Six months later, in November 1896, the men incorporated a new business: Northrup, King and Co.

Northrup, King and Co. struggled for several years but had success by 1900. Its mail-order business peaked in 1909, and the company began to send salesmen to retailers across the state. The company continued selling seeds for garden use but also began to sell field seed for farming.

The cold Minnesota weather was a major selling point for Northrup, King and Co. The company created its Polar Brand to emphasize the virtues of Northern-grown seed. Northrup, King and Co. later developed other cold-weather brands called Sterling, Northland, and Viking. These brands differed in price and quality, and were targeted to different audiences. This made Northrup, King and Co. one of the first seed companies to use branding as a marketing technique.

Corn hybrids became a major part of the company's business in the 1930s. In 1938, Northrup, King and Co. partnered with the University of Minnesota to test the company's hybrid corn varieties at Femco Farms in the Red River Valley. Their hybrids were bred to have the best traits of different genetic strains. They were also very profitable, because the hybrid breeding process meant that the hybrids were intellectually protected even without patents.

In the 1960s, Northrup, King and Co. vice president Allenby White fought for patent protection for agricultural crops that were more difficult to hybridize. This expanded protection was initially rejected by the United States Congress but passed in 1970. It helped companies including Northrup, King and Co. but hurt horticulturists and small farmers.

In 1968, Northrup, King and Co. offered its first public stock shares. The company grew rapidly after it went public, but in 1975 it saw significant losses. The next year, the company was purchased by a Swiss pharmaceutical company called Sandoz, Ltd. Sandoz bought the company for more than twice its book value, renamed it Northrup King, and invested heavily in research.

Sandoz, Ltd. went through several corporate mergers and reorganizations in the 1990s. In 1997, Northrup King became a subsidiary of Syngenta, where it became known as the NK brand.

In 1917, Northrup, King and Co. built a new headquarters in Minneapolis at 1500 Jackson Street Northeast. The company kept a retail store on Hennepin Avenue, but its new location was ideal for distributing seed. It was located where the Great Northern and Northern Pacific railroads came together.

In 1986, Northrup King moved out of its Jackson Street building. In 1996, Debbie Woodward began managing the old Northrup King building. Under her management, it became home to art studios, art galleries, and nonprofit organizations.


Hennepin County Library

Armed Forces Medal for Heroic Deeds

The Armed Forces Medal for Heroic Deeds (Forsvarets medalje for edel dåd) was instituted in 1982 for heroic deeds done while on active service for the Norwegian Defence Force.




Romuald Klim

Romuald Iosifovich Klim (, , 25 May 1933 – 28 May 2011) was a Soviet hammer thrower. He competed at the 1964 and 1968 Olympics and won a gold and a silver medal, respectively. Klim was awarded the Order of the Badge of Honor in 1965.

Klim was born in a farmer's family. He started training in hammer throw around 1955, but became noticed only in 1963, after winning the Riga Cup and finishing second at the 1963 Soviet Championships. In those years Klim was lighter (ca. 90 kg) and physically weaker than elite Soviet throwers, but he had a strong mental balance and a superior throwing technique; he added weight only after joining the national team. The 1964 Olympics were his first international competitions. After three attempts he was third behind Gyula Zsivótzky and world record holder Hal Connolly, but then threw and won a surprising gold medal. After that Klim won the 1966 European Championships, the European Cup in 1965 and 1967, and three Soviet Championships (1966–1968). He finished second at the 1968 Games behind Zsivótzky, who had been his main rival all those years. In 1969 Klim finished second at the 1969 European Championships and set his only world record (74.52 m). He retired in 1973 to become an athletics coach and referee. From 1989 until his death he was professor at the Belorussian Academy of Physical Culture and Sports. Since 1976 a hammer throwing competition has been held in his honor in Minsk.

Klim was married and had a daughter born in 1957 and two twin sons born in 1960.

3.6.3

3.6.3 is the fifth live album by French new wave band Indochine. It was released in 2003.

Moving Up Country

Moving Up Country is an album by James Yorkston and the Athletes.

Released in June 2002, "Moving Up Country" is the debut studio album by James Yorkston and the Athletes. The album was produced by Yorkston and released on vinyl and on CD by Domino Records. Among the musicians are Fence Collective luminaries Lone Pigeon and King Creosote.

The album received positive reviews from the music press. The Independent called it "an expansive and delicately arranged collection", saying it was "one of the most rewarding and unexpected pleasures of the year." NME, meanwhile, said, "It ain’t rocket science: just the very welcome sound of a country boy made good."

In 2012, to celebrate the tenth anniversary of the album, Domino Records reissued it in an expanded edition. The ten-minute, non-album single "The Lang Toun" was added, along with a bonus disc featuring demos and a BBC John Peel session. Drowned in Sound said of the package: ""Moving Up Country" deserves to be remembered as one of the noughties’ finest records, and with the help of these fascinating extra tracks, this reissue should see that become reality."






Nikolai Sverchkov

Nikolai Yegorovich Sverchkov (; 1817–1898) was a Russian painter who specialized in genre and hunting scenes with horses. He was also a member of the Imperial Academy of Arts.

His father was an Imperial groom and coachman. As a child, he worked with his father and began drawing animals. Impressed with his work, his parents arranged for him to take lessons at the Imperial Academy of Arts with the battle painter, Alexander Sauerweid, from 1827 to 1829. Unable to keep up with the rigorous program there, he was transferred to the prestigious Saint Peter's School, where he studied from 1829 to 1833. Upon graduating, he found employment with the Ministry of the Interior.

He painted in his free time and showed his works at the annual exhibitions of the Academy. In 1839, he was awarded the title of "Free Artist" and quit the civil service. During the 1840s, he visited several famous stud farms to paint scenes of the horses there. In 1850, these were published in book form by the Velten company in Karlsruhe.

Following that, he visited Nikolai Nekrasov at his estate near Yaroslavl and created illustrations for some of his works. In 1852, he was named an "Academician" for his popular troika paintings, and became a Professor in 1855.

From 1856 to 1864, he lived abroad; first in Paris, where he exhibited at the Salon, then in London and Brussels. In 1863, his painting of a bear hunt was purchased by Emperor Napoleon III.

Upon returning to Saint Petersburg in 1864, he was commissioned by Tsar Alexander II to paint a large canvas depicting the departure of Tsar Alexis I to inspect his troops in 1664. He would continue to receive orders from the Royal Court until 1882. Most of this work involved equestrian portraits of members of the Royal Family, but he also did battle scenes; especially from the Russo-Turkish War.

He continued to exhibit frequently, participating in many international shows, including the Centennial Exposition in Philadelphia. In all, he produced 350 paintings and over a thousand drawings.


Wild orange

Wild orange is a common name for several plants bearing fruit reminiscent of oranges. They are not necessarily related to family Rutaceae (which contains true oranges). Plants called wild orange include:



FSV Wacker 90 Nordhausen

FSV Wacker 90 Nordhausen is a German association football club from Nordhausen, Thuringia.

The club's greatest success has been promotion to the Regionalliga Nordost in 1995 and 2013. It has also won the Thuringia Cup on three occasions and, through this, qualified for the first round of the DFB-Pokal, the German Cup.

The football team "FC Wacker 05 Nordhausen" was founded on 1 November 1905 as an offshoot of a Protestant youth club in the city. By 14 June 1906 the team had broadened its scope to become the sports club "SV Wacker 05 Nordhausen " and in 1908 merged with local side "Ballsport-Club Mars Nordhausen" which had been formed in 1906. Until 1918 the club played as "SV Wacker-Mars Nordhausen" when it was renamed "1. SV Wacker 05 Nordhausen". Playing in the VMBV (Verband Mitteldeutscher Ballspiel Vereine or Federation of Middle German Ball Playing Teams), "Wacker" participated in the early rounds of the league championships in the mid- to late 20s, but without any success.

After the end of World War II occupying Allied authorities ordered the dissolution of all organizations in Germany, including sports and football clubs. The former membership of "Wacker" reorganized as "SG Nordhausen" in 1946 and this team went on to become the football department of the sports club "BSG Motor Nordhausen" in 1949. The club played briefly as "KWU/Lok Nordhausen" after a merger with an industrial club. From 1951 on the team played as "BSG Motor Nordhausen-West" in second tier East German football. "Motor" enjoyed some modest success in the early 80s but then slipped and was relegated to the third division Bezirkliga Erfurt in 1989.

After German reunification in 1990 the football department separated from the sports club to form "FSV Wacker 90". The newly independent team took up play in the NOFV-Oberliga Süd (III) in the 1991–92 season and played at that level for seven years, interrupted by three seasons in the Regionalliga Nordost (III) from 1995 to 1998. During the 1990s the club made three appearances in the DFB-Pokal, in 1992–93, 1996–97 and 1997–98 but was knocked out in the first round at each occasion. After relegation back to the NOFV-Oberliga Süd (IV) in 1998 the club slowly declined. Financial problems drove the club further down to the Landesliga Thüringen (V) in 2000–01 before they finally landed in the Landesklasse Thuringen-Ost (VI) in 2002.

After a decade of lower league play the club won the Thüringenliga in 2011–12 and the NOFV-Oberliga Süd the season after to make a return to the Regionalliga Nordost where it plays today.

"FSV" plays its home matches in the Albert-Kuntz-Sportpark which has a capacity of 8,000 (~1,000 seats) spectators.

The club's honours:

The recent season-by-season performance of the club:



Godney

Godney is a village and civil parish near Glastonbury on the River Sheppey on the Somerset Levels in the Mendip district of Somerset, England.

Near the village are the sites of the Iron Age Glastonbury Lake Village, and the now drained Meare Pool.
During the Second World War, Godney was incorporated into the GHQ Line. Several pillboxes were constructed in the area. Natural obstacles to tanks were supplemented with an anti-tank ditch and bridges in the area were prepared for demolition at short notice.

The parish council has responsibility for local issues, including setting an annual precept (local rate) to cover the council's operating costs and producing annual accounts for public scrutiny. The parish council evaluates local planning applications and works with the local police, district council officers, and neighbourhood watch groups on matters of crime, security, and traffic. The parish council's role also includes initiating projects for the maintenance and repair of parish facilities, as well as consulting with the district council on the maintenance, repair, and improvement of highways, drainage, footpaths, public transport, and street cleaning. Conservation matters (including trees and listed buildings) and environmental issues are also the responsibility of the council.

The village falls within the Non-metropolitan district of Mendip, which was formed on 1 April 1974 under the Local Government Act 1972, having previously been part of Wells Rural District, which is responsible for local planning and building control, local roads, council housing, environmental health, markets and fairs, refuse collection and recycling, cemeteries and crematoria, leisure services, parks, and tourism.

Somerset County Council is responsible for running the largest and most expensive local services such as education, social services, libraries, main roads, public transport, policing and fire services, trading standards, waste disposal and strategic planning.

It is also part of the Wells county constituency represented in the House of Commons of the Parliament of the United Kingdom. It elects one Member of Parliament (MP) by the first past the post system of election.

To the north west of the village are the Westhay Moor and Somerset Levels National Nature Reserves. Westhay Moor is a biological Site of Special Scientific Interest and part of the Somerset Levels and Moors Special Protection Area under the EU Birds Directive and as a Ramsar site, and a national nature reserve. It is part of the Brue Valley Living Landscape conservation project.

Along with the rest of South West England, Godney has a temperate climate which is generally wetter and milder than the rest of the country. The annual mean temperature is approximately . Seasonal temperature variation is less extreme than most of the United Kingdom because of the adjacent sea temperatures. The summer months of July and August are the warmest with mean daily maxima of approximately . In winter mean minimum temperatures of or are common. In the summer the Azores high pressure affects the south-west of England, however convective cloud sometimes forms inland, reducing the number of hours of sunshine. Annual sunshine rates are slightly less than the regional average of 1,600 hours. In December 1998 there were 20 days without sun recorded at Yeovilton. Most of the rainfall in the south-west is caused by Atlantic depressions or by convection. Most of the rainfall in autumn and winter is caused by the Atlantic depressions, which is when they are most active. In summer, a large proportion of the rainfall is caused by sun heating the ground leading to convection and to showers and thunderstorms. Average rainfall is around . About 8–15 days of snowfall is typical. November to March have the highest mean wind speeds, and June to August have the lightest winds. The predominant wind direction is from the south-west.

The Church of the Holy Trinity, by G.D. Manners, dates from 1839 and was built on a medieval site. It was restored in 1903, with an added chancel, by E. Buckle. It is a Grade II listed building.



The Adventures of Dick Cole

The Adventures of Dick Cole was a 1940s comic book series, created by Bob Davis. It was published by Novelty Press, and later, Star Publications. Dick Cole is a heroic cadet at the fictional Farr Military Academy. The character was introduced in the "Origin of Dick Cole," in the first issue of Novelty Press' "Blue Bolt Comics" (cover-dated June 1940).

Billed as "America's Number One School Star", Dick Cole starred in a backup feature in Novelty Press' "Blue Bolt" (and later "4 Most"), with regular stories about the young hero appearing until 1949. The character got his own book with five issues of "Dick Cole" (Novelty Press/Star Publications, 1948-1949), illustrated by L. B. Cole, Joe Certa, Jim Wilcox, Al Fagaly, Jack Hearne, and others. L. B. Cole continued the title for five more issues at Star Publications in 1949–1950. (Many of the stories published in the Star issues were reprints from "Blue Bolt" and another Novelty Press title, "Target Comics".)

Dick was an orphan left at the Farr Military Academy, and taken in by Professor Blair, who wants to bring him up to be a physical marvel. After years of training, Dick becomes super-strong and acrobatic. He uses these skills to fight crime.

In 1942, the "Dick Cole" feature was adapted into a 30-minute syndicated juvenile adventure radio program that followed the adventures of Dick (Leon Janney) at the Farr Military Academy. When Cole wasn't winning football games, he tracked evildoers with an assist from his Academy pals Simba and Ted. The announcer was Paul Luther. Lew White provided the background music. The program was transcribed and syndicated by the World Broadcasting System.

Radio Daily's 1946 publication, "Shows of Tomorrow", listed the transcribed series "Adventures of Dick Cole at Farr Military Academy" as being available for the 1946-1947 radio season. The series, produced by Charles Michelson Inc., consisted of 52 half-hour episodes.


Iran, The most Dangerous Nation?

Koppel on Discovery: Iran, The most Dangerous Nation? is a documentary about post-revolution Iran and Iran-United States conflicts, made by Ted Koppel Team in Iran (2006).

Although facts suggest otherwise, it is claimed in the movie that the Koppel team was the last group of American journalists allowed into Iran before the Iranian government stopped granting journalist visas in 2006. This was a direct response to claims that the U.S. blocked Iranian journalists from coming to the U.S. Koppel, whose groundbreaking coverage of the Iran hostage crisis morphed into ABC's "Nightline" in 1980, traveled throughout Iran for three weeks for the two-hour special.

"Koppel on Discovery" is produced by Discovery Channel managing editor, Ted Koppel and executive producer Tom Bettag.



Medal for Heroic Deeds

The Medal for Heroic Deeds was instituted in Norway by royal resolution on 19 August 1885 and is awarded for honorable actions in saving lives or a comparable act. There were originally three classes, but from 1905 the medal has only been awarded in gold and silver. To be awarded in gold the recipient must have committed an unusually notable rescue of life where the rescuer's life was put at risk. The medal is surmounted by the Crown of Norway and the adverse side features the portrait, name and title of the reigning monarch. At present the portrait is of King Harald V of Norway, and the inscription reads «Harald den 5, Norges Konge» ("Harald the fifth, King of Norway"). The reverse features an oak wreath and the words «For edel dåd» ("For noble deed"). The ribbon is in the national colours of Norway: red, white and blue.



HMS Bigbury Bay (K606)

HMS "Bigbury Bay" was a anti-aircraft frigate of the British Royal Navy, named for Bigbury Bay in Devon.

The ship was originally ordered on 19 January 1943 as a to be named "Loch Carloway", but the order was changed before construction began. She was laid down on 30 May 1944 as Job Number J11825 by Hall Russell at Aberdeen, launched on 16 November 1944, and completed on 12 July 1945 with the pennant number K606.

Following sea trials "Bigbury Bay" was prepared for service with the British Pacific Fleet. Based at Hong Kong from December 1945, she carried out patrols of the Chinese coast, refitting at Sydney, Australia, in mid-1946, then taking part in exercises with ships of the United States Navy around Japan.

In February 1947 she was transferred to the Mediterranean Fleet, stationed at Haifa with the 5th Frigate Flotilla to carry out patrols to intercept ships bringing illegal Jewish immigrants to Palestine.

In March 1948 "Bigbury Bay" left the Mediterranean for the West Indies, where she would remain for the next nine years, making regular return trips to Portsmouth to refit, as well as three tours of duty as guard ship at the Falkland Islands. As part of the West Indies Squadron she made visits to ports along the coast of the southern United States, Central and South America, including an unusual trip up the Amazon River to Manaos in 1951, and rounding Cape Horn in late 1954 to visit Chile and Peru before transiting the Panama Canal to return to Bermuda. In 1956 her crew formed the Colour guard for the ceremony at the Cathedral of the Most Holy Trinity, Bermuda of the laying-up of the Queen's Colour for the closure of the North America and West Indies Station, and also provided the Guard at Hamilton during the meeting between Prime Minister Harold Macmillan and U.S. President Dwight D. Eisenhower the following year.

In early 1957, "Bigbury Bay" visited Havana, Cuba, the last British warship to do so until the visit of the destroyer on 15 November 2010. In May "Bigbury Bay" visited Jamestown, Virginia to join the celebrations marking the 350th anniversary of the founding of the colony.

"Bigbury Bay" returned to the UK in June to refit, and in November 1957 came under of the Commander-in-Chief, South Atlantic at Simon's Town, South Africa, taking part in fleet exercises and making visits to ports along the coasts of East and West Africa.

Following the revolution in Iraq in July 1958 the ship was transferred to the Mediterranean and sailed to Aden for patrol duty in the Red Sea, and carried out Guard ship duty at Aqaba. In November she returned to the UK and was put into Reserve.

"Bigbury Bay" was sold to Portugal on 12 May 1959 and renamed NRP "Pacheco Pereira". The ship remained active in the Portuguese Navy until sold for breaking-up on 6 July 1970.

 

Tatoosh Wilderness

The Tatoosh Wilderness is a designated wilderness in the Gifford Pinchot National Forest in Washington in the Pacific Northwest region of the United States. The wilderness protects managed by the U.S. Forest Service. It was officially designated as wilderness by Congress in 1984 to protect the scenic alpine environment that complements the adjacent Mount Rainier National Park. It features Tatoosh Peak, a member of the Tatoosh Range.

Tatoosh means "breast" in the Chinook Jargon, in reference to the two large rock outcrops on the south face of Butter Peak.

The Tatoosh Range was used historically by Taidnapam (Upper Cowlitz) Indians. In mid-to-late August, Taidnapam families would climb up the ridge from fishing camps at the confluence of the Muddy Fork and Clear Fork Cowlitz Rivers, to hunt, gather materials for making baskets, and pick huckleberries for drying. The dried berries were transported to home villages for eating during the winter months. Archaeological evidence suggests that these high country treks were a long tradition among the local Indian people.

In 1932, a fire lookout was built. Author Martha Hardy wrote about her experiences keeping watch at the fire lookout in her 1947 book "Tatoosh".

The Tatoosh Wilderness is accessible from the north from Mt. Rainier National Park and from the south via the Tatoosh Trail. A spur of the Tatoosh Trail extends to the location of the fire lookout that Martha Hardy wrote about, although only the foundations of the lookout building remain.


Frank L. Madla

Frank Lloyd Madla Jr. (January 21, 1937 – November 24, 2006), was for thirty-three years a Democratic member of both the Texas House of Representatives and the Texas State Senate from the south side of San Antonio. Madla died in a house fire in the early morning hours on the Friday after Thanksgiving Day in 2006.

Madla was initially elected to the lower house of the Texas legislature in a San Antonio-based district in 1972. He served for twenty years in the House until he was elected to the District 24, later District 19, state Senate seat, which is geographically large and stretches from San Antonio to as far west as El Paso. (In Texas, state Senate districts are geographically and demographically larger than United States House of Representatives districts.)

In 1985, "Texas Monthly", in its biennial feature on the best and worst Texas legislators named Madla to the "Honorable Mention" category, as one of the top twenty legislators for that session.

Madla had maintained his Senate seat without opposition until successfully challenged in the Democratic primary held in March 2006 by the District 118 state representative, Carlos I. "Charlie" Uresti. Uresti, a San Antonio attorney, prevailed with 56.5 percent of the vote to Madla's 43.5 percent.

Carla Vela, the then Bexar County Democratic Party chairman, said that issues were less important in the Madla-Uresti race than an ongoing intraparty power struggle involving the political families who control the Southside section of San Antonio.

Shortly after his primary defeat, Madla announced that he would resign his Senate seat early, effective May 31, 2006.

Madla was born in just outside San Antonio in Helotes to Frank L. Madla Sr., and the former Epigmenia Alcala. Madla attended St. Mary's University and graduated with a B.A. in Government in 1959, and in 1963, an M.A. in Government. Madla was married in 1961, and he and wife Rosemary had a son, Frank L. Madla, III. Madla was remarried in 1977 to the former Helen Cruz (born June 2, 1954), and had a daughter, Marci Morgan Madla.

Madla was a junior high school teacher for ten years before he entered politics. At various times he worked as an insurance and real estate broker, and an instructor at University of the Incarnate Word.

Madla, along with Mary Cruz, his 81-year-old mother-in-law, and Aleena, his five-year-old granddaughter, died in a house fire. Madla had been asleep in his home upstairs and had tried to escape through the bedroom window. Burglar bars on the windows trapped him, and he succumbed to smoke and flames. His granddaughter was initially thought to have survived, but was declared without brain function and died after being removed from life support a day later. Madla's wife Helen survived the blaze but was hospitalized for a time afterward. Madla's home had no smoke detectors.

U.S. President George W. Bush issued his condolences to the Madla family and promised to pray for Helen Madla's full recovery: "Frank was a dedicated public servant who devoted more than three decades of his life to serving his state and all its people in the Texas House and Senate."

Texas Governor Rick Perry ordered state flags to be flown at half-staff in Madla's honor on November 30, the day of Madla's funeral, and 1 December, the date of his interment in the Texas State Cemetery. Perry issued this tribute: "Frank Madla was a dear friend and a dedicated public servant who was an exemplary representative for South and West Texas. Frank was a mentor to me when I came in to the legislature. He had a heart of gold and was a true Texas patriot. He and his wife, Helen, were two of Anita's [First Lady Anita Thigpen Perry] and my favorites. His death is a tragic loss to the community, to his friends and to his family. Anita and I offer our prayers on behalf of his wife Helen for her continued recovery."

In January 2006, the former Royalgate Elementary School in the South San Antonio Independent School District was renamed Frank Madla Elementary School. Madla described the renaming as the "single best honor" to him ever.

VIA Metropolitan Transit named its Madla Transit Center in his honor. It is located on San Antonio's South Side at the intersection of I-35 and Zarzamora Street.

Election history of Madla from 1992.

HMS Wigtown Bay (K616)

HMS "Wigtown Bay" was a anti-aircraft frigate of the British Royal Navy. She was named for Wigtown Bay in Galloway.

Ordered on 6 March 1943 from the Harland and Wolff yard in Belfast as a Loch-class anti-submarine frigate, and assigned the name "Loch Garasdale", the ship was laid down on 24 October 1944 (yard number 1260). However, during construction the need for anti-aircraft escorts for service in the Far East, meant that the contract was revised, and she was completed as a Bay-class frigate. The ship was named "Wigtown Bay" when launched on 26 April 1945 with the pennant number K616.

Commissioned in November 1945 under the command of Lt-Cdr. D. Carson, "Wigtown Bay" completed her fitting-out and sea trials on 19 January 1946.

In February she sailed to Malta, joining the 5th Escort Flotilla, and was deployed for patrol duty in the Mediterranean Sea. In May 1946 the flotilla patrolled the eastern Mediterranean to intercept ships carrying illegal immigrants to Palestine.

In April 1947 "Wigtown Bay" returned to HMNB Devonport, and was decommissioned in May. Laid-up in reserve she was used as an accommodation ship for Reserve Fleet personnel, but was refitted in 1948 and 1951 to ensure that her operational availability was maintained.

In April 1957 the ship was offered for sale to Ceylon, but negotiations failed. Put on the Disposal List in 1958, the ship was sold for scrapping in October 1958, arriving under tow at the breaker's yard at Faslane on 10 April 1959.


Mátészalka

Mátészalka is a town in Szabolcs-Szatmár-Bereg county, in the Northern Great Plain region of eastern Hungary. It is on the Kraszna River, 52 kilometers from the city of Nyiregyhaza.

It covers an area of and has a population of 17,015 people (2011).

The town was the birthplace of actor Tony Curtis' father, Emanuel Schwartz.

In 2001, the population of Mátészalka was nearly 96% Hungarian, 3% Romani, and 1% German. In recent years, however, people from America, India, Canada, and China have moved into Mátészalka (2021)

Mátészalka was created from the merger of two large villages: Máté, founded in 1231 and Szalka, created in 1268. From the fifteenth century, Mátészalka was a market settlement. From 1920 - 1950 it was the seat of the authorities of some of the committees Szatmár, Ugocsa and Bereg remaining in Hungary after the Trianon Treaty. In 1969 Mátészalka received city rights. The city is the seat of the regional "Szatmári Múzeum".

The actor Tony Curtis was born Bernard Schwarz, and his parents were from Mátészalka. His daughter, Jamie Lee Curtis, helped to refurbish the synagogue, which is where her grandparents worshipped. She also attended the opening of the Tony Curtis Memorial Museum and Cafe, which is located in Mátészalka. About 1,500 Jews from the town were taken to Auschwitz in 1944, after the Nazis occupied Hungary that March. In 1946, about 150 Jews returned, but many left after the 1956 Hungarian Revolution.

Mátészalka is twinned with:


Aaron Fotheringham

Aaron Fotheringham is an extreme wheelchair athlete who performs tricks adapted from skateboarding and BMX. He competes in the Vegas Am Jam series in skate park competitions, usually against BMX riders.

Fotheringham calls his activity "WCMX". He is the first person to successfully perform a backflip in a wheelchair at the age of 14, and a double backflip at the age of 18. He performs many other tricks in his wheelchair including 180 degree 'aerials', one-wheeled spins and rail grinds. He plans to fuse the back flip with the 180 aerial into what is known as a 'flair'.

Although he used crutches early on, he has been a wheelchair user full-time since the age of eight. He would watch his brother riding his BMX at the skate park, and one day his brother told him that he should try riding his chair in the park, an event of which Fotheringham said "One day my brother was like, 'It'd be really cool if you dropped in on your chair, do you want to try it?'" My dad was there and he gave me the thumbs up, so they helped me get my chair up a four-foot quarter pipe. Then I dropped in and just fell. Multiple times. Then, finally, I rode away from one of them.". He later noted that "I did, and I was hooked". He placed fourth in the intermediate BMX division in a competition held at Sunny Springs Skate Park on August 26, 2006.

Fotheringham uses a customized WCMX wheelchair designed by Box Wheelchairs, which is both lightweight and features four-wheel suspension. This enables him to perform the same sorts of tricks that skateboarders and BMXers can do, as the suspension cushions his landings. Fotheringham has worked with Box Designs Wheelchairs to help refine the design in real-world situations, resulting in a custom-made chair that is in his words "pretty much indestructible". Fotheringham advises others attempting to try these tricks to wear a helmet; he has had several injuries performing these tricks, including a broken elbow. He tries out new tricks by performing them first into a foam pit. Then he graduates to a 'resi', a harder plastic sheet over the cushions, before attempting the new trick on a regular skateboard ramp. When asked about having to practice, Fotheringham responded "I don't think of it as practice, I think of it as a fun way to live my life".

In 2010 Fotheringham joined the Nitro Circus Live tour, an action sports roadshow that tours Australia, New Zealand, Europe and the United States. "A little while after my 18th birthday I got an email from a producer of Nitro Circus. He said they'd heard I was trying to jump a big ramp but that nobody would give me permission. And they said: 'Here at Nitro Circus, we're not going to stop you doing it," Fotheringham later told James Renhard for Mpora. On the tour Fotheringham performed on a fifty-foot ramp-to-ramp jump doing backflips, double backflip attempts and on February 9, 2011, in New Zealand, the world's first wheelchair frontflip.

In 2008 he appeared in an episode of the reality series "The Secret Millionaire" and received a donation of US$20,000 from Century Software founder Gregory Haerr. In 2009, Fotheringham worked as a stunt double for Kevin McHale's character, Artie Abrams, in the TV series "Glee".

In 2022, he competed on "". After receiving Nikki Bella's golden buzzer in the audition round, he advanced to the finale, and earned second place.


War Medal

A war medal is a military decoration awarded in time of war, as opposed to a service medal. It may refer to, for example:


Muscle hypertrophy

Muscle hypertrophy or muscle building involves a hypertrophy or increase in size of skeletal muscle through a growth in size of its component cells. Two factors contribute to hypertrophy: sarcoplasmic hypertrophy, which focuses more on increased muscle glycogen storage; and myofibrillar hypertrophy, which focuses more on increased myofibril size. It is the primary focus of bodybuilding-related activities.

A range of stimuli can increase the volume of muscle cells. These changes occur as an adaptive response that serves to increase the ability to generate force or resist fatigue in anaerobic conditions.

Strength training (resistance training) causes neural and muscular adaptations which increase the capacity of an athlete to exert force through voluntary muscular contraction: After an initial period of neuro-muscular adaptation, the muscle tissue expands by creating sarcomeres (contractile elements) and increasing non-contractile elements like sarcoplasmic fluid.

Muscular hypertrophy can be induced by progressive overload (a strategy of progressively increasing resistance or repetitions over successive bouts of exercise to maintain a high level of effort). However, the precise mechanisms are not clearly understood; currently accepted hypotheses involve some combination of mechanical tension, metabolic fatigue, and muscular damage.

Muscular hypertrophy plays an important role in competitive bodybuilding and strength sports like powerlifting, American football, and Olympic weightlifting.

The best approach to specifically achieve muscle growth remains controversial (as opposed to focusing on gaining strength, power, or endurance); it was generally considered that consistent anaerobic strength training will produce hypertrophy over the long term, in addition to its effects on muscular strength and endurance. Muscular hypertrophy can be increased through strength training and other short-duration, high-intensity anaerobic exercises. Lower-intensity, longer-duration aerobic exercise generally does not result in very effective tissue hypertrophy; instead, endurance athletes enhance storage of fats and carbohydrates within the muscles, as well as neovascularization.

During a workout, increased blood flow to metabolically active areas causes muscles to temporarily increase in size. This phenomenon is referred to as transient hypertrophy, or more commonly known as being "pumped up" or getting "a pump." About two hours after a workout and typically for seven to eleven days, muscles swell due to an inflammation response as tissue damage is repaired. Longer-term hypertrophy occurs due to more permanent changes in muscle structure.

Biological factors (such as DNA and sex), nutrition, and training variables can affect muscle hypertrophy.

Individual differences in genetics account for a substantial portion of the variance in existing muscle mass. A classical twin study design (similar to those of behavioral genetics) estimated that about 53% of the variance in lean body mass is heritable, along with about 45% of the variance in muscle fiber proportion.

During puberty in males, hypertrophy occurs at an increased rate. Natural hypertrophy normally stops at full growth in the late teens. As testosterone is one of the body's major growth hormones, on average, males find hypertrophy much easier (on an absolute scale) to achieve than females, and, on average, have about 60% more muscle mass than women. Taking additional testosterone, as in anabolic steroids, will increase results. It is also considered a performance-enhancing drug, the use of which can cause competitors to be suspended or banned from competitions. Testosterone is also a medically regulated substance in most countries, making it illegal to possess without a medical prescription. Anabolic steroid use can cause testicular atrophy, cardiac arrest, and gynecomastia.

In the long term, a positive energy balance, when more calories are consumed rather than burned, is helpful for anabolism and therefore muscle hypertrophy. An increased requirement for protein can help elevate protein synthesis, which is seen in athletes training for muscle hypertrophy. However, there is no scientific consensus on whether strength-training athletes have increased protein requirements.

Training variables, in the context of strength training, such as frequency, intensity, and total volume also directly affect the increase of muscle hypertrophy. A gradual increase in all of these training variables will yield muscular hypertrophy.

The message filters down to alter the pattern of gene expression. The additional contractile proteins appear to be incorporated into existing myofibrils (the chains of sarcomeres within a muscle cell). There appears to be some limit to how large a myofibril can become: at some point, they split. These events appear to occur within each muscle fiber. That is hypertrophy results primarily from the growth of each muscle cell rather than an increase in the number of cells. Skeletal muscle cells are however unique in the body in that they can contain multiple nuclei, and the number of nuclei can increase.

Cortisol decreases amino acid uptake by muscle tissue, and inhibits protein synthesis. The short-term increase in protein synthesis that occurs subsequent to resistance training returns to normal after approximately 28 hours in adequately fed male youths. Another study determined that muscle protein synthesis was elevated even 72 hours following training.

A small study performed on young and elderly found that ingestion of 340 grams of lean beef (90 g protein) did not increase muscle protein synthesis any more than ingestion of 113 grams of lean beef (30 g protein). In both groups, muscle protein synthesis increased by 50%. The study concluded that more than 30 g protein in a single meal did not further enhance the stimulation of muscle protein synthesis in young and elderly. However, this study didn't check protein synthesis in relation to training; therefore conclusions from this research are controversial. A 2018 review of the scientific literature concluded that for the purpose of building lean muscle tissue, a minimum of 1.6 g protein per kilogram of body weight is required, which can for example be divided over 4 meals or snacks and spread out over the day.

It is not uncommon for bodybuilders to advise a protein intake as high as 2–4 g per kilogram of bodyweight per day. However, scientific literature has suggested this is higher than necessary, as protein intakes greater than 1.8 g per kilogram of body weight showed to have no greater effect on muscle hypertrophy. A study carried out by American College of Sports Medicine (2002) put the recommended daily protein intake for athletes at 1.2–1.8 g per kilogram of body weight. Conversely, Di Pasquale (2008), citing recent studies, recommends a minimum protein intake of 2.2 g/kg "for anyone involved in competitive or intense recreational sports who wants to maximize lean body mass but does not wish to gain weight. However athletes involved in strength events (..) may need even more to maximize body composition and athletic performance. In those attempting to minimize body fat and thus maximize body composition, for example in sports with weight classes and in bodybuilding, it's possible that protein may well make up over 50% of their daily caloric intake."

Microtrauma is tiny damage to the muscle fibers. The precise relation between microtrauma and muscle growth is not entirely understood yet.

One theory is that microtrauma plays a significant role in muscle growth. When microtrauma occurs (from weight training or other strenuous activities), the body responds by overcompensating, replacing the damaged tissue and adding more, so that the risk of repeat damage is reduced. Damage to these fibers has been theorized as the possible cause for the symptoms of delayed onset muscle soreness (DOMS), and is why progressive overload is essential to continued improvement, as the body adapts and becomes more resistant to stress.

However, other work examining the time course of changes in muscle protein synthesis and their relationship to hypertrophy showed that damage was unrelated to hypertrophy. In fact, in one study the authors showed that it was not until the damage subsided that protein synthesis was directed to muscle growth.

In the bodybuilding and fitness community and even in some academic books skeletal muscle hypertrophy is described as being in one of two types: Sarcoplasmic or myofibrillar. According to this hypothesis, during sarcoplasmic hypertrophy, the volume of sarcoplasmic fluid in the muscle cell increases with no accompanying increase in muscular strength, whereas during myofibrillar hypertrophy, actin and myosin contractile proteins increase in number and add to muscular strength as well as a small increase in the size of the muscle. Sarcoplasmic hypertrophy is greater in the muscles of bodybuilders because studies suggest sarcoplasmic hypertrophy shows a greater increase in muscle size while myofibrillar hypertrophy proves to increase overall muscular strength making it more dominant in Olympic weightlifters. These two forms of adaptations rarely occur completely independently of one another; one can experience a large increase in fluid with a slight increase in proteins, a large increase in proteins with a small increase in fluid, or a relatively balanced combination of the two.

Examples of increased muscle hypertrophy are seen in various professional sports, mainly strength related sports such as boxing, olympic weightlifting, mixed martial arts, rugby, professional wrestling and various forms of gymnastics. Athletes in other more skill-based sports such as basketball, baseball, ice hockey, and football may also train for increased muscle hypertrophy to better suit their position of play. For example, a center (basketball) may want to be bigger and more muscular to better overpower his or her opponents in the low post. Athletes training for these sports train extensively not only in strength but also in cardiovascular and muscular endurance training.

Some neuromuscular diseases result in true hypertrophy of one or more skeletal muscles, confirmed by MRI or muscle biopsy. As this muscle hypertrophy is not the result of resistance training nor heavy manual labour, this is why the muscle hypertrophy is described as a pseudoathletic appearance.

As muscle hypertrophy is a response to strenuous anaerobic activity, ordinary everyday activity would become strenuous in diseases that result in premature muscle fatigue (neural or metabolic), or disrupt the excitation-contraction coupling in muscle, or cause repetitive or sustained involuntary muscle contractions (fasciculations, myotonia, or spasticity). In lipodystrophy, an abnormal deficit of subcutaneous fat accentuates the appearance of the muscles, though the muscles are quantifiably hypertrophic (possibly due to a metabolic abnormality).

Diseases that result in true muscle hypertrophy include, but not limited to, select: muscular dystrophies, metabolic myopathies, endocrine myopathies, congenital myopathies, non-dystrophic myotonias and pseudomyotonias, denervation, spasticity, and lipodystrophy. The muscle hypertrophy may persist throughout the course of the disease, or may later atrophy, or become pseudohypertrophic (muscle atrophy with infiltration of fat or other tissue). For instance, Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophy may start as true muscle hypertrophy, but later develop into pseudohypertrophy.


Nagyhalász

Nagyhalász is a town in Szabolcs-Szatmár-Bereg county, in the Northern Great Plain region of eastern Hungary.

It covers an area of and has a population of 5676 people (2015).

The Nagyhalász Speedway Ring is a motorcycle speedway track, located approximately 1 kilometre west of Nagyhalász on the Rétköz u road. The stadium opened in 2015 and is a significant venue for speedway and has hosted many events, including the 2022 Speedway Grand Prix Qualification and the 2023 Speedway Grand Prix Qualification rounds.

Nagyecsed

Nagyecsed is a town in Szabolcs-Szatmár-Bereg county, in the Northern Great Plain region of eastern Hungary.

The old name of the town was Ecsed but over time it has been renamed Nagyecsed, meaning "grand" or "great Ecsed" to distinguish it. The area had close associations with a cadet branch of the Báthory family. Elizabeth Báthory was raised in the town's now ruined castle. Her main residence and later her prison was Csejte Castle, Upper Hungary, now in Slovakia, but she was buried in the family crypt at Ecsed.

The town's castle was demolished in the eighteenth century after the Kuruc uprisings.

It covers an area of and has a population of 6706 people (2005).

The town is divided in two by the Crasna River. It formerly lay north west of the Ecsed Marsh (Ecsedi-láp), which was the largest contiguous marshland of the Great Hungarian Plain. As part of water control operations by Tibor Károlyi this was drained in the late nineteenth century, and the lands thus reclaimed transformed into farmland.


Totus tuus

According to his Apostolic Letter "Rosarium Virginis Mariae" he borrowed the motto from the Marian consecrating prayer found in the 1712 book "True Devotion to Mary" by Louis de Montfort. The complete text of the prayer in Latin is:

Pope John Paul II once recalled how as a young seminarian he "read and reread many times and with great spiritual profit" some writings of Louis de Montfort and that:

The 2004 "Enchiridion Indulgentiarum" (Indulgences Handbook) grants the indulgence for the prayer of Saint Louis-Marie Grignion de Montfort.

Dana's song "Totus Tuus", commemorating John Paul II's 1979 visit to Ireland, topped the Irish Singles Chart the following year; she sang it at papal masses in 1987 and at World Youth Day 1993.

In 1987, Henryk Górecki composed a choral piece "(Totus Tuus Op. 60)" to celebrate the Pope's third pilgrimage to his native Poland that summer. While the motet opens with the same words as the apostolic motto, the piece actually uses a poem by Maria Boguslawska for its text.


National Museum of Ethnology (Japan)

The is one of the major museums in Japan. It is Japan's largest research institute in the academic disciplines of humanities and social sciences, which was established in 1974 and opened to the public in 1977. It is built on the former grounds of Expo '70 in Suita, Osaka. The founding collection is known as the Attic Collection, and is an early 20th-century ethnological collection of mainly Japanese materials, including some early finds of Jōmon archaeological artifacts (in the Morse Collection). Further collections were brought together for the opening in 1977 and collecting activities have continued since. 

The main focus of collection has been film, still images, sound recordings, and objects representing diverse aspects of everyday life, from farming to food, urban life, folk crafts, and religion. Permanent galleries for all large regions of the world display only part of the full collection.

Two special exhibitions of approximately three months duration are presented in Spring and Autumn each year, and there are numerous smaller temporary exhibitions on special themes. 

The museum has a staff of approximately 70 researchers, and actively supports visits by scholars around Japan and abroad. The museum library is one of the largest academic, multiple-language reference libraries in Japan, with books and journal in Japanese, English, Chinese, Spanish, and other languages. The library is linked to a national network of public university libraries.

The Museum offers PhD courses in association with Japan's Inter-University of Advanced Graduate Studies (Sōkendai), an inter-institutional organization that provides administration for students placed in public research institutes and laboratories all over Japan.

The National Museum of Ethnology is also a founding member of the National Institutes for Humanities (NIHU), Japan.


Davide Facchin

Davide Facchin (born 29 April 1987) is an Italian former footballer who played as a goalkeeper.

After spending six years at Milan in their youth teams, Facchin was loaned out to Olbia for the 2007–08 season. The young goalkeeper was regularly in the starting line-up throughout the whole season.

The following year he was sent to Padova on another loan spell. This time though, the then 21-year-old was the backup keeper and collected only three appearances.

At the start of the 2009–10 season, Facchin was loaned out for the third time, this time to Pavia. However, he was again employed as the backup keeper and made only four appearances throughout the season. In July 2010 Pavia signed Facchin outright after his contract with Milan expired.

On 31 January 2014 Facchin was signed by South Tyrol in a temporary deal; after the loan falls to Pavia where he will play for another two years; in the summer of 2016 goes to Venezia. Facchin's contract was terminated by mutual consent on 17 June 2019.

On 11 July 2019, he signed a 2-year contract with Como.

On 7 May 2022 he announced his retirement.


HMS Burghead Bay

HMS "Burghead Bay" was a anti-aircraft frigate of the British Royal Navy, named for Burghead Bay in Morayshire.

The ship was originally ordered as a from Hall Russell of Aberdeen to be named "Loch Harport". The order was cancelled in December 1943 and the ship was re-ordered as a Bay-class frigate from Charles Hill & Sons of Bristol in 1944. She was laid down on 21 September 1944 as Job No. J601 (Yard No. 301) and launched by Mrs A.V. Alexander, wife of the 1st Lord of the Admiralty on 3 March 1945.

Commissioned for service on 20 September 1945, "Burghead Bay" carried out sea trials in October, and was deployed in November to the Plymouth Local Flotilla, where she stayed until the end of 1952, carrying out exercises, search and rescue in the Channel, and sea training. In 1948 her pennant number was changed to F622.
In January 1952 "Burghead Bay" sailed via La Plata and Montevideo to the Falkland Islands for guard ship duty, making calls to the South Orkney Islands, Graham Land, the South Shetland Islands and South Georgia carrying out survey work. In February, she was involved in the Hope Bay incident in Antarctica. In April she was relieved by sister ship . She then sailed to Bermuda to join the West Indies Squadron, taking part in exercises and patrols, and making port visits around the Caribbean, before returning to the UK in October to refit.

Refitting was completed by April 1953, and she took part in the Coronation Naval Review at Spithead in June before returning to Bermuda for the usual programme of exercises and port visits, returning to the UK in June 1954. After another refit in which new radars and UHF radio equipment were fitted she departed for the West Indies in December. In February 1955 she sailed to the Falklands for guard ship duty, returning to Bermuda in June, and sailed back to the UK in November.

An extended refit at Devonport lasted from January 1956 until March 1957. On 24 May "Burghead Bay" was recommissioned for service in 7th Frigate Squadron on the South Atlantic Station, sailing for Simon's Town in August. She made calls in Brazil and Argentina, took part in squadron exercises in South Atlantic, and was also deployed in South African waters for joint exercises with the South African Navy. In early 1958 she visited ports in East Africa. In May she sailed for the Falklands for her third and final tour of duty as guard ship, departing in June and sailing to the UK via ports on west coast of South America, making calls in Chile and Peru before transiting the Panama Canal, and finally arriving at Devonport in August where she was decommissioned, put into Reserve, and on the Disposal List. During this commission she was commanded by Commander S L McArdle

"Burghead Bay" was bought by Portugal in May 1959 for service in the Portuguese Navy as NRP "Álvares Cabral". She was deployed as an anti-aircraft frigate until 23 June 1971, and then scrapped.

 

Nyírbátor

Nyírbátor () is a town in Szabolcs-Szatmár-Bereg county, in the Northern Great Plain region of eastern Hungary. With its historic atmosphere, this city is known for its 15th- and 16th-century ecclesiastic and secular architectural heritage and for the Báthory family, former landowners.

It covers an area of and has a population of 12,259 (2015).

The first written record of the settlement dates from 1279. Its name stems from the Old Turkish word 'batir' or Mongolian 'bator' (originally meaning a 'good hero', and corresponding to 'bátor' in modern Hungarian). At that time, the ancestors of the Báthorys, the Gutkeled clan, already owned the land. The town became the administrative centre of their estates and also the family burial site. The family owned the town until the death of Gabriel Báthory, Prince of Transylvania in 1613.

The town was of great significance in Hungarian history during the 16th century. In 1549, the legates of King Ferdinand I and of Isabella agreed to return Transylvania to the Kingdom of Hungary. During the decades that followed there was a lasting dispute as to whom the town belonged since the local aristocrats were more inclined to recognise the sovereignty of the ruling prince of Transylvania.

By the 18th century the town had become impoverished. In the course of the 1872 reorganisation of public administration it lost its city rights that were returned only in 1973.

Numerous heritage buildings have remained from the town's heyday. The best known is what is now the Reformed Church. Built between 1488 and 1511, it is one of the most beautiful International Gothic structures in Hungary. The late Renaissance-style belfry next to it is the largest wooden bell tower in the country.

Franciscan friars built their friary church around 1480 in a late Gothic style. Its altars and its pulpit are among the most beautifully carved Baroque works in the country. Standing near the church is the building which now houses the István Báthori Museum. Originally a Baroque Minorite friary, it was built on the site of an earlier monastery.

The association football club, Nyírbátori FC, is based in Nyírbátor.


Nyírbátor is twinned with:



War Medal (Norway)

The War Medal () is a Norwegian war decoration for service during Second World War, and later for meritous service during war.

The Norwegian War Medal was instituted by King Haakon VII of Norway by Royal Decree on 23 May 1941 with the addition of the Royal Decree of 13 November 1942. It may be awarded to Norwegian and foreign members of the military who in a meritorious way have participated in the Second World War for Norway. The War Medal may also awarded posthumously to all Norwegians and foreigners who fought in the Norwegian forces and merchant marine and fell for the Norwegian Resistance.

The distribution ceased in 1951, but in 1979 it was determined by Royal decree that this medal was to be awarded Norwegian and foreign seamen who served on Norwegian Shipping and Trade Mission (Nortraship) vessels during World War II for 18 months, or on board Royal Norwegian Navy vessels.

The criteria were again changed in 2012. The medal can be awarded to Norwegians who have served meritously during war, for Norway. It has been awarded for war against ISIL.

The obverse side of the medal features the portrait of King Haakon VII of Norway, his name and motto "Alt for Norge". The reverse features a wreath, the inscription "Krigsmedalje" and the king's monogram. The medal is in bronze and the ribbon is in the colours of the Royal Standard: red and yellow. If a recipient earns the medal more than once, up to three stars may be attached to the ribbon. Along with the medal comes with a certificate, signed by the king. The medal was first produced at the firm Spink & Son in London.


Yongdingmen

Yongdingmen (), was the former front gate of the outer city of Beijing's old city wall. Originally built in 1553 during Ming Dynasty, it was torn down in the 1950s to make way for the new road system in Beijing. In 2005, the Yongdingmen was reconstructed at the site of the old city gate. This new gate is disconnected from the original road leading towards the gate and into the city (see photograph below).

During the Boxer Rebellion, on 11 June 1900, the secretary of the Japanese legation, , was attacked and killed by the Muslim soldiers of General Dong Fuxiang near Yongdingmen, who were guarding the southern part of the Beijing walled city.

Great Elm

Great Elm is a village and civil parish between Mells and Frome in the Mendip district of Somerset, England. The parish includes the hamlet of Hapsford.

The name Great Elm was recorded as "Telma" in the Domesday Book of 1086, and then as "Teames" in 1236 which is a contraction of "aet elm" "at the elm tree". Little Elm developed into the village of Chantry.

At Tedbury Camp southwest of the village a pot of Roman coins was dug up in 1961.

After the Norman Conquest the manor was held by the Giffards and later by the Hidges family and then the Stracheys.

The parish was part of the hundred of Frome.

For many years in the 18th and 19th centuries Great Elm was the site of water powered mills owned by James Fussell IV.

The Stracheys owned Rock House for a period early in the 20th century.

Hapsford House on Hapsford Hill is a 19th-century country house.

The Jackdaws Music Education Trust has been based in the village since 1993.

The parish council has responsibility for local issues, including setting an annual precept (local rate) to cover the council's operating costs and producing annual accounts for public scrutiny. The parish council evaluates local planning applications and works with the local police, district council officers, and neighbourhood watch groups on matters of crime, security, and traffic. The parish council's role also includes initiating projects for the maintenance and repair of parish facilities, as well as consulting with the district council on the maintenance, repair, and improvement of highways, drainage, footpaths, public transport, and street cleaning. Conservation matters (including trees and listed buildings) and environmental issues are also the responsibility of the council.

The village falls within the Non-metropolitan district of Mendip, which was formed on 1 April 1974 under the Local Government Act 1972, having previously been part of Frome Rural District, which is responsible for local planning and building control, local roads, council housing, environmental health, markets and fairs, refuse collection and recycling, cemeteries and crematoria, leisure services, parks, and tourism.

Somerset County Council is responsible for running the largest and most expensive local services such as education, social services, libraries, main roads, public transport, policing and fire services, trading standards, waste disposal and strategic planning.

It is also part of the Somerton and Frome county constituency represented in the House of Commons of the Parliament of the United Kingdom. It elects one Member of Parliament (MP) by the first past the post system of election.

The village lies above the Mells River in the Mendip Hills.

Vallis Vale is a biological and geological Site of Special Scientific Interest which includes an ancient woodland and exposes some of Britain's most classic rock outcrops, exhibiting several of the most easily demonstrated examples of angular unconformity available.

The Macmillan Way long-distance path passes through the village, the Mendip Way passes by on the far side of the river, and the village is just off the Colliers Way, National Cycle Route 24.

The parish is crossed by a Mendip Rail railway line which carries aggregate trains from Whatley Quarry. On 6 October 2008 a freight train was hit from behind by a runaway train near Great Elm on the private line from Whatley Quarry. There were no serious injuries.

The Church of St Mary Magdalene dates from the 12th century and is a Grade I listed building.

György Garics

György Garics (; born 8 March 1984) is a former professional footballer who played as a full-back. Born in Hungary, he made 41 appearances for the Austria national team scoring twice.

Born in Szombathely, Hungary, of Croatian descent, Garics moved to Vienna when he was 14 years old and started his football career in Austria with prominent side Rapid Vienna in 2002; during his first season as a teenager he made two appearances.

By the 2004–05 season the young attacking wingback has become more of a prominent member in the first team and Rapid Vienna won the Austrian Bundesliga. Around this time he also became captain of the Austria under-21 national team.

Having made 81 appearances for Rapid Vienna and scored one goal, he was bought by Italian side Napoli for €500,000, making his debut against Triestina on 23 September 2006. Soon after, he achieved a call up on 6 October 2006 for the Austria national team against Liechtenstein and scored on his international debut.

He was also called up to the Euro 2008 squad and started Austria's third match against Germany in Vienna.

The case of Garics divided Hungarian public sentiment, as it is the first high-profile case of a player choosing a national team other than Hungary, and is also considered a failure on the part of the Hungarian Football Federation to consider to select him in time for the national team.

Garics signed for Atalanta from Napoli in a co-ownership deal in early July 2008, for €1.5 million. Atalanta bought full ownership of the player for €1 million on 26 June 2009.

After Atalanta were relegated from Serie A, Garics was sold outright to Bologna on 9 August 2010, for €3 million. Garics was seriously injured in 2011, and had to miss most of the spring season at Bologna.

On 14 August 2015, Garics joined newly promoted Bundesliga club SV Darmstadt 98 on a two-year deal. He left the club on 30 August 2016.

Rapid Vienna


Nyírlugos

Nyírlugos is a town in Szabolcs-Szatmár-Bereg county in the Northern Great Plain region of eastern Hungary. It covers an area of . Its population was 2699 as of 2015.

Joe Goldstein

Herbert Joseph Goldstein (c. 1928 – February 13, 2009) was an American publicist who promoted sporting events in New York City for 60 years, including basketball at Madison Square Garden, the New York City Marathon and a trotter with an affinity for artichokes.

Goldstein was born in Conway, South Carolina where his father owned a business, and moved to Manhattan as a child with his family. He graduated from New York University.

Goldstein's public relations prowess relied on his ability to connect with reporters to create stories for his clients, which included promoting basketball for Madison Square Garden during the 1950s and for Roosevelt Raceway from the mid-1950s until 1969.

In 1959, a trotter from France named Jamin was scheduled to run in the inaugural International Trot at Roosevelt Raceway. Goldstein spread the word that the horse's chances were affected by the loss of over 150 pounds of artichokes that had been impounded, and then misplaced, by the United States Department of Agriculture at Idlewild Airport. Goldstein placed ads in "The New York Times" and "New York Herald Tribune" that read "French Trotter Needs Artichokes. Can You Help?", including a phone number of Roosevelt Raceway. Newspapers gave the story extensive play, with locals bring their backyard-grown artichokes to the track and United Airlines flying artichokes in from Watsonville, California, the artichoke capital of America. The horse was energized after eating the artichokes, or so Goldstein said, and went on to win the race in front of a crowd of 45,000.

At the 1962 International Trot, a French horse named Kracovie that had won that year's European circuit was missing a stablemate, either a mountain sheep or a goat, that could not be brought into the United States due to quarantine regulations, and would not eat in the absence of its companion. As described by George Vecsey in the Times, "The entertainer Tina Louise just happened to have a goat in her Manhattan apartment. Wearing a low-cut dress, she and her agent and the goat paid a mission of mercy to Roosevelt." Despite the publicity, and the goat, Kracovie lost the race to Su Mac Lad.

In 1969, Goldstein was hired as national press representative for the United States Trotting Association.

Goldstein died at age 81 on February 13, 2009, in Boca Raton, Florida due to a myocardial infarction and stroke. He was survived by three sons and two sisters. His wife, Helene, had died in 1999.

Ričardas Šileika

Ričardas Šileika (born 3 April 1968 in Atkočiai, Ukmergė) is a Lithuanian writer, essayist and photographer.




Arthur Marsh (politician)

Arthur F. Marsh was an American politician from the state of Michigan. Marsh was from Allegan and was Chairman of the Michigan Republican Party from 1898 to 1900.


TruCluster

TruCluster is a closed-source high-availability clustering solution for the Tru64 UNIX operating system. It was originally developed by Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC), but was transferred to Compaq in 1998 when Digital was acquired by the company, which then later merged with Hewlett-Packard (HP).


Nyírtelek

Nyírtelek is a town in Szabolcs-Szatmár-Bereg county, in the Northern Great Plain region of eastern Hungary.

The town was separated from Nyíregyháza and became an independent settlement in January 1952 under the name Sőrekút. It was renamed to its current name still in that year, in November 1952.

It covers an area of and has a population of 7114 people (2005).

Nyirtelek.hu

Einion ap Gwgon

Einion ap Gwgon (fl. c. 1215) was a court poet in the Welsh language. His sole surviving poem is a eulogy to Prince Llywelyn ap Iorwerth (Llywelyn the Great) of Gwynedd.

Climate of California

The climate of California varies widely from hot desert to alpine tundra, depending on latitude, elevation, and proximity to the Pacific Coast. California's coastal regions, the Sierra Nevada foothills, and much of the Central Valley have a Mediterranean climate, with warmer, drier weather in summer and cooler, wetter weather in winter. The influence of the ocean generally moderates temperature extremes, creating warmer winters and substantially cooler summers in coastal areas.

The cool California Current offshore, enhanced by upwelling of cold sub-surface waters, often creates summer fog near the coast, creating a warm-summer Mediterranean climate (Köppen climate classification "Csb"). Farther inland, the climate becomes more continental, with some areas turning semi-arid (Köppen "BSk"), with colder winters and markedly hotter summers. Low-lying inland valleys, especially the Central Valley, have a hot-summer Mediterranean climate (Köppen "Csa"), with subtropical temperatures but a well-defined summer dry season and a foggy, rainy season in winter.

The temperature gradient between immediate coast and low-lying inland valleys in the south is about 7 °F (4 °C) in winter, the coast being warmer, and in summer roughly 20 °F (11 °C), the interior being warmer. For example, the average daily high in San Francisco in July and August is between , and in Walnut Creek, some inland, the average daily high in July and August is : a temperature gain of more than one degree (Fahrenheit) per mile. In Southern California, the temperature differences are approximately 4 °F in winter and 23 °F (2 °C and 13 °C) in summer. At the coast in Santa Monica, the average high in August is , while in Burbank, approximately inland, the average high in August is : a temperature gain of about two degrees Fahrenheit per mile.

During the cooler winter months (October–March), the Coachella Valley regularly has the warmest winter temperatures out of any place west of the Rocky Mountains. East Los Angeles, the Gateway Cities, and parts of the San Gabriel Valley average the warmest winter high temps () in all of the western U.S., and Santa Monica averages the warmest winter lows () in all of the western U.S. Palm Springs, a city in the Coachella Valley, averages high/low/mean temperatures of 75 °F/50 °F/63 °F, (24 °C/10 °C/17 °C) respectively during the period of cooler weather from November to April.

The extreme southwest, around San Diego, has a subtropical semi-arid or steppe climate (Koppen "BSh") as winters are drier there.

The southeastern regions have a hot arid climate (Koppen "BWh"), similar to that of the Sahara Desert. In the northern portion of the Mojave Desert on the east side of the state is Death Valley, which has recorded temperatures among the highest in the world. It is common in the summer for temperatures in the valley to surpass . The highest reliably recorded temperature in the world, , was recorded in Death Valley on July 10, 1913. Temperatures of or higher have been recorded as recently as 2005. The 24-hour average July temperature in Death Valley is (1981–2010 NCDC Normals).

The highest temperature ever recorded in California was in Death Valley on July 10, 1913. This is also the highest temperature ever recorded on Earth. The lowest was in Boca on January 20, 1937.

The prevailing westerly winds from the oceans also bring moisture, and the northern parts of the state generally receive higher annual rainfall amounts than the south. California's mountain ranges influence the climate as well: moisture-laden air from the west cools as it ascends the mountains, dropping moisture; some of the rainiest parts of the state are west-facing mountain slopes. Northwestern California has a temperate climate with rainfall of to per year. Some areas of Coast Redwood forest receive over of precipitation per year.

The Central Valley has a wide range of precipitation. The northern parts of the Central Valley receive substantially greater precipitation from winter storms which sweep down from the Pacific Northwest, while the southernmost regions of the Central Valley are near desert-like because of a lack of precipitation. 

The high mountains, including the Sierra Nevada, the Cascade Range, and the Klamath Mountains, have a mountain climate with snow in winter and mild to moderate heat in summer. Ski resorts at Lake Tahoe, Mammoth Lakes, and Mount Shasta routinely receive over of snow in a season, and some years, substantially more – leading, for example, to annual ski races on the Fourth of July.

On the east side of the mountains is a drier rain shadow. California's desert climate regions lie east of the high Sierra Nevada and southern California's Transverse Ranges and Peninsular Ranges. The low deserts east of the southern California mountains, including the Imperial and Coachella valleys and the lower Colorado River, are part of the Sonoran Desert, with minimal frost in the winter; the higher elevation deserts of eastern California, including the Mojave Desert, Owens Valley, and the Modoc Plateau, are part of the Great Basin region, which has a more continental climate. During the summer months, especially from July through early September, the region is affected by the Mexican Monsoon (also called the "southwest monsoon"), which drives moisture from the tropical Pacific, Gulf of California, and/or Gulf of Mexico into the deserts, setting off brief, but often torrential thunderstorms, particularly over mountainous terrain.

The ENSO cycle has a huge effect on rainfall and snowfall patterns in California, especially during the winter and spring seasons. During the El Niño phase, the jet stream is located south through California, allowing for warmer temperatures and more heavy rains to occur, particularly in the southern portions of the state. During the La Niña phase, the jet stream is much further north, and therefore the far northern portions of California are wetter, while the southern half stays cool and dry.

Incidences of dense fog in Los Angeles have been decreasing over time; researchers surmise the change may be a consequence of both the urban heat Island effect and decreased air pollution.

In the Central Valley during the winter months and in times of clear skies and light winds, the moisture from the Pacific can produce the tule fog, which is exceptionally thick fog that is visible on satellite imagery. The tule fog, named after the local tule grass wetlands, can reduce visibility to near zero, making it the primary cause of weather-related traffic accidents in the state. On November 3, 2007, a sudden patch of dense fog along California State Route 99 (SR 99) resulted in a traffic crash involving 108 vehicles in Fresno, which killed two people and at least 36 injuries. Following the accident, the California Department of Transportation (Caltrans) developed a fog warning system along a section of SR 99.

Across the state, tornadoes develop in three main regions – the Los Angeles area, the deserts of Southern California, the Central Valley. However, they are typically weaker and shorter-lived than tornadoes in the central United States. Because of their irregular and short-lived nature, the San Diego National Weather Service considers it "nearly impossible to forecast a Southern California tornado before it touches down." The agency utilizes a volunteer group of more than 1,300 volunteers to report local severe weather. The most California tornadoes on a single day in the state was seven, which occurred on November 9, 1982. In July 2004, a twister touched down in Sequoia National Park at an altitude of around 12,156 ft (3,705 m), making it the highest elevation for a confirmed tornado in the United States.

Despite its long coastline, California is not vulnerable to tropical cyclones. Because of the cold California Current from the North Pacific Ocean and the fact that the storms tend to "steer" west, California has only been hit with three tropical storms in recorded history, a storm which came ashore in 1939 and dumped heavy rainfall on the Los Angeles area and interior deserts. The remnants of tropical systems will affect California more commonly, every several years.

Summers in inland California can see temperatures well over during the day and less than of monthly rainfall, particularly in the southern areas. This makes them prone to wildfires. These can be life-threatening and cause evacuation. Wildfires are less common along the coast because of the cooler, more humid summers, but can occur in autumn when the marine layer is less common, making temperatures warmer and humidity drop significantly.

On occasion, fire whirls or fire tornadoes can develop within wildfires. One such event was rated an EF3, which developed in Redding in Shasta County within the Carr Fire. The fire whirl produced winds over , killing four people and injuring six others.

The following are terms used to describe local or regional weather events.




HMS Cardigan Bay (K630)

HMS "Cardigan Bay" was a anti-aircraft frigate of the British Royal Navy, named after Cardigan Bay, off the coast of Ceredigion, Wales.

The ship was originally ordered from Henry Robb of Leith in 1943 as the "Loch Laxford", and laid down on 14 April 1944 as Admiralty Job No. J11861. However the contract was then changed, and the ship was completed to a revised design as a Bay-class anti-aircraft frigate, and launched on 28 December 1944 as "Cardigan Bay", the first Royal Navy ship to carry the name. She was completed on 15 June 1945.

After sea trials, on 18 August 1945 "Cardigan Bay" joined the Mediterranean Fleet at Malta under the command of Commander Colin Maud. She was deployed in the Aegean Sea and at Haifa to intercept immigrant ships bound for Palestine. In July 1947 she escorted "1947" to Haifa, Mandatory Palestine, after putting a boarding party aboard, and in August escorted the British merchant ships "Empire Rival", and "Runnymede Park" to Port-de-Bouc near Marseille, taking the immigrants from "Exodus 1947" back to France. In early 1948 she intercepted the Liberty ships "Pan York" and "Pan Crescent" on passage from the Black Sea to Palestine with illegal immigrants.

"Cardigan Bay" carried out the usual programme of Fleet exercises and visits, also deploying for surveillance operations in the Adriatic Sea following the Corfu Channel Incident, acted as guard ship at Trieste and Aqaba, and performed patrol duties in the Red Sea. In 1948 her pennant number was changed to F630.

In July 1949, "Cardigan Bay" and sister ship were transferred to the Eastern Fleet, based at Singapore, arriving there in August, for a series of exercises and patrols off Malaya and China, deploying on the Yangtze Patrol with "St Brides Bay" and the sloop in November and December.

In October 1950 "Cardigan Bay" was detached for service with the United Nations as part of British and Commonwealth support for naval operations off Korea, sailing from Hong Kong on 17 November to Sasebo to join the UN Naval Task Group. In December she sailed on her first operational deployment off the west coast of Korea supporting UN personnel at Inchon. She remained there until mid-January 1951, then returned to Sasebo. Released from UN duty, she was deployed at Hong Kong for exercises and guard ship duties until June. She then returned to Sasebo, and began her second Korean tour, patrolling the west coast, supporting the aircraft carrier during coastal bombardments, and preventing movements of enemy shipping. In July she escorted an American LCU to recover wreckage from a Mikoyan MiG-15 fighter aircraft which had crashed in shallow water south-west of Hanchon. Large parts of the aircraft were recovered using the LCUs crane and smaller components by divers, while "Glory" and the cruiser provided radar and air cover. Further offensive patrols and survey operations in Han River estuary followed until September, when she sailed to Hong Kong to refit.
"Cardigan Bay" resumed service with UN Naval Task Force off Korea in January 1952 for patrol duties and naval gunfire support, until April, then sailed for Sasebo and Hong Kong for repairs and Flotilla exercises. In June she returned to Korea for further patrols and bombardments, and acted as an Air Control Ship during flying operations. Released in September she sailed for Hong Kong to refit.
Recommissioned for service in the 4th Frigate Squadron on 28 December, in January 1953 "Cardigan Bay" sailed on her fifth tour of service with the UN Task Group off Korea. On 7 April she embarked American General Maxwell D. Taylor and the Commander of the Commonwealth Naval Forces Admiral Alan Scott-Moncrieff, and sailed to Ch'o-do Island, close to the mouth of the Taedong River to carry out a shore bombardment. Shortly afterwards "Cardigan Bay" was involved in a collision with the Dutch frigate , sustaining some damage to her plating. Further damage was sustained when she was hit by the US Navy tug called in to assist. She sailed for Hong Kong in April for exercises and patrols off the west coast of Malaya supporting of operations against insurgents.

In July 1953 an armistice was agreed and hostilities in Korea ended. However "Cardigan Bay" was retained for occasional UN duty on the west coast of Korea into 1955, also taking part in joint exercises with the United States Navy. She spent the rest of the time deployed at Hong Kong and Singapore, patrolling off Malaya, Borneo and Indonesia. She also took part in various joint exercises with the Royal Thai Navy, Indian Navy Royal Australian Navy, Royal New Zealand Navy, and multi-national exercises with SEATO. In early 1958 she visited New Zealand, calling at Wellington and ports in South Island before resuming service with the Fleet at Singapore and Hong Kong, where she remained until November 1960.

"Cardigan Bay" then sailed for Australia, calling at Townsville, Queensland, then Nouméa, New Caledonia, Suva, Fiji and Apia, Samoa before refuelling at Pearl Harbor on 9 January 1961. She then sailed for San Francisco, and called at San Diego, Manzanillo, Mexico, and Puntarenas, Costa Rica before transiting the Panama Canal on 23 February. She then called at Cartagena, Colombia, Maracaibo, Venezuela, Port of Spain, Trinidad and Bermuda before finally arriving back at Plymouth on 7 April to decommission.
"Cardigan Bay" was put into Reserve on 30 May 1961, and was put on the Disposal List in 1962. She was sold to the BISCO for breaking-up by West of Scotland Shipbreakers at Troon, Ayrshire, where she arrived in tow on 5 March 1962.


Fool the World

Fool the World: The Oral History of a Band Called Pixies is a 2005 book by Josh Frank and Caryn Ganz about the American alternative rock band Pixies. The book, written as an oral history, covers the career of the band from their inception in 1985, to their breakup in 1993 and eventual reunion in 2004. "Fool the World" features interviews and recollections from a range of characters involved with the band, including "Surfer Rosa" producer Steve Albini, Kim Deal's twin sister Kelley Deal and 4AD co-founder Ivo Watts-Russell, as well as each member of the band.

The book's name, "Fool the World", is the English translation of the title of Pixies' 1991 album, "Trompe le Monde". It is published by Virgin Books in the United Kingdom and St. Martin's Griffin in the United States. The book's foreword is written by Chas Banks, Pixies' European tour manager. The book includes a selected discography, along with a "Fun Facts" chapter, which includes information about references to Pixies in popular culture and released Pixies covers.

"Fool the World" was originally written as a musical by Frank, until it was suggested that he compile all his material into "one big, fat book". As a result, sections of the book are named after musical theatre terms, such as "Cast of Characters", "Acts" and "Encore". The book is split into three acts: "Boston", "U.S. vs. UK" and "Le Monde", concluding with an "encore".

Contains the "Cast of Characters" (a list of people interviewed for the book), an introduction by author Josh Frank and foreword by Pixies' European tour manager Chas Banks.

Discusses the band members' early lives, the formulation of the band in 1985 and their first recordings in 1987 which formed the basis of their first release, known as "The Purple Tape" (1987), and its abridged counterpart, "Come On Pilgrim" (1987).

Covers the band's signing with 4AD Records, as well as the recording and release of the albums "Surfer Rosa" (1988), "Doolittle" (1989) and "Bossanova" (1990).

Named after Pixies' 1991 album "Trompe le Monde", this section explores the recording and release of that album, their subsequent tour supporting U2 in 1992, the breakup of the band and intervening years prior to the reunion.

The book finishes with chapters on the band's 2004 reunion and lasting impact, and an epilogue that serves as an update on the people interviewed in the book. A selected discography and "Fun Facts" appendix is also included.

This is a partial selection of the people interviewed for the book:


Peach Creek

Peach Creek may refer to:

James Crabb

James Crabb (born 1967) is a Scottish classical accordion player.

Crabb was born in Dundee. He was given his first accordion at age 4 by his accordion-playing father. He studied at the Royal Danish Academy of Music in Copenhagen with classical accordion pioneer Mogens Ellegaard and was awarded the Carl Nielsen Music Prize, Denmark in 1991. In 2008 he was awarded the Fredriksborg Culture Centre's Artist Prize.

Since Crabb's London debut in 1992, critics internationally have praised him for his virtuosity and versatile musicianship. Since then he has performed worldwide as soloist with orchestras and ensembles including the BBC Symphony Orchestra, the BBC Scottish Symphony Orchestra, Royal Scottish National Orchestra, the Sydney Symphony Orchestra, the Melbourne Symphony Orchestra, the Philharmonia, the London Philharmonic Orchestra, the London Symphony Orchestra, The Hallé, the Rotterdam Philharmonic, the London Sinfonietta, Birmingham Contemporary Music Group, and the Paragon and Nash Ensembles.

His solo, chamber music and concerto repertoire ranges from original contemporary works, frequently commissioning new works and collaborating with composers, to transcriptions from Baroque through to the 21st Century, tango nuevo and folk music. He also performs and directs chamber orchestras from the instrument with amongst others, the Scottish Ensemble, Northern Sinfonia, English and Irish Chamber Orchestras, Kuhmo Virtuosi and Camerata Salzbug. James has also worked extensively with the Australian Chamber Orchestra.

Crabb's has performed the music of Astor Piazzolla in concerts with the original members of Piazzolla's own quintet along with tworecordings, one as soloist and arranger with the Australian Chamber Orchestra and the second with Richard Tognetti and the quintet named Tango Jam. In 2005 he directed from the accordion Piazzolla's "Maria de Buenos Aires" at the Royal Danish Opera. A selection of Crabb's acclaimed solo arrangements of Piazzolla's music was published in 2009 by Boosey & Hawkes.

James Crabb has recorded with his accordion duo colleague Geir Draugsvoll for EMI Classics transcriptions of Igor Stravinsky's "Petrushka" and Modest Mussorgsky's "Pictures at an Exhibition". This duo performs regularly worldwide and collaborates frequently with the Tero Saarinen Dance Company from Finland.

He has been professor of classical accordion at the Royal Danish Academy of Music in Copenhagen since 1995 and has held a long-standing guest professorship at the University of Music and Dramatic Arts in Graz, Austria. He regularly gives master-classes at music institutions worldwide.

The ARIA Music Awards is an annual awards ceremony held by the Australian Recording Industry Association. They commenced in 1987.


Rakamaz

Rakamaz is a town in Szabolcs-Szatmár-Bereg county, in the Northern Great Plain region of eastern Hungary.

It covers an area of and has a population of 4374 people (2015).

History of ITV television idents

The ITV television network in the United Kingdom began as a group of regional stations, each with their own identities. Each station used its own idents to create an individual identity.

In 1989, a first attempt to establish a national ITV corporate identity was made, which saw regional brands combined with a new national ITV brand. The attempt had only limited success: some companies never adopted the ITV branding, while many others later diluted or abandoned the ITV component as time progressed. A second attempt in 1998 was more successful, but was still rejected or significantly modified by some companies. 

In 2002, a major change of appearance occurred when all ITV regions in England adopted national continuity. Regional logos vanished and regional names were mentioned only before regional programmes. Effectively this left ITV1 in England looking like a national channel with slots for regional opt-outs – like BBC One – rather than a group of independent regional broadcasters sharing programmes. The unification was consolidated in 2004 when Granada plc acquired Carlton Communications to form ITV plc. By then, the two companies had acquired all the regional Channel 3 companies in England and Wales. ITV plc later acquired Channel Television in the Channel Islands and UTV in Northern Ireland.

This article looks at the history of presentation of the ITV brand on the main ITV network. The other digital channels owned by ITV plc also adopted logos very similar to the main ITV channel but with different colour schemes and background images; these are not covered by this article.

When ITV was incepted in 1955, every regional company had its own individual logo and identity for its own use and identification within the network. The name "ITV" was rarely used on air and had no associated broadcast logo.

From the mid-1970s to the mid-1980s, the IBA (Independent Broadcasting Authority) regulator used a matching pair of logos for ITV and ILR (Independent Local Radio), but these appear to have been used in print only.

From 1981, a generic, 'blocky-looking' logo was used infrequently throughout the 1980s, often in a rainbow colouration for promos produced by the "Big Five" franchises (Thames Television, LWT, Granada Television, Yorkshire Television and ATV, which by then renamed itself Central Independent Television), as well as holding slides used by some of the regions and Channel 4 (for cross-promotion purposes), but it was never widely used as the centrepiece of an identity.

A new generic ITV logo was introduced on 1 September 1989 and accompanied a first-time, national on-air identity designed by English Markell Pockett with music by Lord David Dundas. The logo was the centre of a whole branding package; there was a national logo and regional logos for all of the ITV franchises. Each franchise had a distinctive portion of their logo included into the V of the ITV logo. The ident was generally formed by beginning with the franchisee's logo, then going into a sliding sequence featuring an arctic tern, a couple in period dress, Big Ben, an athlete, and a pair of dancers before the regional ITV logo is reformed. Along with this, each franchise received a regional clock, trailer style, network font, and break bumpers.

However, their new look did not go as the designers intended:


Their look was dropped at various times depending on the region:

On 5 October 1998, the ITV logo was changed to a lower-cased blue and yellow affair. This was in line with the fact that with the uppercased ITV logo used previously, the viewer perception of ITV was a high-brow stuffy channel, it was not aimed at younger audiences. ITV changed the logo to reverse the younger audience's perceptions.

On 8 November 1999, the next generic look was launched, designed by English and Pockett with music by Lord David Dundas, both of whom were involved with the last look. The main theme of the look was the ITV slogan of 'TV from the heart'. There were three variations of the ident:


The lines and static idents could also feature a spinning hearts background that was tinted brown that was used during Daytime schedules. The look was accompanied by a clock superimposed on a spinning hearts background, as well as promotions provided by ITV's Network Promotions Unit. A heartbreak bumper was also provided. Upon launch and over time, some changes were made to the look:

As with the last look, not all of the companies adopted it:

competition concerns, HTV had to be sold to Carlton. From July 2001 onwards, the idents were slightly changed to a strange mix of Heart and Star. The new idents would start out with one of the Carlton animations, the only difference is that the flash would instead be in a shape of a heart, and would instead zoom out to become the V of the HTV logo imposed on the same blue spinning hearts background as before.

Once again like the last look, it was dropped at different times:


On Monday 28 October 2002, a new idents package was rolled out across the regions using the central theme of a celebrity posing 'backstage'. There would be a clip of the celebrity chilling out when they were supposedly off-screen. The 'ITV1' logo had been softened with smoother edges by this point and it would animate on in the bottom right-hand corner, being formed from 3 aligned blue blocks and one yellow block. This package also coincided with the centralisation of continuity from the English, Isle of Man and Scottish Border regions to London. As a result of this, announcers were always from a national team of six live from the Carlton/LWT continuity booth, even with regional idents. Wales retained its own announcers for the time being.

The Granada & Carlton owned regions decided that the regional versions of the idents now only appear in Scotland, Wales, and Northern Ireland throughout the day. The other regions had their own idents specifically for use before local programmes. These varied subtly by region:


The set of idents were updated with new sets and celebrities on 1 September 2003, with the sets more pronounced blues and yellows and removing the backstage feel. Along with this, news ident graphics and the backgrounds to the regional idents were changed to overlapped blue squares.

A number of regions changed their identities throughout the period:


The look was dropped at different times:


The 1 November 2004 heralded a new on-air look coinciding with the launch of ITV3. The ITV1 logo was reworked, splitting it into separate squares. On-screen, the boxes were arranged as a large yellow square containing the '1' with blue ITV boxes on top. This logo would be seen against a generic background of a blue sky with clouds, windows of a high-rise building, underwater with bubbles floating by, and dark blue ribbons flowing against a blue background.

The plan for these Idents was to use them as mini-menus showing what is coming up soon. The Idents would zoom to the left allowing a short video and description of the upcoming programmes to be shown before the panels of the videos become part of the ITV1 logo in the centre of the screen. They were not designed to be traditional idents, however, despite the fact that ITV took on a team of associate producers to produce these promotions, the promotional idents were used less and less as the months go on.

During this period, Granada took over Carlton & renamed itself ITV plc, also, ITV spent a lot of this period using themed idents specific to particular programmes, such as "Celebrity Love Island".

Once again, not all of the companies took the look:

ITV Meridian, ITV Tyne Tees, ITV Westcountry and ITV Yorkshire all adopted the look.

Regional idents were available and featured the ITV1 ident with the region name written under the logo, to a background of different shades of dark blue. However, the ident was becoming less frequently seen, usually only before some local news bulletins and the decreasing number of regional programming. ITV1 Wales was the exception to the rule, with a Wales name added to the bottom of all idents in their package.

The ITV plc regions, the only regions to adopt the look, dropped it in 2006 in favour of a complete overhaul. Final idents (ribbons and clouds) were shown on 16 January 2006 before GMTV, without spoken continuity announcements.

On 16 January 2006, a brand new logo and presentation package was unleashed. It brought ITV1, ITV2 and ITV3 in line with ITV4. It was part of a major rebrand of the ITV network, known as "Brand 2010", which also included the News and Sport divisions as well as off-screen content. It was designed by Red Bee Media following a perception analysis carried out by the audience. The results stated that although all the ITV channels had a good combining brand, with the ITV logo, they all looked the same, couldn't be told apart, their programming values were blurred and the ITV logo itself was getting boring.

The solution was to make a new logo in a rounded-off box, involving the lowercase itv. These, it was claimed, made the service look friendly, retaining what had been attempted in 1998, and yet fresh and crisp. From there they added an extra rectangle on the other side of the channel name. All channels shared this look with the colour being the only main difference with the exception of the name. This provided the distinctiveness, yet unity they sought.

The ITV1 idents were created on the basis that ITV1 provokes "an emotional response in all of us" and therefore the so-called 'Emotion' idents were created. Many were shot in South Africa and featured a montage of unrelated scenes, which include such things as a man rubbing his bare chest, girls rolling down a hill, and two people hugging trees. These represented moods such as joy, pride, sadness, love, etc. In them, the 'ITV1' logo would open out and enclose the footage it was superimposed onto. The exception to the rule was one of the ITV1 logo on a black background, used to introduce the news.

The look was controversial both with critics, online and in print, viewers and ITV bosses who saw the look as too vague. This look had one regional ident, Pride which was used before regional programming and also for a time at the 19:00 and 22:30 junctions on Thursdays, with an announcer name-checking the regional station on some occasions. These were the last ITV idents to include the region's name onscreen. ITV1 Wales also had a full selection of idents for a time before they began using the standard ITV1 idents with Wales added on the live television feed during transmission.

Only two of the four ITV parent companies adopted any part of the look:


The next presentation of ITV1 was launched on 13 November 2006, just 10 months after the last new look. Following the issues with the previous one, the themes were changed slightly: the logo remained the same shape and style, but with the letters, ITV changed to black so as to contrast with the yellow of the logo better. This look also saw another change for regional idents for the ITV plc-owned stations; the regional names were now used leading into the regional news only.

The ident films themselves were scrapped and a new set was created following the theme of "Alive with Colour" with ITV promoting the new idents as the "second phase" of the look introduced in January. The idents, based on the previous set by Red Bee Media, were designed by The Mill and produced by Blink Productions and Pleix include surreal scenes featuring yellow colours to the same audio track. The look launched with six idents: 'Beach', 'Bike', 'Lake', 'Market', 'Basketball' and 'Pavement Art', with another 4 added on 3 September 2007 which runs in tandem with the previous ones. These latest idents included an ITV1 logo that was bigger than the ones launched in 2006 but retained the same soundtrack. 

In April 2010, ITV1 HD was launched, featuring an updated glossier logo based on that of ITV1. In response, ITV1 changed its logo to the glossier version and launched another four idents. These latest idents have been noticeably different from their predecessors: the logo was once again larger and faded on in parts. They also featured individual soundtracks based on those previously and the style of the ident themselves, namely the shooting of them, was very different from those before them. They were accompanied on-screen by updated programme promotions, end credit promotions, stings, and break bumpers.

Because of these changes, all of the idents were updated with the new logo, including making it bigger in many places. However, the soundtracks remained the same causing some to question why the other idents weren't changed with the new looks. Viewer opinions suggest that the original music is unpopular, but the ident package itself is generally popular. This has been the longest-lasting ITV generic look to date, lasting far longer than the 1999 Hearts, and being kept by far more companies and for longer collectively than the 1989 Generic look.

The primary criticisms of the look have been the scrapping of regional idents. All regions are introduced with a national ident and the region is not referenced in the announcement. The exception to the rule is ITV1 Wales, with includes the word 'Wales' either underneath the ident or located in the bottom left-hand corner of the ident. The Wales ident was used before all programming except overnight for the first few years of the rebrand before being quietly relegated to regional junctions only.

A paper lantern-themed ident, first aired in April 2010, was withdrawn after the National Farmers Union criticized ITV for the dangers of paper lanterns.

This package was only seen in some areas of the ITV network, however:


The ITV plc regions, the only regions to adopt the look, dropped it in 2013 in favour of a complete overhaul.

On 15 November 2012, it was announced that ITV1 was to receive a rebrand in January 2013, in which it would revert to its old name of ITV. A new "curvy" logo was introduced with new idents and presentation package. This was first implemented on 14 January 2013.

Also on 14 January 2013, ITV1 +1 and ITV1 HD were rebranded to ITV +1 and ITV HD respectively, whilst sister channels ITV2, ITV3, ITV4, and CITV all received new idents and presentation based upon the new corporate logo (later two new channels based on the 2013 ITV logo, first ITV Encore from June 2014, and then ITVBe from October 2014 were also joined the sister channels).

ITV's new idents were created to reflect "everyday life of the Great British public". New idents will be brought in on a consistent basis to reflect the four seasons – Spring, Summer, Autumn, and Winter. In addition, the new ITV logo changes colour on each ident, a process named as "colour picking", in which each segment of the logo adopts the colour of whatever passes behind it.

This package is only seen on the ITV plc regions.

UTV started using the look, when ITV plc bought the channel in February 2016 and relaunched it on 17 October 2016 to match ITV's 2013 branding.

The STV Group regions of STV Central and STV North have refused their new look, instead continuing with their triangle flip idents introduced on 23 March 2009, before being rebranded on 2 June 2014.

In December 2018, ITV announced a new project, "ITV Creates", which would be the basis of its idents beginning on 1 January 2019. The network will commission artwork featuring the ITV logo from British artists, which will be used as the basis for a new set of idents every week. The first 8 artists of the project were Ravi Deepres, Sutapa Biswas, James Brunt, Patricia Volk, Mark Titchner, Katrina Russell Adams, Kristina Veasey, and James Alec Hardy.

ITV Creative executive creative director Tony Pipes explained that the project was meant to be a platform for British visual artists, reflect ITV's position as being an "endlessly creative" broadcaster, and counter the traditional notion of idents being a static theme used for a long-term period.

Until April 2020, the ITV Creates idents were only used by the ITV-branded stations in England, Wales, and the Channel Islands. UTV initially continued to use the 2013 ident series, with a new on-air presentation used alongside the new idents, but began taking on full ITV branding in April 2020. This was initially meant to be temporary due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic but was later made permanent in November of the same year. As before, the STV Group regions of STV Central and STV North did not use this presentation.

A new set of idents, entitled "ITV Creates Project", debuted on 1 January 2021. Unlike the original set, each ident was now used for a month rather than a week, with two batches. No ident was created for March 2021, due to ITV using their "ITV Kids Create" idents that month. In 2022, these idents were used in tandem with the original set of "Creates" idents.

On 15 November 2022, all five of ITV's main channels underwent a rebranding to coincide with the launch of ITVX, with new logos and idents by the agencies DixonBaxi and Coffee & TV respectively. All five channels adopted idents with the theme of a "multiverse", depicting different scenes at common locations that reflect each channel's programming output and image. For the first time since 2013, ITV was renamed back to "ITV1" (which was first introduced in 2001). As with the last two, the STV Group regions of STV Central and STV North did not use this presentation.


Hemington, Somerset

Hemington is a village and civil parish north west of Frome, in the Mendip district of Somerset, England. It is located just off the A366 between Trowbridge and Radstock. The parish includes the villages of Hardington, Faulkland and Foxcote.

The name of the parish means ""the settlement of Hemmi's (or Hemma's) people"".

The parishes of Hardington and Hemington were part of the Kilmersdon Hundred, while Foxcote was part of the Wellow Hundred.

On the village green in Faulkland and at several other sites throughout the village there are standing stones of unknown origin. Between two of the stones are the 16th or 17th-century village stocks. There are two pubs in the village: "The Faulkland Inn", which dates from the early 19th century, and the historic "Tuckers Grave" which was probably built in the early 18th century and is one of the few remaining 'Parlour' pubs with no bar counter.

Foxcote was on the route of the Somerset and Dorset Railway and was the site, on 7 August 1876, of a collision between the Wimborne to Bath train and one travelling from Bath to Radstock. The crash, known as the Radstock rail accident, left 13 people killed and 51 injured. It is just off the route of NCR 24, the Colliers Way, which is named for the Somerset coalfield which included a colliery at Foxcote from 1853 to 1931. In 1896 they were owned by Writhlington, Huish and Foxcote Colliery Co., and by 1908 this had been changed to Writhlington Collieries Co. Ltd. The Upper and Lower Writhlington, Huish & Foxcote were later all merged into one colliery.

In the late 19th century a local quarry owner, John Turner of Faulkland, took out a lawsuit against his neighbour Hedworth Jolliffe, 2nd Baron Hylton who owned Ammerdown House in Kilmersdon. When Turner lost he erected a tower of around high to rival the column at Ammerdown, with a dance hall and tea garden at the base. When Turner died in 1894, Lord Hylton bought the structure to demolish it. The base and dance hall were converted into workers' cottages and eventually demolished in 1969.

John VI Bampfield (fl. 14th century), of Poltimore, Devon, married Agnes Pederton, daughter and heiress of John Pederton of Hardington, Somerset, by his wife Cecilia Turney, daughter and heiress of John Turney. By his wife he had two sons, the eldest Sir William Bampfield of Poltimore, the youngest Peter Bampfield of Hardington, Somerset, whose ultimate male descendant was Warwick Bampfield (1623–1695), of Hardington, whose heir was Sir Coplestone Warwick Bampfylde, 3rd Baronet (c. 1689–1727) of Poltimore.

The parish council has responsibility for local issues, including setting an annual precept (local rate) to cover the council’s operating costs and producing annual accounts for public scrutiny. The parish council evaluates local planning applications and works with the local police, district council officers, and neighbourhood watch groups on matters of crime, security, and traffic. The parish council's role also includes initiating projects for the maintenance and repair of parish facilities, as well as consulting with the district council on the maintenance, repair, and improvement of highways, drainage, footpaths, public transport, and street cleaning. Conservation matters (including trees and listed buildings) and environmental issues are also the responsibility of the council.

The village falls within the Non-metropolitan district of Mendip, which was formed on 1 April 1974 under the Local Government Act 1972, having previously been part of Frome Rural District, which is responsible for local planning and building control, local roads, council housing, environmental health, markets and fairs, refuse collection and recycling, cemeteries and crematoria, leisure services, parks, and tourism.

Somerset County Council is responsible for running the largest and most expensive local services such as education, social services, libraries, main roads, public transport, policing and fire services, trading standards, waste disposal and strategic planning.

It is also part of the Somerton and Frome county constituency represented in the House of Commons of the Parliament of the United Kingdom. It elects one Member of Parliament (MP) by the first past the post system of election.

Foxcote church, dedicated to St James the Less, dates from the early 18th century and incorporates a 15th-century turret. It has been designated by English Heritage as a Grade II* listed building.

The parish Church of St Mary dates from the 12th century and is Grade I listed.

The Church of St. Mary at Hardington in the parish of Hemington, Somerset, England dates from the 11th century and has been designated as a Grade I listed building. It is no longer used as a church and is in the care of The Churches Conservation Trust.

The Wesleyan Chapel at Faulkland has been designated by English Heritage as a Grade II listed building.



HMS Carnarvon Bay

HMS "Carnarvon Bay" was a anti-aircraft frigate built for the Royal Navy during World War 2.

The Bay-class frigates were anti-aircraft versions of the anti-submarine frigates intended for service in the Far East. "Carnarvon Bay" displaced at standard load and at deep load. The ship had an overall length of , a beam of and a draught of . She was powered by two vertical triple-expansion steam engines, each driving one shaft, using steam provided by two Admiralty three-drum boilers. The engines produced a total of and gave a maximum speed of . "Carnarvon Bay" carried a maximum of of fuel oil that gave her a range of at . The ship's complement was 157 officers and ratings.

The ships were armed with four QF 4-inch Mark XVI dual-purpose guns in two twin mounts forward of the superstructure. Supplementing their anti-aircraft (AA) defence, they had two twin mounts for 40 mm Bofors and two twin mounts for Oerlikon 20 mm cannon AA guns. Some ships had their Oerlikons replaced by two single Bofors guns. She was fitted with a 24-barrel Hedgehog spigot mortar. Two depth charge rails and four throwers were fitted for 50–60 depth charges.

HMS "Carnarvon Bay", named after Caernarfon Bay (anglicised as 'Carnarvon Bay') in Gwynedd, Wales, was originally ordered as the vessel "Loch Maddy", but the order was changed in 1944. Built by Henry Robb of Leith, the ship was laid down on 8 June 1944 and launched on 15 March 1945 by Lady Westwood.

After sea trials "Carnarvon Bay" was assigned to the Rosyth Flotilla, joining in November 1945. Deployed for training duties, she made a single voyage to Oslo in January 1946, and to Scapa Flow in February. In April she sailed to Harwich to be decommissioned. Laid-up in the Reserve Fleet at Harwich, she was used as an accommodation ship for personnel of the Reserve Fleet.

"Carnarvon Bay" remained at Harwich until the Reserve Fleet was closed down and was then transferred to Chatham. Placed on the Disposal List in 1959 the ship was sold to an Italian ship-breaker and towed to La Spezia where she arrived on 28 August 1959.


Rittō

Rittō may refer to:

Also, Ritto redirects here, and may refer to: 

Taisetsu

The is a limited express service operated by Hokkaido Railway Company (JR Hokkaido) between and in Hokkaido via the Sekihoku Main Line since 4 March 2017. The "Taisetsu" train service name was also formerly used for express services operated by Japanese National Railways (JNR) and later by JR Hokkaido from June 1947 until March 1992.

, two return services operate daily between and on the Sekihoku Main Line, supplementing the "Okhotsk" limited express services operating between and Abashiri.

Trains stop at the following stations:

Stations in brackets () are stations where not all trains stop at.


Services are normally formed of four-car KiHa 183 series diesel multiple unit (DMU) trains formed as follows. All cars are no-smoking.

The train service that was later to become the "Taisetsu" was first introduced on 29 June 1947 as an unnamed steam-hauled express service operating between and via and . The train received the name "Taisetsu" from 1 April 1951.

This service ran until 31 May 1963, after which it was replaced by the "Lilac" service.

From 1 June 1963, the "Taisetsu" service operated as an express between Sapporo and Abashiri, via Asahikawa. This service was discontinued from the start of the revised timetable on 14 March 1992.

The Good "Taisetsu" name was revived from 4 March 2017 as a limited express service operating between and on the Sekihoku Main Line.

Daikan

Daikan (代官) was an official in Japan that acted on behalf of a ruling monarch or a lord at the post they had been appointed to. Since the Middle Ages, "daikan" were in charge of their territory and territorial tax collection. In the Edo period, "daikan" were local governors in charge of the government and security of domain and shogunate territories.

In the Middle Ages, "azukaridokoro" and "ukesho" referred to "daikan" of a feudal lord, and "shugo-dai" and "jitō-dai" referred to "daikan" of "shugo" and "jitō" governors, respectively. In the Azuchi-Momoyama period, territorial rulers in charge of local tax collection were called "daikan".

In the Edo period, high-ranking "hatamoto" retainers of the shogun were appointed "daikan" to govern the shogunal demesne across Japan and were given a 50,000-100,000 "koku" territory. The "daikan" worked from their administrative headquarters ("jin'ya") at their territory or their mansion in Edo, under the Commissioner of Finance ("kanjō bugyō"), and had a dozen of "tetsuki" and "tedai" officials under their service. Hereditary succession of the position was common. In 1867, at the end of the Edo period, there were 37 "daikan".

"Daikan" who had a bad reputation for self-interest were dismissed by the shogunate, as the harsh collection of annual taxation led to the escape of farmers, which in turn reduced the amount of collectable taxation. Some of them were dismissed and punished for causing starvation during famines. On the other hand, other "daikan" gained a great reputation, such as Suzuki Shigenari, who continued to appeal to the shogunate for a reduction or exemption of annual taxation at the cost of his own life in order to save the people of the domain from heavy taxes, and Ido Masaaki, who also saved the people from famine by introducing "ganzo" to the territories under his control.

In the latter half of the Edo period, the feudal domains followed the example and appointed their own "daikan", district magistrates, who were called "gun-dai" or "kōri bugyō".

Cellphone's Dead

"Cellphone's Dead" is a song by American musician Beck. It appears on the album "The Information" (2006) and was also released as a single.

The opening bass synth riff has been cited as reminiscent in tone and rhythmic character of "Chameleon" by jazz artist Herbie Hancock from his 1973 record "Head Hunters".

The music video was directed by Michel Gondry. It is available on the 2009 DVD compilation "".

The video was filmed to resemble one long shot and employs Gondry's signature usage of special effects. In the black-and-white video, Beck walks into an empty house, tuning a radio to different stations, then sitting down in a chair, where he sings the song. Suddenly, the view of the city skyline outside morphs into a 2-dimensional humanoid figure, and the door morphs into a figure as well. As the video progresses, Beck and those two figures morph into each other, transforming into doors and skylines, while the apartment's radio and dresser morph into different forms, as well.

The visual effects were completed at Fly Studio.

A remix 12-inch single was released by Berlin-based label BPitch Control, featuring remixes by Ellen Allien and Ricardo Villalobos. These remixes also appear on disc 2 of the deluxe version of "The Information".

Ferdinando Vitofrancesco

Ferdinando Vitofrancesco (born August 4, 1988) is an Italian professional footballer who plays as a defender for Serie D club Varese.

Vitofrancesco started playing in Milan's youth sector in 2000, at the age of 11.

On November 25, 2006, due to the large number of injuries suffered by various players, he got his first first-team call-up for a Serie A match against Messina. However, he didn't even manage to get a spot on the bench. He did three days later in a Coppa Italia game against Brescia, but eventually didn't enter the field.

In summer 2007 Vitofrancesco left for Cremonese in co-ownership deal for €5,000. In June 2008 the club purchased outright for an additional €70,000, made Milan booked the bonus of €65,000 as financial income.

In June 2011 he was signed by Serie B club Cittadella in exchange with Daniel Semenzato. He spent two years in Cittadella.

In 2013, he moved to Perugia.

In 2014, he was signed by Alessandria.

In July 2016 he left for Lecce.

On 7 September 2019, he joined Rende.

On 21 August 2020 he returned to Serie D with Lavello. He left Lavello on 30 December 2021 for fellow Serie D club Casarano.


Grigory Soroka

Grigoriy Vasilyevich Soroka (, real surname Vasilyev (Васильев); —) was a Russian painter, one of the most notable members of Venetsianov school.

Soroka was born as a serf in Pokrovskoye village (Tver Guberniya), owned by the Milyukov family. In 1842-1847 he studied art from Alexey Venetsianov then he was returned to his owner. In the 1850s-1860s he resided in his home village. He fell in love with his owner's daughter Lydia but was forcibly married to a serf woman. After the emancipation reform of 1861 in Russia, Soroka remained under the serfdom system. He made a formal complaint but it was rejected and he was flogged. Soroka's body was found in the baking room where he had hanged himself. His beloved Lydia poisoned herself soon after.

Though Soroka's surviving output is relatively small and includes no more than 20 undated paintings, Soroka proved himself to be a gifted draughtsman. He also painted several icons for local churches, among them "Saviour Not Made by Hands".


Duchy of Salzburg

The Duchy of Salzburg () was a Cisleithanian crown land of the Austrian Empire and Austria-Hungary from 1849 to 1918. Its capital was Salzburg, while other towns in the duchy included Zell am See and Gastein. Before becoming a crown land, Salzburg went through numerous changes of rulership. It is differentiated from its predecessor, the Prince-Archbishopric of Salzburg, as it was mediatized in 1803 through the and remained henceforth under secular rule as the Electorate () of Salzburg; in the following 43 years, it would undergo three more changes of rulership before becoming the crown land of Salzburg.

In the course of the German mediatization of 1803, the Prince-archbishopric of Salzburg, an ecclesiastical State of the Holy Roman Empire, was secularized as the Electorate of Salzburg, ruled by the Habsburg archduke Ferdinand III of Austria. However, two years later, this short-lived principality was annexed by the newly established Austrian Empire according to the Peace of Pressburg and Ferdinand received the Grand Duchy of Würzburg in compensation. The electoral title became obsolete with the Empire's dissolution in 1806. By the Treaty of Schönbrunn of 1809, Salzburg temporarily became French and was released in 1810 to the Kingdom of Bavaria, where it formed the .

After the end of the Napoleonic Wars and the 1816 Treaty of Munich, the Salzburg lands came back to Austria, with the exception of the share on the left bank of the Salzach river, the so-called "Rupertiwinkel", which, like the former Prince-Provostry of Berchtesgaden, remained in Bavaria. Some smaller areas in the Ziller and Defereggen valleys fell to Tyrol; the town of Friesach was ceded to Carinthia. The Salzburg territory was administered from Linz as , the fifth district within the crown land of Upper Austria. The decreased significance led to emigration and economic crises. On the other hand, the remote province developed as a tourist destination, mainly for Alpinists like Archduke John of Austria.

After the Revolutions of 1848, the Salzburg territory was again separated from Upper Austria and became a new crown land in its own right, the Duchy of Salzburg, by resolution of 26 June 1849. Caroline Augusta of Bavaria, widow of the late Emperor Francis I of Austria, chose the city of Salzburg as her residence. According to the 1861 February Patent, the duchy received a diet. After the Austro-Hungarian Compromise of 1867, it belonged to the Cisleithanian (Austrian) part of Austria-Hungary.

With the fall of the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy in 1918, the duchy was succeeded by the state of Salzburg, part of first German Austria and then the First Austrian Republic.

Tiszalök

Tiszalök is a town in Szabolcs-Szatmár-Bereg county, in the Northern Great Plain region of eastern Hungary.

It covers an area of and, in 2015, had a population of 5,395.


HMS Cawsand Bay

HMS "Cawsand Bay" was a anti-aircraft frigate of the British Royal Navy, named for Cawsand Bay in Cornwall.

The ship was originally ordered from the Blyth Shipbuilding Company of Blyth, Northumberland on 25 January 1943 as the "Loch Rowan", and laid down on 24 April 1944. However the contract was then changed, and the ship was completed to a revised design as a Bay-class anti-aircraft frigate, launched on 26 February 1945, and completed on 13 November 1945.

After sea trials in November and December 1945, "Cawsand Bay" was attached for service in the Rosyth Local Flotilla, joining in February 1946. However she was almost immediately nominated for reduction to Reserve status, sailing to Portsmouth to decommission on 11 March.

"Cawsand Bay" remained in Reserve at Portsmouth until 1958 when she placed on the Disposal List. The ship was sold for demolition to an Italian ship-breaker and towed to Genoa, arriving on 5 September 1959.

 

Omer Fattah Hussain

Omer Fattah Hussain (Born: As-Sulaymaniyah) is the former deputy Prime Minister of the Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG) in Iraq. Due to political problems in the PUK, he handed his resignation in on 24 February 2009. He also served as acting Prime Minister of Jalal Talebani's Suleimaniyeh based Kurdish administration from July 2004 (when Barham Salih resigned to become Deputy Prime Minister for the Iraqi Interim Government until June 2005 with the re-unification of Iraq's Kurdish autonomous Republic.


Dental laboratory

Dental laboratories manufacture or customize a variety of products to assist in the provision of oral health care by a licensed dentist. These products include crowns, bridges, dentures and other dental products. Dental lab technicians follow a prescription from a licensed dentist when manufacturing these items, which include prosthetic devices (such as denture teeth and implants) and therapeutic devices (such as orthodontic devices). The FDA regulates these products as medical devices and they are therefore subject to FDA's good manufacturing practice ("GMP") and quality system ("QS") requirements. In most cases, however, they are exempt from manufacturer registration requirements. Some of the most common restorations manufactured include crowns, bridges, dentures, and dental implants. Dental implants is one of the most advanced dental technologies in the field of dentistry.

Certification in the dental laboratory profession is strictly voluntary. Laboratories who have taken the extra steps to become certified represent the top of their field. The most easily obtainable certification is the CDL (Certified Dental Laboratory). A Certified Dental Laboratory has met standards in personnel skill, training, infection control, tracking mechanisms and good business and manufacturing practices. The certification is based on a third party review of photos of the facility. The next tier for certification is DAMAS (Dental Appliance Manufacturers Audit Scheme). DAMAS requires a third party on-site inspection. Based on international standards for the manufacturing of medical devices, the DAMAS certification ensures the lab environment operates in such a way as to ensure product and patient safety. It provides a formula for improved documentation of many aspects of dental lab activity (from dental prescriptions to material traceability). DAMAS standards mirror the FDA's quality system and good manufacturing practice standards, which all domestic dental laboratories must comply with.

The highest level of manufacturing certifications available to dental laboratories are through the ISO "International Organization for Standardization". The ISO develops standards through the consensus of standards organizations from 161 countries. Members represent both the public and private sectors of countries around the world. ISO standards are thought to represent the best interests and needs of the broader global society. ISO 9001 is a set of standards for quality management systems. ISO 13485 is a set of standards, published in 2003, that represents the requirements for a comprehensive management system for the design and manufacture of medical devices. It emphasizes meeting regulatory requirements and managing risk in order to ensure the production of safe design and distribution of medical devices. Product documentation is thorough and covers the entire life cycle of product design, manufacture and post-delivery. Although not considered a substitute, ISO 13485 will align a dental lab's management system not only with the FDA QS-GMP regulation, but various other regulatory requirements found throughout the world.

The National Association of Dental Laboratories (NADL) was formed in the United States in 1951 after the merger of Dental Laboratory Institute of America and the American Dental Laboratory Association. It became a federation of state commercial dental laboratory associations. This merger took place in Chicago and then, in 1952, NADL established its headquarters offices in Washington, D.C., which were moved to Tallahassee, Florida later in 2001.

The association was known as the National Association of Certified Dental Laboratories from 1968 to 1971 when it changed back to its original name. Its mission is to be the recognized advocate for the dental laboratory technology industry by promoting professionalism, setting technical standards and providing valued services to its membership. The stated purpose of NADL is to uphold and advance the dignity, honor and efficiency of those engaged as operators of dental laboratories, to advance their standards of service to the dental profession and to establish cooperation among its members.

NADL offers several benefits to its members and one of such benefits is that it promotes high standards and aims to work as a unified voice for the dental laboratory trade. NADL establishes alliances with professional businesses to benefit its members with either discounts or services. Members also benefit from NADL's educational programs ranging from seminars, conferences, materials, the NADL University which offers a Certificate in Dental Laboratory Management, to the Wealth of Knowledge Videotape Library. These programs inform and educate NADL members on topics such as production, marketing, and promotion, and also serve as continuing education credits. Furthermore, this association offers the NADL Pillar Scholarship aimed to provide qualified dental technicians the opportunity to take the necessary examinations to complete the Certified Dental Technician examination process.

NADL also has its set of communications tools to keep its members informed about the industry trends. Two examples are the Journal of Dental Technology (JDT), a journal published 9 times a year, and JDT Unbound, a mail newsletter that includes regular updates.

Its Board of Directors comprises 14 members and its current President is Robert Savage. NADL also has an independent board, the National Board for Certification in Dental Laboratory Technology, founded in 1955 as an independent certification organization. It administered the first Certified Dental Technician (CDT) tests in October 1958 and awarded the first CDT certificates in March of the following year.

CDTs can retain certification if they apply to the NBC every year for renewal and prove they have complied with the local laws governing their work and undergone continuing technical education. They are also required to pay a renewal fee.

It is in NADL best interests to protect the patients' health and assure their restorations are safe for use. To fulfill this objective, NADL has supported federal and state regulations since 2003 and has worked close with the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), state health officials and the dental industry as well. It has also developed regulatory guidelines aimed to be a basic standard of regulation. Although its main objective is to benefit the general public it is also intended to be effective for the dental technicians and the dental industry. One of the requests from NADL to the FDA has been to protect patient's safety. In this sense, the Association intends that the source of dental devices be disclosed to the patient.

NADL has expressed its support to establish mandatory certification and continuing education for dental technicians dedicated to restoration manufacture; mandatory registration of all dental laboratories with the competent authority; mandatory documentation of those materials used in any restoration and their point of origin; as well as mandatory documentation of the mentioned items in the patient's dental records.

In their Guidelines for Establishing Statutory Regulation, NADL has noted that certification is a way to recognize individuals who have met established qualifications, therefore, they should be the only ones legally acknowledged to use the designated title.

All Dental Technicians and Clinical Dental Technicians in the UK are required by law to be registered with the General Dental Council (GDC). The GDC is an organisation which regulates all dentists and dental care professionals, they set and maintain standards in UK dentistry.

Many of those who work for Dental Laboratories are also registered with the Dental Technologists Association (DTA). The DTA is a professional association representing the interests of dental technicians in the UK.

The GDC ensures that dental professionals have the necessary qualifications and are trained to the necessary levels. Dental technicians must prove their knowledge is up-to-date by taking part in Continuing Professional Development (CPD).


HMS Enard Bay

HMS "Enard Bay" was a anti-aircraft frigate of the British Royal Navy, named for Enard Bay in Caithness.

The ship was originally ordered from the Smiths Dock Company of South Bank, Middlesbrough on 25 January 1943 as the "Loch Bracadale", and laid down on 27 May 1944. However the contract was then changed, and the ship was completed to a revised design as a Bay-class anti-aircraft frigate, launched on 31 October 1944, and completed on 4 January 1946.

After sea trials in December 1945 and January 1946, "Enard Bay" sailed for the Mediterranean joining the Escort Flotilla at Malta on 7 February. She was first deployed in the eastern Mediterranean for the interception of merchant ships carrying illegal Jewish immigrants to Palestine. In June she returned to Malta, and in August was guard ship at Trieste, returning to the eastern Mediterranean in September for further interception patrols off Haifa. In January 1947 she returned to the UK to decommission and was placed into Plymouth Reserve Fleet, where she was used as an accommodation ship. In 1953 she took part in the Fleet Review to celebrate the Coronation of Queen Elizabeth II.

"Enard Bay" was placed on the Disposal List in 1956, and sold to the British Iron & Steel Corporation (BISCO) for demolition by Shipbreaking Industries at Faslane, where she arrived in tow on 15 November 1957.

Bahla Club

Bahla Club () is an Omani sports club based in Bahla. The club is currently playing in the First Division League of Oman Football Association.


Tiszavasvári

Tiszavasvári is a town in Szabolcs-Szatmár-Bereg county, in the Northern Great Plain region of eastern Hungary.

The settlement of Tiszavasvári was created in 1941 by merging the former independent settlements of Tiszabűd and Szentmihály under the name of Bűdszentmihály. The villagers of Tiszabűd opposed the merger and the two communities were separated in 1946 but only for four years. In 1950 the two settlements were again merged. The name of the locality was changed to Tiszavasvári in 1952 in memory of Pál Vasvári, a Hungarian writer and participant in the Hungarian Revolution of 1848.

It covers an area of and has a population of 13,473 people (2005).

Tiszavasvári is twinned with:

Fernando de Ornelas

Fernando Franco de Ornelas (born 29 July 1976 in Caracas), is a retired Venezuelan football player.

De Ornelas has played for clubs in several countries in his career, such as Norwegian Odd Grenland and Hong Kong First Division League giant South China. He has had short spells with Crystal Palace, Celtic and Queens Park Rangers, Olympiakos Nicosia, and played for two teams called Marítimo, CS Marítimo of Portugal and Marítimo Caracas.

After finishing his career as a footballer, de Ornelas settled in Bamble, Norway. He currently works as a Pentecostal pastor in a Norwegian free church.


2005–06 Scottish Cup

The 2005–06 Scottish Cup was the 121st season of Scotland's most prestigious football knockout competition, also known for sponsorship reasons as the Tennent's Scottish Cup. The Cup was won by SPL club Heart of Midlothian who defeated Second Division side Gretna on penalties after a 1–1 draw in the final. Hearts became the first non-Old Firm club to win the Cup since they themselves won it in 1997–98. Gretna earned a place in the UEFA Cup with Hearts having already qualified for the Champions League via the SPL.

A major shock occurred in the third round when First Division side Clyde defeated Cup holders Celtic 2–1. Rangers were knocked out of at the fourth round stage, losing 3–0 at home to Hibernian. Spartans reached the fourth round before eventually losing to St Mirren after a replay.

A list of the largest wins from the competition.

Záhony

Záhony () is a town in Szabolcs-Szatmár-Bereg county, Northern Great Plain, eastern Hungary.

It covers an area of and has a population of 4675 people (2005). It is near the Ukrainian border (at Chop and Solomonovo) and was part of Ung county before the Treaty of Trianon. Road and railway border crossings into Ukraine are located here. The Ukrainian town across the border is Chop.

Záhony's climate is classified as humid continental climate (Köppen "Dfb"). The annual average temperature is , the hottest month in July is , and the coldest month is in January. The annual precipitation is , of which July is the wettest with , while January is the driest with only . The extreme temperature throughout the year ranged from on February 7, 2005 to on July 20, 2007.
Záhony is twinned with:


Sport auto (Germany)

sport auto is a German automobile magazine, established in 1969, published monthly by Motor Presse Stuttgart, based in Stuttgart.

The magazine publishes its "Supertest" of cars, featuring the laptime at the Nordschleife. Until 2015 almost all supertest were done by Horst von Saurma, from 2015 laptimes are recorder by Christian Gebhardt. The magazine also runs a challenge for the fastest lap time driven with a car that is road legal (TÜV) and registered in Germany. The road legality rule also applies for the tires.

The journalists usually enter VLN and 24 Hours Nürburgring races, in cooperation with Honda or Aston Martin. Results are mixed, they caused at least two crashes.

In 1995, the magazine introduced a Nordschleife lap record challenge for the fastest lap time driven with a car that is road legal, having passed German TÜV and is registered in Germany. The road legality rule also applies for the tires. After the trophy had been given to Blitz, a Japanese tuning parts company in 1997, sport auto editor Horst v. Saurma regained the record in 1999. After the sport auto record was lowered to 7:14 in 2005, "sport auto" announced to introduce rules according to their Hockenheimring-based Tuner GP event. In 2005, "sport auto" also clocked a 6:55 for a UK-registered Radical SR8 which is not eligible to "sport auto"'s ranking.

In 2008, five super sports cars owned by an enthusiast were compared by Porsche factory driver Marc Basseng, winner of several VLN races in Porsche GT3 RSR. Timing was provided by sport auto as in a Supertest. The results were also reported elsewhere.

During the industry testing sessions in which sport auto records its "Supertest", the track can not be traveled at full speed past "Tribüne 13" (T13, grandstand 13) in order to allow safe access from the old exit/entrance there. The missing uphill section, from a slow right hand corner, would take in average an extra 7 s compared to a full lap. 

There are 5 sections on the long Supertest-Nordschleife: 
In recent tests, about 33 numbers are reported to judge a cars performance on various points of a Ring lap: speeds, braking deceleration and lateral g-forces. Sortable list of some Supertest times are provided online.



Archibald Hunter

General Sir Archibald Hunter, (6 September 1856 – 28 June 1936) was a senior officer in the British Army who distinguished himself during the Boer War. He was Governor of Omdurman, in Sudan, and later of Gibraltar.

Archibald Hunter, born a twin, was the son of an Archibald Hunter (1805–1868), a London businessman and Mary Jane Graham (1833–1905). Having chosen not to follow his father's business routes, Hunter began military education in Glasgow, and then at the Royal Military College Sandhurst. In 1875, the nineteen-year-old sub lieutenant joined the 4th (King's Own Royal) Regiment.

Between 1884 and 1885, Hunter joined the Gordon Relief Expedition, which sought to rescue Major General Charles George Gordon from his Mahdi captives. The expedition was, however, too late; Gordon had been killed two days before their arrival.

During the time in which the Mahdi's were being suppressed, Hunter saw much front line action. He led a brigade under the command of Major General Grenfell in Suakin. He was wounded on this mission.

He was appointed Governor of Dongola Province in the Sudan and Commandant of the Frontier Field Force in 1895. In 1896, he joined the "Anglo-Egyptian Nile Expeditionary Force" under Lord Kitchener, the Sirdar (commander of the Egyptian Army), Hunter commanding the Egyptian Army Division during the reconquest of the Sudan, which culminated in the Battle of Omdurman in September 1898. He was made Governor of Omdurman in Sudan in 1899, and was appointed in command of the Quetta district in India later the same year.

At the outbreak of the Second Boer War in October 1899, Major General Hunter (although actually Chief of Staff to General Sir Redvers Buller's 1st Army Corps) was on the staff of Sir George White's Natal Field Force during the Battle of Ladysmith in Natal and the subsequent 118-day siege. On 8 December he successfully led a small raid against one of the Boers' Creusot "Long Tom" guns and a howitzer which they disabled with cotton charges.

The town was relieved on 1 March 1900 and Hunter was promoted to lieutenant general on 6 March and posted as General Officer Commanding 10th Division.

The 10th Division were sent to join Lord Roberts' army on the western front of South Africa which was now camped at the captured Orange Free State capital Bloemfontein. Hunter led them in the march on Pretoria, crossing into the Transvaal Republic on 3 May. Once Pretoria was captured though Robert's army had to deal with Guerrilla warfare and General Hunter was sent south again as overall commander of five columns that converged on the Free State army camped at Brandwater Basin, forcing the surrender of 4,314 Boers led by Marthinus Prinsloo. It was the largest number of Boers captured in the war so far and cost very little in British casualties; only 33 dead and 242 wounded.

In early 1901 he was asked by King Edward VII to take part in a special diplomatic mission to announce the King's accession to the governments of Denmark, Sweden and Norway, Russia, Germany, and Saxony.

Hunter became General Officer Commanding Scottish District in May 1901, Commander-in-Chief Bombay Command in 1903 (renamed Western Army Corps in 1905) and General Officer Commanding Southern Army in India from 1907.

From 1910 until 1913 he was Governor of Gibraltar, after which he was appointed colonel of the King's Own (Royal Lancaster Regiment), a position he held until 1926.

In August 1914 Hunter was living in Scotland as a half-pay officer. Writing to his former commander Lord Horatio Kitchener he stated "I live in hopes of your giving me a command". Too old for a field command in the First World War, he was posted to Aldershot, first in the key role of GOC Aldershot Training Centre and then as GOC Aldershot Command. He retired in 1918.

Hunter was elected at the 1918 general election as a Coalition Conservative Member of Parliament (MP) for Lancaster, but stood down at the 1922 general election.

Hunter was an honorary freeman of the borough of Lancaster.

Hunter received the honorary Doctor of Laws (LL.D) from the University of Glasgow in June 1901.

He received the following decorations:

Archibald Hunter married, in 1910, Mary, Dowager Baroness Inverclyde (1866–1924), widow of George Burns, 2nd Baron Inverclyde (1861–1905) and daughter of Hickson Fergusson. There was no issue of the marriage.

His archive of over one hundred letters and documents was recently sold. A highlight of the £15,000 collection included twenty six autographed letters from Kitchener.


 

Brantford Lions

The Brantford Lions were a Canadian junior ice hockey team in the Ontario Hockey Association, based in Brantford, Ontario. The Lions played at the Junior A level from 1933 to 1936, and again from 1941 to 1944. In the intermediate years, the played at the Junior B level, from 1936 to 1941, and again from 1944 to 1946. They were Junior B Ontario champions in the 1940–41 season.

Hockey Hall of Fame defenceman Bill Quackenbush played for the Lions in 1941–42. That season, Bob Wiest led the league in scoring, winning the Eddie Powers Memorial Trophy with 40 goals and 28 assists in 40 games. The same year, Branford finished first place in the OHA for the regular season, but lost in the first round of the playoffs to the defending champions, the Oshawa Generals. The Lions were runners-up to the J. Ross Robertson Cup in 1943, but against lost to the Oshawa Generals.

Chris Evert (horse)

Chris Evert (February 14, 1971 – January 8, 2001) was an American Hall of Fame Champion Thoroughbred racehorse, winning the U.S. Filly Triple Crown in 1974 and earning the Eclipse Award for Outstanding 3-Year-Old Filly.

Chris Evert was bred by Echo Valley Farm near Georgetown, Kentucky, owned by Donald & Shirley Sucher. The couple would later breed Winning Colors, another Hall of Fame filly and winner of the 1988 Kentucky Derby. Carl Rosen (1918–1983), owner of clothing manufacturer Puritan Fashions Corp., purchased the unnamed filly at a Keeneland yearling sale. He named her for the tennis player Chris Evert, whom he had signed to endorse his company's line of sportswear.

Chris Evert began racing at age two. Of her five starts, she won four and finished second in the other. At age three she dominated her class, winning the U.S. Filly Triple Crown and earning the Eclipse Award for Outstanding 3-Year-Old Filly.

In 1974, Aaron Jones, the owner of the West Coast-based filly Miss Musket, issued a challenge to Chris Evert's owner for their horses to meet in a match race. Miss Musket's record included winning the Hollywood Oaks, and her confident owner offered to put up $100,000 if Chris Evert's owner would match it. Hollywood Park Racetrack offered another $150,000 to the winner-take-all race, which it would host and would bill as the Hollywood Special Stakes. Rosen accepted the offer for a match race to be held on July 20, 1974. Chris Evert won by 50 lengths, and the large purse significantly contributed to her becoming 1974's leading money earner in U.S. Thoroughbred racing.

At age four, Chris Evert won two more times but was retired early after competing in only four races. Rosen decided to use her as the foundation mare to establish his own horse breeding operation at Three Chimneys Farm in Midway, Kentucky.

As a broodmare, Chris Evert produced graded stakes race winners Wimbledon Star and the filly Six Crowns, who was sired by Secretariat. Six Crowns in turn produced Eclipse Award and Breeders' Cup Juvenile winner Chief's Crown. Pensioned in 1990, at age 30 Chris Evert was euthanized on January 8, 2001, due to the infirmities of old age. She was buried at Three Chimneys Farm's broodmare cemetery.

Chris Evert was inducted into the National Museum of Racing and Hall of Fame in 1988.

Roberto De Zerbi

Roberto De Zerbi (; born 6 June 1979) is an Italian professional football coach and former player who is the head coach of club Brighton & Hove Albion.

De Zerbi started his professional career at AC Milan. He spent four seasons on loan to lower divisions clubs (Serie B to Serie C2). He spent 1999–2000 Serie C1 season in Como along with Alberto Comazzi and Luca Saudati of Milan. Half of the registration rights were also sold to Salernitana in the 2000–01 and 2001–02 season. In June 2002, Milan bought back De Zerbi from Salernitana, and subsequently sold him to Foggia.

De Zerbi signed for Serie B side Napoli from Catania for €2.5 million in 2006.

On 8 February 2010, Napoli announced his loan transfer to Romanian Liga I club CFR Cluj, with the deal being made permanent on 31 August 2010 on a three-year contract.

On 6 September 2016, De Zerbi was named head coach of Serie A club Palermo following Davide Ballardini's departure by mutual consent due to disagreements with the board. His stint at the helm of the Sicilians, however, turned out to be negative, with seven consecutive defeats and no points at home in three months. After a penalty shootout elimination in a home match against Serie B club Spezia, De Zerbi was sacked on 30 November 2016, and replaced with former team captain Eugenio Corini.

On 23 October 2017, De Zerbi was named head coach of 2017–18 Serie A newcomers Benevento. Despite the side being relegated back to Serie B at the end of the season, De Zerbi was praised for his possession-based, attacking football and transfer business.

On 13 June 2018, De Zerbi was appointed manager of Sassuolo. Under his tenure, Sassuolo were praised for their footballing style coupled with overachieving results, which led the small Emilia based club to two consecutive eighth place spots in the Italian top flight, losing a UEFA Conference League qualification place to Roma only on goal difference at the end of the 2020–21 Serie A season.

In May 2021, De Zerbi announced he would leave Sassuolo at the end of the season.

On 25 May 2021, De Zerbi was announced as the new head coach of Ukrainian Premier League club Shakhtar Donetsk. On 22 September he won the 2021 Ukrainian Super Cup against Dynamo Kyiv at the Olympic Stadium in Kyiv, becoming the first Italian manager to win the title. He departed the club in July 2022 as a result of the Russian invasion of Ukraine. He managed to leave the club at the top of the UPL during the unfinished season.

De Zerbi succeeded Graham Potter as head coach of Premier League side Brighton & Hove Albion on 18 September 2022, signing a four-year contract. He managed his first game in England on 1 October, in a 3–3 away draw at Liverpool with Leandro Trossard becoming the first Brighton player to score a Premier League hat-trick.

De Zerbi lost his first game at Brighton's Falmer Stadium on 9 October, calling his players "fantastic" despite the 1–0 defeat to Tottenham Hotspur. His first win came on 29 October with a 4–1 thrashing of Graham Potter's Chelsea. De Zerbi went three games unbeaten against Liverpool in his debut campaign at Brighton, including beating them as defending champions in the FA Cup fourth round on 29 January 2023.

On 18 February, he was sent off by referee Darren England following Brighton's 1–0 home defeat against Fulham. De Zerbi was shown a red card for complaining that he had lost time to prepare for the match due to a refereeing meeting during the week. In a post-match interview, he said the "level of refereeing in the Premier League is very bad", whilst also criticising Darren England for not having a "good attitude". On March 3, he was banned from the touchline for one game and fined £15,000 by the FA in the wake of his red card in the Fulham game.

De Zerbi guided Brighton to the semi-final of the FA Cup, where they faced Manchester United at Wembley on 23 April. Brighton went on to lose on penalties after a goalless 120 minutes. The Italian responded to the defeat by saying that Brighton "have to close the page" by putting disappointment behind them and fighting for a place in Europe. Three days later, Brighton went on to lose 3–1 at Nottingham Forest before their biggest Premier League victory at the weekend on 29 April, a 6–0 home win over Wolves to boost Brighton's European hopes. Brighton took revenge on Manchester United on 4 May, with Alexis Mac Allister scoring the only goal of the match, a 99th minute penalty that put Brighton on course for Europe. However, four days later, Brighton suffered one of their worst Premier League defeats and the worst under De Zerbi, losing to Everton 5–1 at Falmer Stadium. The "Toffees" opened the scoreline in 34 seconds.

On 21 May, Brighton beat Southampton 3–1 at home, securing a top seven finish, meaning that Brighton had qualified for Europe for the first time in the club's history. De Zerbi called the qualification "more prestigious than winning the title" with a top six club. The Italian spoke with pride of coaching Brighton, calling it "an honour". Three days later, Brighton sealed their place in the 2023–24 UEFA Europa League after a 1–1 draw at home against champions Manchester City.

CFR Cluj

Foggia

Shakhtar Donetsk

HMS Largo Bay (K423)

HMS "Largo Bay" was a anti-aircraft frigate of the British Royal Navy, named for Largo Bay in Fife.

The ship was originally ordered from William Pickersgill & Sons Ltd. of Southwick, Sunderland on 25 January 1943 as the "Loch Foin", and laid down on 8 February 1944. However, the contract was then changed, and the ship was completed to a revised design as a Bay-class anti-aircraft frigate, launched on 3 October 1944, and commissioned on 26 January 1946.

After sea trials, "Largo Bay" sailed for the Mediterranean, joining the Escort Flotilla at Malta on 23 February 1946. She was first deployed in the eastern Mediterranean for the interception of merchant ships carrying illegal Jewish immigrants to Palestine. In March she returned to Malta for Flotilla duties. In August 1946 she returned to the UK to decommission and was placed into Plymouth Reserve Fleet. In 1953 she took part in the Fleet Review to celebrate the Coronation of Queen Elizabeth II.

"Largo Bay" was placed on the Disposal List in 1958 and sold to the British Iron & Steel Corporation (BISCO) for demolition by Thos. W. Ward at Inverkeithing. She was towed to the breaker's yard, arriving on 11 July 1959.

 

Quercus chrysolepis

Quercus chrysolepis, commonly termed canyon live oak, canyon oak, golden cup oak or maul oak, is a North American species of evergreen oak that is found in Mexico and in the western United States, notably in the California Coast Ranges. This tree is often found near creeks and drainage swales growing in moist cool microhabitats. Its leaves are a glossy dark green on the upper surface with prominent spines; a further identification arises from the leaves of canyon live oak being geometrically flat.

It is placed in "Quercus" section "Protobalanus".

"Quercus chrysolepis" is an evergreen tree with significant-sized spreading, horizontal branches, and a broad, rounded crown; it attains a height of 6–30 meters (20–100 feet) and often forms as a shrub. The trunk diameter typically ranges from . Exceptionally large specimens are found in the mountains of Southern California, and rank among the largest oaks in North America. The largest known in the San Bernardino Mountains measures high, with a trunk circumference of and a crown spread of .

The elliptical to oblong leaves are in length and about half as wide; they are short-pointed at the tip, and rounded or blunt at base. Although the leaves appear generally flat, they may have edge margins slightly turned under, typically with spiny teeth, particularly on young twigs. These leathery leaves are a glossy dark green above, with a nether surface a dull golden down, often becoming gray and nearly glabrous the second year.

The bark of the canyon live oak is grayish brown, and rather smooth or sometimes scaly. Acorns occur solitarily or in pairs, exhibiting lengths of 2–5 cm; these fruits are variable in size and shape, but generally ovoid, turban-like with a shallow, thick cup of scales densely covered with yellowish hairs; the stalk is barely evident.

"Q. chrysolepis" is found in a variety of forest communities in the southwestern United States. It is common in the mountainous regions of California (Sierra Nevada, Coast Ranges, Klamath Mountains, Cascades, San Gabriel Mountains, etc.) with additional populations in the Siskiyou Mountains of southwestern Oregon, western Nevada, northern Baja California, Arizona, southwestern New Mexico, and Chihuahua. Southwestern New Mexico population are most likely the result of introgression from "Quercus palmeri" to "Q. chrysolepis". Those populations tend to be intermediate in overall morphology, but all lack the diagnostic trichomes and biochemical markers of "Q. palmeri"; they are best classified as "Q. chrysolepis" affinity "Q. palmer".

Canyon live oak is tolerant of a variety of soil types, including very rocky or cobbly environments. It is hardy to cold temperatures down to −11 °F, and will grow in neutral to moderately acidic soils with pH ranges of 4.5 to 7.5. An example of very rocky and serpentine soil tolerance is the species occurrence at the Cedars of Sonoma County, California. Canyon live oak grows at elevations of about 500 to 1,500 meters in southwestern Oregon; in Northern California, from 100 to 1,400 meters; and in Southern California, up to approximately 2,700 meters. "Q. chrysolepis" can be the dominant tree on steep canyon walls, especially in locations of shallow rocky soils. In areas of moderate to high rainfall, it occurs on south facing slopes, and in the hotter, drier parts of its distribution, on northerly slope faces.

Fossil data supports a much wider distribution throughout the western United States during the early Holocene period.

The species is often sympatric with "Quercus agrifolia" and several other oak species. It is more shade tolerant than Pacific madrone but not as much as the associated Douglas-fir, tanoak, and golden chinkapin. After forest fires, canyon live oak regenerates vigorously by basal sprouting, and the clonal diversity of this species has been shown to be high. It is typically succeeded by other species except in more extreme dry and rocky climates, being exceptionally drought tolerant.

The acorns are consumed by a variety of wildlife as diverse as acorn woodpecker, California ground squirrel, dusky-footed wood rat, western harvest mouse and black-tailed deer. There seems to be little difference in food preference by wildlife among different oaks.
Extensive hybridization of "Q. chrysolepis" has been documented with several other sympatric oak species, probably to a greater extent than for any other "Quercus" species. The ability of "Q. chrysolepis" to compete with other dominant trees within its range has been analyzed from the standpoint of leaf architecture and photosynthetic capability. The study results explain that, in low light environments, "Q. chrysolepis" out-competes species with superior leaf size and crown mass per unit volume by its greater photosynthetic efficiency and leaf lifespan.

Canyon live oak gives functional habitat for many fauna by providing perching, nesting, resting, or foraging sites for numerous species of birds, and shade and cover for diverse other mammals. Young "Q. chrysolepis" is a readily available browse. Canyon live oak woodlands serve as excellent mountain lion habitat because of the large population of deer frequenting these areas. Many species forage on canyon live oak foliage including black-tailed jackrabbit, beaver, brush rabbit, red-backed vole, Sonoma chipmunk, cactus mouse, deer mouse, and porcupine. Pocket gophers often feed on the cambium of young canyon live oaks.

In southern California "Q. chrysolepis" is the food plant of a small moth, "Neocrania bifasciata".

The pollen of the canyon live oak is a severe allergen. Pollination occurs in spring.

Native Americans used the acorns of this species as a food staple, after leaching the tannins. Its roasted seed is also used as a coffee substitute.

The wood is strong, being referred to as 'maul oak' by European-American settlers who employed it for sledgehammers and wedges. It is sometimes used in paneling and especially as firewood.


John Muir Way

The John Muir Way is a continuous long-distance route in southern Scotland, running from Helensburgh, Argyll and Bute in the west to Dunbar, East Lothian in the east. It is named in honour of the Scottish conservationist John Muir, who was born in Dunbar in 1838 and became a founder of the United States National Park Service. The route provides a coast-to-coast route across Scotland, linking Muir's birthplace with Scotland's first national park, Loch Lomond and The Trossachs, and Helensburgh, from where he left Scotland for the United States. It is suitable for walkers and cyclists although some sections are on rougher terrain and may not be suitable for road bicycles.

The John Muir Way opened on 21 April 2014. Previously a shorter 'John Muir Way' existed only in East Lothian, but the majority of this older route has now been absorbed into the much longer new route. A shorter section of the older route from Dunbar to the Scottish Borders has been renamed as the 'John Muir Link'. In 2017 the route was designated as one of Scotland's Great Trails by NatureScot. "The Independent" declared the original John Muir Way its "Walk of the Month" for February 2014. Between 240,000 and 300,000 people use the path every year, of whom about 5,500 walk the entire route.

The John Muir Way is signposted throughout using a purple-brown logo. Taking the trail from west to east, the John Muir Way starts in Helensburgh. The trail follows over the hills, providing views of Loch Lomond and the Trossach mountains, before descending into Balloch, with its National Park centre. This is one of the wilder sections of the route with the most rugged terrain: windswept, high moorland with little shelter. From here the route winds its way towards Strathblane and Scotland's most famous long distance walk, the West Highland Way which it crosses near Dumgoyne hill and Glengoyne Distillery.

At Kirkintilloch, the trail picks up the Forth and Clyde Canal and heads through Strathkelvin to Falkirk and its wheel which provides a link between waterways for travelling craft. Roman forts and the Antonine Wall are the next attractions en route to the ancient town of Linlithgow and its impressive palace of Mary, Queen of Scots. It leaves Linlithgow with its low lying loch for the seashore and the harbour town of Bo'ness, coasting along to Blackness Castle and the bridge town of South Queensferry. The trail follows the greener places in the capital city, Edinburgh, before guiding travellers east, past famous, coastal birding and golf spots via Aberlady and North Berwick. The trail ends in Dunbar, where Muir was born and there is a museum dedicated to him.



Lamyatt

Lamyatt is a village and civil parish in the Mendip district of Somerset, England. It lies south east of Shepton Mallet, north east of Castle Cary, and south of Evercreech. The parish has a population of 183.

A square, Roman-period Celtic temple built in the late 3rd century, is situated a mile north-west of the parish on the summit of Lamyatt Beacon. It fell into disuse at the end of the Roman period and a small east-west building was constructed nearby. A small cemetery was radiocarbon dated to the early middle ages.

Lamyatt was recorded in the Domesday book as Lamieta meaning "the lamb's gate" from the Old English lamb and goat. The Abbot of Glastonbury Abbey owned the land and 5 hides (660 acres) were sublet to Nigel the Doctor.

The parish of Lamyatt was part of the Whitstone Hundred.

The parish council has responsibility for local issues, including setting an annual precept (local rate) to cover the council’s operating costs and producing annual accounts for public scrutiny. The parish council evaluates local planning applications and works with the local police, district council officers, and neighbourhood watch groups on matters of crime, security, and traffic. The parish council's role also includes initiating projects for the maintenance and repair of parish facilities, as well as consulting with the district council on the maintenance, repair, and improvement of highways, drainage, footpaths, public transport, and street cleaning. Conservation matters (including trees and listed buildings) and environmental issues are also the responsibility of the council.

The village falls within the Non-metropolitan district of Mendip, which was formed on 1 April 1974 under the Local Government Act 1972, having previously been part of Shepton Mallet Rural District, which is responsible for local planning and building control, local roads, council housing, environmental health, markets and fairs, refuse collection and recycling, cemeteries and crematoria, leisure services, parks, and tourism.

Somerset County Council is responsible for running the largest and most expensive local services such as education, social services, libraries, main roads, public transport, policing and fire services, trading standards, waste disposal and strategic planning.

It is also part of the Wells county constituency represented in the House of Commons of the Parliament of the United Kingdom. It elects one Member of Parliament (MP) by the first past the post system of election, and was part of the South West England constituency of the European Parliament prior to Britain leaving the European Union in January 2020, which elected seven MEPs using the d'Hondt method of party-list proportional representation.

St Mary and St John Church dates from the 13th century, and has been designated by English Heritage as a grade II* listed building.



Biri, Hungary

Biri is a village in Szabolcs-Szatmár-Bereg county, in the Northern Great Plain region of eastern Hungary. Its postal code is 2836

It covers an area of and has a population of 1407 people (2015). The region of Biri is especially famous for its large number of ice-cream parlors.

Charles Harbutt

Charles Henry Harbutt (July 29, 1935 – June 30, 2015) was an American photographer, a former president of Magnum, and full-time Associate Professor of Photography at Parsons School of Design in New York.

Harbutt was born in Camden, New Jersey, and raised in Teaneck, New Jersey, and learned much of his photography skills from the township's amateur camera club. He attended Regis High School in New York City where he took photographs for the school newspaper. He later graduated from Marquette University.

Harbutt's work is deeply rooted in the modern photojournalist tradition. For the first twenty years of his career he contributed to major magazines in the United States, Europe and Japan. His work was often intrinsically political, exhibiting social and economic contingencies. In 1959, while working as a writer and photographer for the Catholic magazine "Jubilee", he was invited by members of the Castro underground to document the Cuban Revolution on the strength of three photographs he had published in "Modern Photography". 

An editor at "Jubilee" while Harbutt was working there, Robert Lax, used photographs taken by Harbutt for the front and back cover of his first book of poetry, "The Circus of the Sun".

Harbutt joined Magnum Photos and was elected president of the organization twice, first in 1979. He left the group in 1981, citing its increasingly commercial ambitions and the desire to pursue more personal work. He taught photography workshops, exhibited in solo and group shows around the world, and joined the faculty of the Parsons School of Design at New School University as a full-time professor, in addition to serving as guest artist at MIT, The Art Institute of Chicago, and the Rhode Island School of Design. Harbutt was a founding member of Archive Pictures Inc., an international documentary photographers' cooperative, and a member of the American Society of Magazine Photographers.

His work was exhibited at the Museum of Modern Art, the National Museum of American History, the Corcoran Gallery of Art, the U.S. Library of Congress, George Eastman House, the Art Institute of Chicago, the International Center of Photography, the Center for Creative Photography, and at the Bibliothèque Nationale, the Beaubourg, and the Maison européenne de la photographie in Paris.

In 1997, his negatives, master prints, and archives were acquired for the collection of the Center for Creative Photography in Tucson, Arizona.

He mounted a large exhibition of his work at the Centro de la Imagen in Mexico City in December 2000 and received the medal of the City of Perpignan at a retrospective of his work there in 2004. He died in Monteagle, Tennessee, on June 30, 2015, at the age of 79. He had emphysema.



Lehigh Mountain Hawks

The Lehigh Mountain Hawks are the athletic teams representing Lehigh University in Bethlehem, Pennsylvania. The Hawks participate in NCAA Division I competition as a member of the Patriot League. In football, Lehigh competes in the Division I Football Championship Subdivision (FCS).

The athletic teams at Lehigh University were founded in 1865. They were known as the Engineers until the 1995–96 academic year. Some believe that this nickname was a reference to the Lehigh Valley Railroad, not to the school's academic engineering program. However, there was also a logo of a giant Lehigh Engineer looking through a surveyor's transit while an airliner flew over him and a diesel passenger train steamed beneath his feet in use at Lehigh during the 1950s and 60s. As the university expanded following the advent of coeducation in 1971, while the number of engineering students remained steady, the percentage of students enrolled in engineering declined from 50% to about 30%. As a result, during the school's 1988 appearance in the men's NCAA basketball tournament, TV commentators were encouraged to refer to the school by its colors, Brown and White.

Beginning in the 1980s and until 1995, the team used a logo of a train locomotive with an "L" on the front. In November 1995, the school introduced the Mountain Hawk as a mascot, replacing the "L train", which stemmed from a student-based movement to come up with a suitable mascot; the Mountain Hawk was officially voted in as the new mascot by the Lehigh Student Senate soon after. Controversy arose the following year, when the school's nickname was changed to the Mountain Hawks. Many alumni and students, including various members of Lehigh's Marching 97, still object, though the school's athletes were cited as being strong supporters of this change. The school still lists all three nicknames (Engineers, Brown & White, and Mountain Hawks) in its media guides.
In November 2008, just before the 144th game against Lafayette, the mascot was given the name "Clutch." The name was chosen after a long contest of name suggestions and voting.

Lehigh is especially known for its football rivalry with Lafayette College, the most frequently-played matchup in college football history. Known as The Rivalry, as of 2023 both teams have met 159 times. 

Lehigh has very successful programs in both baseball (men) and softball (women), having won both Patriot League titles in 2015 and advancing to the NCAA playoffs. More recently, the Lehigh softball team won the 2022 Patriot League Softball Tournament and advanced to the Washington regional in the NCAA Tournament.

Lehigh is also competitive in men's and women's basketball. Both teams play in Stabler Arena. The men's and women's teams both won the Patriot League championship in 2010. The Men's team went on to the NCAA Tournament, losing in the first round to top-ranked University of Kansas.

The Mountain Hawks men's basketball team is best known for its first-round game in the 2012 NCAA Men's Division I Basketball Tournament as a #15 seed on March 16, 2012 against the #2 seed Duke Blue Devils. Despite being a heavy underdog, due in large part to future NBA player CJ McCollum's 30-point game, the Mountain Hawks defeated Duke 75–70 making it only the sixth time that a 15th seed has defeated a 2nd seed.

The varsity football team competes at the Division I FCS level. Lehigh is a highly respected FCS program with a rich tradition. Lehigh won the 1977 Division II National Championship by defeating Jacksonville State 33–0 in the Pioneer Bowl. The Engineers were 1979 1-AA National Runners-up after falling to Eastern Kentucky in the title game. Lehigh has ten Patriot League championships, which is the most amongst league members. The program has also enjoyed seven FCS playoff appearances: 1980, 1998, 1999, 2000, 2001, 2004, 2010 and 2011.

Lehigh is also part of the most played rivalry in college football. The Mountain Hawks have met the Lafayette Leopards 159 times. Lafayette leads the all-time series 82–72–5. The game is traditionally played on the Saturday before Thanksgiving.

Football games are well-attended at Lehigh's Goodman Stadium, which has been voted the best place to watch a Patriot League football game for the past six years. Tailgate parties are a big part of the experience, attracting many students and alumni who attend the games.

In the Lehigh Mountain Hawks 2016 football season they finished with 9 wins and 3 losses, and made the playoffs for the first time since 2011. They went undefeated in the Patriot League winning all 6 games, while winning 3 games and losing 2 games against out of conference opponents. They played the University of New Hampshire in the first round of the 2016 FCS playoffs, where they lost 21 to 64.
The senior captains for the 2016 season were quarterback Nick Shafnisky, linebacker Colton Caslow, offensive center Brandon Short, and offensive tackle Zach Duffy.

After the 2016 season, Nick Shafnisky was named Patriot League Offensive Player of the Year and Lehigh football Head Coach Andy Coen was named Patriot League Coach of the Year. Lehigh also received nine first team honors for senior quarterback Nick Shafnisky, sophomore running back Dom Bragalone, junior wide receiver and return specialist Gatlin Casey, junior wide receiver Troy Pelletier, senior offensive tackle Zach Duffy, sophomore place kicker and punter Ed Mish, and senior linebacker Colton Caslow. Lehigh also earned four second team honors for junior offensive tackle Tim O'Hara, senior offensive tackle Brandon Short, junior defensive lineman Tyler Cavenas, and senior defensive back Brandon Leaks.

In the upcoming 2017 football season the Lehigh Mountain Hawks will be looking towards defending their 2016 Patriot League Championship, and hope to repeat. Lehigh will kick off their season with a home game against Villanova. They have dropped Princeton from their schedule and will be facing Wagner instead for their fifth game of the season.

Lehigh's lacrosse team competes in the nine-team Patriot League. The Mountain Hawks have a strong tradition in lacrosse, but have only appeared twice (2012, 2013) in the present NCAA championships since its formation in 1971. Lehigh has accumulated seven national lacrosse titles under the former USILA national title format and strongly contributed to the growth of lacrosse in Pennsylvania.

Lehigh men's and women's soccer are NCAA Division I programs that compete in the Patriot League. Both teams are highly competitive. The 2006 men's team had a 15–2–3 overall record and became the first Patriot League team to go a perfect 7–0 in league play. They advanced to the third round of the NCAA play-offs before losing to the number-one seed. Both teams are sponsored by Nike as well.

The head coach of the men's team is Dean Koski, and he is assisted by Ryan Hess and goalkeeper coach Matt Deming. This past season (2016), the Lehigh men's soccer team posted a 7–10–1. However, they won the Patriot League Championship in 2015, earning them an automatic berth to the NCAA tournament.

Leading the women's team is Eric Lambinus, assisted by Lauren Calabrese, Madi Morgan, and Bill Moukoulis. In their 2016 season, they went eight games without giving up a single goal, putting them at first in the country for goals against. They're overall record in that season was 11–5–2.

Both teams play on Ulrich Field, located in Ulrich Sports Complex on Goodman Campus at Lehigh University. The field is grass with stands that hold about 1,300 fans. Locker rooms and practice fields (Kauffman Fields) are located a short distance from the game field. There are three grass fields with an irrigation/sprinkler system to keep up maintenance.

Combined between the two teams, 24 student athletes made the Patriot League Honor Roll, having a 3.2 GPA or higher during the fall semester (Women: 15, Men: 9).

Men's Roster 2016: Ian Marshall, Will Smith, Joe Bogan, Alex Greene, Matt Morana, Zarin Tuten, Calum Bishop, Doyle Tuvesson, Jack Miskel, Danny Gonzalez, Mark Forrest, Gio Giammatteo, Oscar Greene, Justin Worley, Nolan Coulter, Tatsu Otani, Nick Jewell, Tommy Dokho, David Zipkin, Kevin Klinkenberg, Matthew Peralta, Nick Facendo, Danny Leszczynski, John Marc Charpentier, Jacob Gottwald, Paul Steingraber

Women's Roster 2016: Lidia Breen, Sam Miller, Kylie Ginsberg, Alyssa Riporti, Maggie Wadsworth, Laura Courtney, Tori Pantaleo, Kalin Ojert, Kat Jacobellis, Clare Severe, Kayla Arestivo, Jess Sacco, Sabrina Mertz, Amanda Stratton, Becca Sherry, Madeline Walsh, Adrian Vitello, Lexi Chang, Annika Jansa, Grace Correll, Ashley Maziarz, Sidonie Warnecker, Erin Racano, Mary Casey

Julius Seligson played collegiate tennis at Lehigh University, graduating in 1930. He never lost a regular season match. In 1928 he won the NCAA Men's Tennis Championship in singles, to become Lehigh's first individual national champion. He won 66 straight matches, before losing in the 1930 NCAA finals. He won the NCAA indoor singles championship in 1928, 1929, and 1930.

Lehigh's wrestling team competes in the EIWA and has a strong tradition in the sport dating back to 1910. Over its history, Lehigh has won 34 EIWA team championships and 203 Lehigh wrestlers have won EIWA individual championships. The team regularly places among the top 10 at the NCAA Division I Wrestling Championships and is considered one of nation's best collegiate wrestling programs. In addition to its EIWA successes, Lehigh has had 28 national NCAA individual champions, 137 NCAA All-Americans, and 16 top five NCAA team finishes. Its last national champion was Darian Cruz in 2017.

Among Lehigh wrestling alumni are several coaches of the sport at other universities and colleges, including Jason Kutz (1998) at East Stroudsburg University, Chris Ayres (1999) at Princeton University, Cory Cooperman (2006), assistant wrestling coach at Rutgers University, and Troy Letters (2006) and Derek Zinck (2006), assistant wrestling coaches at Princeton. Bobby Weaver, a Lehigh wrestling alumnus, is a former won a gold medal in wrestling at the 1984 Summer Olympics.

In 2006, the wrestling team marked its fifth straight EIWA championship. In 2018, they won the EIWA championship again, snapping the 11-year streak of Cornell University, the team's biggest rival. Lehigh's current head wrestling coach is Pat Santoro, a Lehigh wrestling alumnus and former EIWA champion, and the team's home is Leeman-Turner Arena at Grace Hall, often referred to as "The Snakepit", with a capacity of 2,200.

Lehigh's marching band is known as the "Marching 97". The number "97" represents the number of people who are in the marching band. It is composed of 12 ranks of 8 members and one drum major to conduct the entire band. The Marching 97 is known for its antics, silliness, and tradition in Lehigh University.

First created in 1906 under direction of E.E. Ross with only 15 men as a band. The band only grew from there and started to perform in halls such as Drown Hall and Carnegie Hall. The Marching 97 allowed women to join as cheerleaders in 1969. They were considered to be part of the band, but women were admitted as musicians in 1973.

In the 1970s, Professor Rich Aaronson asked if the Marching 97 could play in his Economics 001 class. The 97 enjoyed doing this and has taken requests for other classes. This is how the popular "Eco-flame" was created and it is done every year on the week Lehigh faces its rival, Lafayette College. Similar to the Eco-flame, if asked, the 97 will gather volunteering members to "flame" events on Lehigh. These events could be away football games, events organized by Lehigh, or Alums who ask to play at one of their events on Lehigh. The Marching 97 play at every home game and follow the football team whenever possible.

Today, the Marching 97 is entirely student-ran and is one of the country's only marching bands to do so. The band has performed at Carnegie Hall, Drown Hall, and at the New York World's Fair, as well as at Yankee Stadium in 2014 for the 150th meeting of the Lehigh-Lafayette game. In 2017, the Marching 97 was invited to march in London's New Year's Parade.


Botpalád

Botpalád is a village in Szabolcs-Szatmár-Bereg county, in the Northern Great Plain region of eastern Hungary.

It covers an area of and has a population of 654 people (2013 estimate).

Henry Gariepy

Colonel Henry Gariepy (1930–2010) was a Salvation Army officer and the former national editor in chief and literary secretary for The Salvation Army which included The War Cry. He retired in 1995. He held many other positions within the Army such as corps officer and youth camp coordinating officer in various locations in the USA. He continued to be very active though retired in the Salvation Army as a speaker, literary consultant, conference speaker and college teacher at the School for Officer Training in Suffern, New York, where new Salvation Army officers participate in a two-year educational program.

He was married to retired officer Colonel Marjorie Gariepy with four children, twelve grandchildren and a growing number of great-grand children. He died on Saturday, April 3, 2010.

He received the Order of the Founder in July 2007 - the highest honor that can be conferred by The Salvation Army 

Today, he is better known for his many publications; he is the author of more than 29 books and contributor to more than 50 works, ranging from devotional works to biography and history. One of his best known titles includes "100 Portraits of Christ". This work has been produced in nine editions, in several languages and also had 150,000 copies printed for Billy Graham.

Works include:


He has released a biography on Israel Gaither. "Israel L. Gaither: Man With a Mission" (2006) and now "Christianity in Action: The International History of The Salvation Army" (2009)

HMS Padstow Bay (K608)

HMS "Padstow Bay" was a anti-aircraft frigate of the British Royal Navy, named for Padstow Bay on the northern coast of Cornwall. Commissioned in 1946, she served on the American and West Indies Station only until 1947 before being put into reserve, and then sold for scrapping in 1959.

The ship was originally ordered on 19 January 1944 as the "Loch Coulside". However, the contract was then changed, and the ship was laid down by Henry Robb of Leith on 25 September 1944 to a revised design as a Bay-class. Admiralty Job No. J11867 was launched as "Padstow Bay" on 28 August 1945, and completed on 11 March 1946.

After sea trials, "Padstow Bay" sailed to Plymouth still lacking her full complement. The ship was finally commissioned in June to serve on the American and West Indies Station. In July she sailed for Bermuda, calling at Ponta Delgada, Azores for fuel, and arriving at Bermuda on 8 August.

In September and October she carried out an extensive series of visits, stopping at Havana, Cuba, Veracruz, Mexico, Honduras, Kingston, Jamaica, Bluefields, Nicaragua, Cartagena, Colombia, Curaçao, La Guaira, Venezuela, Trinidad, Georgetown, British Guiana, Paramaribo, Surinam, and Cayenne, French Guiana, returning to Bermuda by 15 November.

After local duties, she sailed on 31 December 1945 with ships of the Squadron for more exercises and another visits programme. In January 1946 she called at Antigua and Tobago, in February, Grenada, then Saint Thomas, U.S. Virgin Islands, Guadeloupe, Marie-Galante and Sint Eustatius in March.

After a routine docking at the Royal Naval Dockyard, Bermuda, in June she embarked on a visit to North America with the cruiser . On 1 July she arrived at Halifax, Nova Scotia, to take part in joint exercises with ships of the Royal Canadian Navy. In August she sailed from Halifax to ports in the Eastern Canadian Provinces, calling at Bathurst, New Brunswick, Ellis Bay, Anticosti, Miquelon, and Argentia and St. John's, Newfoundland. In September she visited Montreal with "Sheffield", before returning to Bermuda via Portsmouth, New Hampshire.

In October she sailed for the UK, arriving back at Plymouth on 18 November, was decommissioned, and laid-up with the Reserve Fleet in December. "Padstow Bay" remained in the Reserve Fleet until 1958 when the ship was placed on the Disposal List. In 1959 she was sold to BISCO for demolition by an Italian shipbreaker and towed to La Spezia, arriving on 11 August.

Curetis bulis

Curetis bulis, the bright sunbeam, is a species of butterfly belonging to the lycaenid family. It is found in Asia.

Male upperside, forewing: velvety black, an elongate broad medial patch dark orange red, that extends from base outwards for about three-fourths the length of the wing and fills the area from vein 1 to the middle of the cell; in some specimens diffusely, spread below vein 1 near base, but there shaded with dusky black; the outer margin of this red patch unevenly rounded. Hindwing: brownish black, a large orange-red spot above vein 3 to near apex, inwardly extended into the cell to near the base of the wing and posteriorly diffuse below vein 3, but in the cell thickly overlaid with dusky-black scaling and posteriorly shaded with long brown hairs that in certain lights take a golden tint; above the cell extended from the base of the wing to the inner margin of the orange spot is a prominent broad streak of a shade darker than the ground colour; abdominal fold pale pinkish brown. Underside: silvery white with sparsely scattered minute black dots. Forewing: a discal and inner subterminal series of very indistinct somewhat lunular black markings that form broken anteriorly convergent bands, which are continued over the hindwing to the tornus; beyond these, on both forewings and hindwings, succeeds an outer subterminal series of minute black dots, in most specimens very indistinct. Antennae, head, thorax and abdomen dark brown; sides of the abdomen golden brown; beneath: palpi, thorax and abdomen white.

Female upperside: more or less as in the male, but the dark orange-red medial patches replaced by white and much larger. On the forewing this white patch extends above the cell, the discocellulars closing which are prominently marked by a black tooth, and posteriorly it reaches the dorsal margin. On the hindwing the white patch is very large and in some specimens very diffuse. Both forewings and hindwings are shaded at the base by dusky scales and in many specimens the markings of the underside are plainly visible by transparency; the broad black streak above the cell on the hindwing is present in some, absent in other specimens. Underside: ground colour and markings as in the male, but much more prominent.

Upperside golden or coppery orange o£ a shade paler than the orange patch in the typical form. Forewing: costal margin broadly black, the width of the black colour increasing to the apex and continued from below that in an even border along the termen to the tornus, thence along the apical third of the dorsum, ending more or less diffusely in a point; discocellulars marked by a prominent tooth extended from the black costal border. Hindwing: base and dorsal area lightly irrorated (sprinkled) with fuscous scales, the latter also shaded with long pale brown hairs; termen with a blackish border of varying width but generally widest in the middle, its inner margin more or less diffuse; costal margin broadly pale yellow. Underside: silvery white; markings similar to but in some specimens even more indistinct than in "bulis". Antennae, head and thorax of a paler brown than in "bulis"; sides of the abdomen golden yellow; beneath: palpi, thorax and abdomen white.

Female upperside: similar to that of the male, but the orange replaced by white, the black costal and terminal borders on the forewing broader; on the dorsal margin the border is continued further towards the base; the discocellular black tooth-like mark as prominent as in the male. Hindwing: the white area very much smaller than the similar orange area on the hindwing of the male and confined to the apical third of the wing; a short, broad, clavate (club like), black streak extends from the base outwards above the cell. Underside as in the male but the markings more prominent.

Differs from "bulis" in the shape of the hindwing, which has the termen very strongly angulate in the middle in both sexes. In both male and female also the apex of the fore and tornal angle of the hindwing are highly acuminate, in the forewing the apex is, in most specimens, falcate (sickle shaped). Male upperside: differs from the upperside of the typical form in the greater extent and paler colour of the orange-red areas on both forewings and hindwings. On the forewing the discocellulars are marked by a black tooth as in var. "dentata", and on the hindwing the orange-red ground colour extends posteriorly to vein 2, but along the dorsum it is heavily shaded with dusty-black scales. Underside: as in typical "bulis". Antennae, head, thorax and abdomen black, the sides of the abdomen not reddish or golden; beneath: palpi, thorax and abdomen white. Female upper and undersides: similar to those of the male, but the ground colour on the upperside white.

Upperside, forewing: closely resembles that of typical "bulis", but the medial orange-red area is larger and extends slightly further outwards, upwards and downwards so that the black on the tornal area forms a broad triangle and is continued along the dorsal margin, narrowing to a slender line near the base of the wing; anteriorly the black border along the costa projects as a slender black tooth along the discocellulars, which however, is absent in many specimens. Hindwing: the orange-red area that in "bulis" forms an upper discal patch, in this variety or form spreads inwards to the base, posteriorly towards the tornus and leaves only a comparatively narrow terminal margin; the tornal area broadly black, the inner margin of the black very diffuse, rarely so clearly defined as in Felder's figure; near the base, above the subcostal vein, there is a short, broad, black streak; abdominal fold pale greyish white. Underside: silvery white, the markings faint and ill-defined as in all forms of "Curetis"; the discal oblique band of the forewing carried over the hindwing, but not in any specimen that I have seen continued in even a disjointed line (as in "bulis") to the tornal angle. The rest as in typical "bulis". Antennae, head, thorax and abdomen similar to those of "bulis".— Female Very similar to that of "bulis". Differs on the upperside, in some specimens only, by the extent of the white area on the hindwing, which spreads practically over the whole wing, but is heavily shaded along the terminal margin and posteriorly on the dorsal area with dusky brownish-black or fuscous. On the underside the ground colour and markings are as in "bulis". Antennae, head, thorax and abdomen similar to those of "bulis".

About 10 mm long. Colour velvety green; head dark brown; 3rd and 4th segments with narrow, obliquely placed lateral stripes of crimson, edged posteriorly with yellow; 6th to 11th segments with a slender longitudinal dorsal stripe of the same colour; the spiracles on each side surmounted by a slender, lunulated, pale yellow line; on the 9th segment a conspicuous quadrate patch of white between the spiracular yellow lunule and the crimson dorsal line; 12th and remaining segments dark green; on the 12th two greenish-yellow, erect, rigid processes slightly divergent at their apices; the tentacles protruded from their processes seem to be pinkish brown, with a tuft of black and white hairs at their apices; but it is not easy to note the colour of the hairs, as they are protruded, whirled round and withdrawn with great rapidity. There is no opening or honey-gland on the 11th or other segment, as in many lycaenid larvae. In shape also these do not resemble the larva of the Lycaenidae which as a rule, are onisciform. In these the head is small and almost always completely hidden under the 2nd segment; the 3rd, 4th, and 5th segments sloped upwards posteriorly, form each a well-marked transverse ridge.

A rounded slightly convex disc with a protrusion posteriorly; colour translucent dark green. Seen under a magnifying glass they seem to be studded with tiny pits, except on the lateral areas; on the anterior portion there is an oval yellowish-white mark.


Substrata

Substrata, plural of substratum, may refer to:



Pot Hole quarry

Pot Hole quarry (also known as Pothole quarry or Three Springs quarry) is a former limestone quarry close to Llanferres, near Mold, in Denbighshire, North Wales. The quarry is popular with rock climbers due to its rural setting, ease of access and selection of routes on good quality limestone. The average height of the quarried rock is approximately .

Pot Hole Quarry is located near the village of Llanferres, on the A494 between Mold and Ruthin, in Denbighshire, North Wales, United Kingdom.

The routes range in grade from V-Diff to E3, the emphasis of the majority of routes being on single pitch finger cracks and pockets. The hardest graded route at the quarry is Vetta Variation (E3 5c). The easiest graded route is Sunset (VD).

Although some of the easier routes on the Main Wall are now becoming polished, routes graded HVS and above are in fair condition. The crag has been popular since the late 1970s/early 1980s and is often visited on the way to or from Snowdonia, when traveling from the North West of England. The quarry, and much of the Clwyd Area, was pioneered by Stuart Cathcart. The crag remains a favourite for group usage, with school parties and military outward-bound groups both frequenting Pot Hole.

The main wall of the quarry has a few outstanding routes, the star of the crag being 'The Dog' (HVS 5a), a thin finger crack with well protected, absorbing and sustained climbing. The routes are chiefly mid-grade, with routes of VS level dominating much of the main wall, 'Tre-Fynnon' (VS 4b) and 'The Watzman' (VS 4b) being the routes most worthy of note. The Right Angle (HS 4b) is an interesting climb requiring a bridge of two faces and wide crack jamming methods; a route marred by dampness, loose rock inside the crack and awkward protection.

HMS St Austell Bay (K634)

HMS "St Austell Bay" was a anti-aircraft frigate of the British Royal Navy, named after St Austell Bay on the south coast of Cornwall. In commission from 1945 until 1956, she served in the Mediterranean Fleet and on the America and West Indies Squadron.

The ship was originally ordered from Harland and Wolff of Belfast on 2 February 1943 as the "Loch Lydoch". However the contract was then changed, and the ship was built to a revised design as a Bay-class anti-aircraft frigate, launched on 18 November 1944, and completed on 29 May 1945.

After commissioning and sea trials "St Austell Bay" was assigned to duty in the British Pacific Fleet. However, she was still at Malta with other ships of the 33rd Escort Group when news of the surrender of Japan arrived on 15 August. "St Austell Bay" remained in the Mediterranean Sea for the next five years, mainly operating in the Aegean and Adriatic, on patrols, guardship duties, and several periods as part of the Haifa Patrol, attempting to intercept ships carrying illegal Jewish immigrants to Palestine.

In April 1950 "St Austell Bay" and sister ship exchanged with the Royal New Zealand Navy frigates and , arriving at Auckland on 3 July to join the RNZN 11th Frigate Flotilla for exercises, patrols and visits in the Pacific, finally returning to the flotilla at Malta on 4 January 1951.

In March she returned to the UK for service in the 7th Frigate Flotilla, Home Fleet, and almost immediately took part on the search for the missing submarine . Patrols, visits, and fleet exercises occupied the rest of the year, including an exercise with a submarine of the Royal Norwegian Navy in September.

In June 1952 she arrived at Hamilton, Bermuda, to join the America and West Indies Squadron, and in July was sent to Port Stanley to act as Guardship in the Falkland Islands. In October she left the Falklands and sailed up the west coast of South America, making calls at Puerto Montt, Valparaíso and Antofagasta in Chile, and Callao in Peru, before transiting the Panama Canal, and returning to Bermuda in December.

In 1953 she visited various Caribbean ports, and carried out exercises, including one in May with ships of the Royal Canadian Navy. In June she sailed to Devonport to refit, then returned to Bermuda in November. From March to June 1954 she was Guardship at the Falklands, again returning to Bermuda by way of the Pacific coast of South America. In September she visited the United States, calling at ports in New England, then returned to the UK in November to refit at Plymouth.

"St Austell Bay" was recommissioned in May 1955, but significant problems with the refit delayed deployment until November when she returned to Bermuda for the usual programme of joint exercises, training and port visits in the Caribbean and to North America. She returned to Plymouth in August 1956 to decommission and was put into Reserve. "St Austell Bay" remained in the Reserve Fleet at Plymouth until 1959 when she was placed on the Disposal List. She was sold to BISCO for demolition by Shipbreaking Industries and arrived in tow at the breakers yard at Charlestown near Rosyth on 5 July 1959.

Edward Cooke

Edward Cooke may refer to:



Donald Weber

Donald Weber is a literary critic and a specialist in Jewish American literature and film studies. He is the Lucia, Ruth, and Elizabeth MacGregor Professor of English and Chair of the English department at Mount Holyoke College.

Weber received his B.A. from State University of New York at Stony Brook and an M.A. and Ph.D. from Columbia University. He joined Mount Holyoke in 1981.




HMS St Brides Bay (K600)

HMS "St Brides Bay" was a anti-aircraft frigate of the British Royal Navy, named for St Brides Bay in Pembrokeshire. In commission from 1945 to 1961, she served in the Mediterranean and Eastern Fleets, seeing active service in the Korean War.

The ship was originally ordered from Harland and Wolff, Belfast, on 2 May 1943 as the "Loch Achilty", and was laid down on 2 May 1944. However the contract was then changed, and the ship was completed to a revised design as a Bay-class anti-aircraft frigate. Admiralty Job No. J3902 was launched as "St Brides Bay" on 16 January 1945, and completed on 15 June 1945.

After sea trials "St Brides Bay" was commissioned for service in the British Pacific Fleet in June 1945. In July she sailed for Malta, but the proposed deployment in the Pacific was cancelled in August and she was reallocated to the 5th Escort Flotilla in the Mediterranean Fleet. There her duties included weather ship and air sea rescue duties in the western Atlantic during U.S aircraft troop repatriation flights in late November 1945, patrol duty in the Aegean, Adriatic, and Red Seas, and periods as Guardship at Alexandria, Trieste, and Aqaba, as well as attachment to the Haifa Patrol, attempting to intercept ships carrying illegal Jewish immigrants to Palestine. In May 1948 her pennant number was changed from K600 to F600.

In July 1949 she sailed with sister ship to join the Eastern Fleet, arriving at Hong Kong on 31 August, and joining the 4th Frigate Flotilla. Her duties at Hong Kong included Guardship duty in the Yangtze, surveillance of Chinese Nationalist warship movements, and patrols to support military operations against insurgent forces in Malaya.

In December 1950 "St Brides Bay" was sent to join the British naval forces that formed part of the United Nations Naval Task Force after the outbreak of the Korean War. She was deployed off the west coast of Korea and supported the evacuation of Incheon. From February to July 1951 "St Brides Bay" was deployed for Flotilla duties at Hong Kong and Singapore, returning to Korea in August for patrols and fire support duties off the west coast. In December she took part in bombardment operations on the Han River, returning to Hong Kong in January 1952 to continue supporting operations in Malaya. Her third UN tour began in June, and in July she was detached for duty with the United States Task Group on the East Coast, providing medical aid to the destroyer after she was damaged by 75 mm shore battery fire off Songjin. She returned to Hong Kong for flotilla duties in November, and in April 1953 began her fourth Korean tour, deployed for military support off the east coast. In June she carried out bombardments in Ch'o-do area in support of RoK Army operations before being released from United Nations duty.

After a refit at Hong Kong "St Brides Bay" resumed her usual duties; local and fleet exercises, patrols in the Formosa Straits, and further patrols off Korea, serving as Guardship at Pangyaengo Do off the east coast. Frequent exercises were carried out with ships of the United States, Australian and New Zealand navies.

On 16 August 1953, she intervened when the British mercantile freighter "Nigelock" (the former Flower-class corvette ), was seized in the Taiwan Strait by a gunboat of the Republic of China Navy enforcing Taiwan's Guanbi policy of blockading the coast of the Chinese mainland and ordered to make for Penghu. The appearance of "St Brides Bay" caused the gunboat to depart, allowing the freighter to continue on her original journey.

During the Suez Crisis in late 1956 "St Brides Bay" was sent to Aden for patrols in the Red Sea, returning to Singapore in January 1957. In February she detached for service in New Zealand, arriving at Auckland in March for exercises, training and patrols, returning to Hong Kong in July. The ship was refitted at HM Dockyard, Singapore, from December 1957 to March 1958, and in April sailed to Inchon with the frigate for an official visit by the Commander-in-Chief, Far East. In August she returned to Aden for local patrols and interception of illegal traffic, returning to Singapore in October.

In January 1959 she was deployed for Borneo patrol, and in March escorted the Royal Yacht to Hong Kong. After a refit, and local exercises she was deployed to Addu Atoll as Guardship in September, returning to Singapore in December.

In early 1960 "St Brides Bay" was detached for visits to Australia and New Zealand, calling at Fremantle and Adelaide, Auckland and Wellington, Hobart, Sydney and Cairns, before returning to Singapore in March. In May, while at Hong Kong some of ship's company were employed as extras during the filming of "The World of Suzie Wong". In June she took part in Fleet exercises and made an official visit to Japan, calling at Yokohama and Maizuru. On arrival back at Hong Kong on 2 July she collided with the minesweeper , almost cutting the ship in half. In November she and "Cardigan Bay" sailed to Townsville, Queensland, for detached service on a Pacific islands visit programme, calling at Nouméa, New Caledonia, Suva, Fiji and Apia, Samoa. She arrived at Pearl Harbor on 9 January 1961, then called at Funafuti, Onotoa and Tarawa in the Gilbert and Ellice Islands, Manus, Admiralty Islands, and Iloilo, Philippines, before returning to Hong Kong in March.

In May she was deployed for anti-piracy patrol duties based at Tawau, Borneo, calling at Yokosuka in June. After exercises with the Far East Fleet and Commonwealth warships she sailed for Australia in late August, calling at Brisbane, Mackay, Cairns and Darwin, before returning to Singapore in September.

In November 1961 "St Brides Bay" sailed for the UK, arriving at Portsmouth on 14 December. Two days later the ship was decommissioned after 16 years of continuous overseas service. Put into Reserve at Portsmouth in January 1962, she was sold to BISCO for scrapping. She was towed to Faslane for breaking-up by Metal Industries, arriving there on 3 September 1962.

Lullington, Somerset

Lullington is a village and civil parish just across the Mells River from Beckington and north east of Frome, in the Mendip district of Somerset, England.

The parish includes the hamlet of Laverton, where the Church of St Mary dates from the 11th century.

The name Lullington means "the settlement of Lulla's people".

Before the Norman Conquest the estate belonged to King Harold, later passing to Longleat Priory and after the Dissolution of the Monasteries was acquired by the Thynne family. It was sold in the early 19th century by the Marquess of Bath and bought by William Duckworth, who rebuilt the village.

The parish was part of the hundred of Frome.

Just to the south of the village is the Orchardleigh Estate, which comprises a Victorian stately home, built in 1856 by Thomas Henry Wyatt for William Duckworth, a 13th-century island church, and an 18-hole golf course.

The parish council has responsibility for local issues, including setting an annual precept (local rate) to cover the council's operating costs and producing annual accounts for public scrutiny. The parish council evaluates local planning applications and works with the local police, district council officers and neighbourhood watch groups on matters of crime, security and traffic. The parish council's role also includes initiating projects for the maintenance and repair of parish facilities, as well as consulting with the district council on the maintenance, repair and improvement of highways, drainage, footpaths, public transport and street cleaning. Conservation matters (including trees and listed buildings) and environmental issues are also the responsibility of the council.

The village falls within the Non-metropolitan district of Mendip, which was formed on 1 April 1974 under the Local Government Act 1972, having previously been part of Frome Rural District, which is responsible for local planning and building control, local roads, council housing, environmental health, markets and fairs, refuse collection and recycling, cemeteries and crematoria, leisure services, parks and tourism.

Somerset County Council is responsible for running the largest and most expensive local services such as education, social services, libraries, main roads, public transport, policing and fire services, trading standards, waste disposal and strategic planning.

It is also part of the Somerton and Frome county constituency represented in the House of Commons of the Parliament of the United Kingdom. It elects one Member of Parliament (MP) by the first past the post system of election.

The parish Church of All Saints dates from the 12th century, the south aisle from around 1280, and the chancel, tower and south porch circa 1450. The church was restored in 1862 by T. H. Wyatt. It is a Grade I listed building. Henry Waldegrave, 11th Earl Waldegrave was the rector of the village in the early 20th century.

Giorgos Koudas

Giorgos Koudas (; born 23 November 1946) is a Greek former professional footballer who played as an attacking midfielder. He spent his entire career in PAOK. Due to his fierce competitiveness and his Macedonian heritage, his nickname was "Alexander the Great".

Born in Agios Pavlos, Thessaloniki, Koudas began playing football for PAOK where he made his first-team debut in December 1963, aged 17. Koudas, nicknamed "Alexander the Great", spent his entire football career with PAOK, making 504 appearances in the Alpha Ethniki from 1963 to 1984, and 607 appearances in all competitions (PAOK all-time records). Koudas won two out of nine Greek Cup finals he appeared in and in the 1972 Cup final, he scored both goals as PAOK defeated Panathinaikos 2–1 and earned their first domestic title in club's history.

During the summer of 1966, Olympiacos unsuccessfully tried to acquire Koudas from PAOK, approaching him directly without going into a negotiation with his club. PAOK president Giorgos Pantelakis never gave his consent for the transfer to be completed and for the next two seasons, Koudas participated only in Olympiacos friendly games. In the summer of 1968, he returned to PAOK and led the great team of the 1970s to glorious days. Fueled by this incident, Olympiacos–PAOK rivalry is considered nowadays the fiercest intercity football rivalry in Greece.

He retired in 1984, aged 37, serving for over 20 years at PAOK.

Koudas became even inspiration for a popular song by the Greek songwriter and PAOK supporter Nikos Papazoglou and lyricist Manolis Rasoulis.

Koudas made 43 appearances for the Greece national team, scoring four goals, between 1967 and 1982. He appeared at UEFA Euro 1980 in Italy, along with PAOK teammates Konstantinos Iosifidis, Ioannis Damanakis, Ioannis Gounaris and Georgios Kostikos.

After he had retired, Koudas made a final appearance for the national team in a friendly against Yugoslavia on 20 September 1995. That made him the oldest international player (at age 48) until George Weah (at age 51) beat the record in September 2018.

Koudas had a short managerial career as the co-manager of Iraklis together with Kostas Aidiniou.
His father Giannis was from Çorlu(Greek name Tyroloi), and his mother Eleftheria was from Stavroupoli

PAOK



Roberto Sosa (Argentine footballer)

Roberto Carlos Sosa (born 24 January 1975) is an Argentine former professional football striker turned coach.

Sosa was born in Santa Rosa, La Pampa. He started playing for Gimnasia y Esgrima La Plata in 1995. His best season with Gimnasia was in 1997–98 when he scored 28 goals in 38 matches. He was the top scorer in the 1998 Argentine Torneo Clausura, with 17 goals. After this excellent season, Sosa was transferred to Italy, to play with Serie A team Udinese.

He spent almost 10 years playing in Europe, playing with Serie A and Serie B teams Ascoli and Messina. He also spent four years with S.S.C. Napoli between 2004 and 2008, helping Napoli to return to the Italian Serie A. Then, he returned to Argentina to play for his first club Gimnasia y Esgrima de La Plata, which was struggling to keep its Primera A standing. Even though Sosa had a mediocre 2008/09 season, scoring only 2 goals in 24 games, he helped Gimnasia to avoid relegation.

Perhaps, his most memorable moment during his last return to Gimnasia happened on 5 April 2009. Sosa was unable to deliver on his promise to score twice against derby rivals Estudiantes, and became upset with those who criticized him for running his mouth, citing his ten-year playing spell in Europe.

In June 2010, Sosa signed in for Sanremese. In December 2010, he received death threats to leave the club by the 'Ndrangheta. He was out of the team by February. He finished the season playing for FC Rapperswil-Jona in Switzerland Third Division. At the end of the season, he retired.

Roberto Sosa was not a technical player, but he was an effective scorer. Overall, he scored 112 goals in 385 games.

After his retirement, Sosa has been working as a color commentator for Sky Italia and took his coaching badges. On 1 August 2014, he was appointed head coach of recently relegated Serie D club Sorrento. He left Sorrento by mutual consent on 5 January 2015.

He then served as head coach of Eccellenza Campania club Savoia throughout the 2015–16 season, ended in third place.

In September 2016, Sosa accepted an offer from newly promoted Serie D club Vultur Rionero.

Sosa's son Tomás, born 2001 in Udine, followed on his father's footsteps and he plays for Serie C club Pontedera as of February 2023.




Lowthorpe railway station

Lowthorpe railway station was a minor railway station serving the village of Lowthorpe on the Yorkshire Coast Line from to Hull and was opened on 6 October 1846 by the York and North Midland Railway. It closed on 5 January 1970.


Autovía A-48

The Autovía A-48 is a highway in Andalucia, Spain.

It follows the route of the N-340 around the southern tip of Spain. It is currently under construction, and upon completion it will serve as a continuation of the Autovía A-7 from Algeciras, linking it to Cadiz (junction with Autopista AP-4 towards Madrid, Seville, and the border with Portugal).

The highway replaced the historic trail "La Trocha".


Burton Agnes railway station

Burton Agnes railway station was a minor railway station serving the village of Burton Agnes on the Yorkshire Coast Line from to Hull and was opened on 6 October 1846 by the York and North Midland Railway. It was closed to passengers on 5 January 1970, although the disused platforms, derelict signal box and station buildings all remain, the latter still used as a private house.

At 06:42 on 17 September 1947, an army lorry conveying German Prisoners of war (POWs) crashed through the level crossing gates and collided with the 05:55 passenger train from Hull to Bridlington. Two British NCOs and seven POWs were killed, with three more dying later in hospital. The accident was caused by an unauthorised driver losing control on the approach to the station level crossing and possibly the ability to press both the accelerator and brake at the same time on the Bedford three-ton truck used. The report concludes:There can be no criticism of the railway arrangements at the crossing and it is clear that this accident, which might well have had even more serious consequences, if, for instance, the couplings of the train had not held and the derailment of the leading van had been followed by that of the coaches behind it, was due to careless handling of the lorry by an unauthorised and apparently inexperienced driver, Staff Sgt. Wadey.


Carnaby railway station

Carnaby railway station was a minor railway station serving the village of Carnaby on the Yorkshire Coast Line from to Hull, England. The station probably opened on 7 October 1846 when the York and North Midland Railway opened the line between Hull and Bridlington.

The station was host to a camping coach from 1935 to 1939.

The station closed on 5 January 1970.

The western end of the station was to be the junction of the Bridlington and North Frodingham Light Railway. The act of parliament for this line was granted in 1898 under the Light Railways Act 1896. The line was to have been standard gauge and worked by steam locomotives throughout. The line was never built.

As of 2018, the two platforms are still visible and can be seen from the main road next to the station, however overgrown.

Chandragiri (disambiguation)

Chandragiri may refer to places in:




HMS Start Bay (K604)

HMS "Start Bay" (K604/F604) was a Bay-class anti-aircraft frigate of the British Royal Navy, named for Start Bay in Devon. In commission from 1945 to 1946 in the Mediterranean Fleet, she spent most of her career in the Reserve Fleet.

The ship was originally ordered from Harland and Wolff, Belfast, on 6 March 1943 as the "Loch Arklet". However the contract was then changed, and the ship was laid down to a revised design as a Bay-class anti-aircraft frigate on 8 February 1944, launched on 15 February 1945, and not completed until 6 September 1945, after the end of hostilities.

"Start Bay" was originally assigned to the British Pacific Fleet, but after the surrender of Japan in August this was changed and she was allocated for service in the 66th Escort Division in the Mediterranean Fleet. After trials, testing, and working-up at Tobermory she sailed for Malta in November 1945, to carry out patrol duties in western Mediterranean, with visits to Gibraltar and Catania. She also deployed as guardship at Trieste, and carried out patrols in eastern Mediterranean to intercept ships taking illegal Jewish immigrants to Palestine in mid-1946.

In September 1946 she joined the newly formed 5th Frigate Flotilla based in Malta, and continued her patrols in the Eastern Mediterranean. She returned to the UK in October, was decommissioned in November, and put into Reserve at Portsmouth. She was refitted at Southampton in 1948, and her pennant number was changed to F604 in May 1948.

The ship attended the Coronation Review at Spithead in 1953 as part of the Reserve Fleet. She then carried out visits to ports on the south coast of England and in Wales before returning to Portsmouth.

Placed on the Disposal List in 1958, she was sold to the British Iron & Steel Corporation (BISCO) for breaking-up by J. Cashmore, and arrived in tow at the breaker's yard in Newport, Wales, on 22 July 1958.

 

Keith Mason (rugby league)

Keith Mason (born ) is a former rugby league footballer who played in the 2000s and 2010s. 

He played as a for Wakefield Trinity Wildcats, St Helens (Heritage No. 1128), Castleford Tigers (Heritage No. 853) (two spells) and Huddersfield Giants, as well as Brisbane Norths, and for Melbourne Storm in the National Rugby League (NRL). Mason played in three Challenge Cup finals, winning one in 2004 for St Helens against Wigan in Cardiff. He also won the League Leaders' Shield with St Helens in 2005. 

He won two caps for Wales at international level, and also played for Great Britain and England Under-21s. 

Mason was born Dewsbury, West Yorkshire, England.

In a 14-year career Mason played for four Super League teams; the Wakefield Trinity Wildcats, St Helens, the Castleford Tigers, and the Huddersfield Giants, as well as playing in the NRL for two seasons with Melbourne Storm.

In 2009 Mason won the 'Coaches' Player of The Year', the 'Directors' Player of The Year', and the Huddersfield Giants 'Man of Steel Award', he also appeared in a Challenge Cup final in the same year at the Wembley Stadium against Warrington Wolves, a boyhood dream come true for Mason, also appearing in 2 more Challenge Cup finals in 2004 which he won for St Helens against Wigan at the Millennium Stadium playing .

Keith Mason won caps for Wales while at Wakefield Trinity Wildcats in 2001 against England, and while at Melbourne Storm in 2002 against New Zealand in 2002. He also represented England at under-21 level on the tour to South Africa in 2001.

At the end of the 2013 season, Mason retired from playing rugby league in order to pursue a career as an actor. He appeared in the film "Skin Traffik" alongside Mickey Rourke and Daryl Hannah, and has subsequently appeared in the TV series "Peaky Blinders".

In 2021 he starred in, and produced, his first feature film, "Imperative."


Sun Management Center

Sun Management Center is a computer system monitoring product from Sun Microsystems.

Sun Management Center (Sun MC) is a systems management and monitoring tool for enterprise-wide management of Sun servers, desktops and storage devices. It provides in-depth monitoring of Sun hardware and the most comprehensive set of metrics for the Solaris OS, including support for Solaris Containers.

Sun MC was originally named Sun Enterprise SyMON, and was co-developed by Halcyon Monitoring Solutions. Clients are available for Solaris on SPARC and x86 systems as well as Linux on x86 systems.

Native integration support is available for IBM Tivoli and CA Unicenter; Halcyon provides integrations for HP Openview, Micromuse Netcool and other frameworks.


Ghanaians in the United Kingdom

Ghanaians in the United Kingdom (also British Ghanaians) encompass both Ghana-born immigrants and their descendants living in the United Kingdom. Immigration to the UK accelerated following the independence of Ghana from the British Empire in 1957, with most British Ghanaians having migrated to the UK between the 1960s to the 1980s owing to poor economic conditions at home.

The 2011 census recorded 95,666 people born in Ghana living in the UK, up from 56,112 in 2001. The most recent estimate by the Office for National Statistics in 2019 estimated that the Ghanaian-born population accounted for 114,000 residents of the UK. None of these figures account for British-born individuals of Ghanaian descent.

Although modern Ghana gained independence from the United Kingdom in 1957 and was the first African country to do so, small numbers of people from that region have been arriving and living in Britain since at least the mid-16th century. At that time, there were many Africans living and working in London, some of whom were based at the royal court. Even Shakespeare, it is rumoured, sought the company of an African lady, Lucy Morgan.

In 1555, John Lok, a London merchant and Alderman, brought five Africans from the town of Shama, in what is present-day Ghana, to London to be trained as interpreters in order to assist England's trade with the western coast of Africa. From that time onwards, economic links were established between West Africa and England. The English were most concerned with acquiring gold from the region that came to be known as the Gold Coast. Pepper and other spices were also much in demand in Europe.

Besides a number of West Africans arriving in Britain during the 16th–18th centuries, there were Britons who went to the Gold Coast and married Ghanaian women. Some Ghanaians have Scottish and English ancestry, since a number of Scots and Englishmen married in local customary ceremonies and had children who became successful, such as Gold Coast's James Bannerman and Robert William Wallace Bruce. Most Scottish and English settlers left the Gold Coast after it won independence.

By the 1980s and early-1990s, 10 to 20 per cent of Ghanaians were living outside Ghana, with many migrating to other countries in Africa, the Middle East, the United States and Europe from the 1970s to the 1980s due to poor economic conditions at those times in Ghana.

Ghanaian British actors such as Freema Agyeman, Cynthia Addai-Robinson, Idris Elba and Peter Mensah have successfully crossed over into the international market and work in Hollywood. Adjoa Andoh is also noted for her work in theatre, and other actors of not include Paapa Essiedu, Hugh Quarshie and Peter Mensah.

Notable filmmakers include John Akomfrah, Amma Asante, Yaba Badoe and Kodwo Eshun.

Among those who have made a mark in the field of literature in the UK, as journalists, writers, and publishers, are such names as Cameron Duodu, Afua Hirsch, Derek Owusu, Ekow Eshun, Margaret Busby and Nii Ayikwei Parkes.

Ghanaian music and musicians have a strong influence on the overall Ghanaian British community as well as British music in general, from traditional Ghanaian music to Afrobeats, hip-hop and grime, the UK has produced many fine artists. The Ghana Music Awards UK began in 2002 with an aim to promote and award the best achieving Ghanaian British musicians. By the 1980s, the UK was experiencing a boom in African music as Ghanaians and others moved there, immediately they made their presence felt in the form of local gigs and carnivals, and to this day Ghanaians and other African groups prevail as the most successful ethnic groups in the UK R&B and rap scene.

Artists such as Stormzy, Dizzee Rascal and Fuse ODG are household names in the UK and have won numerous awards, Tinchy Stryder, Donae'o, Oxide & Neutrino, Abra Cadabra, Headie One, Sway DaSafo, Tempa T, Lethal Bizzle, Novelist and The Mitchell Brothers have also received numerous nominations and awards (including the MOBO Awards, Mercury Prize and BET Awards). Another notable Ghanaian British musician who chose to stray away from the typical hip-hop scene is Rhian Benson, who now lives in Los Angeles and is noted for being a Singer-songwriter, composer, instrumentalist and record producer who performs mainly jazz and soul music.

Zoe Adjonyoh, UK-born of Ghanaian heritage, is a writer and chef who founded the restaurant "Zoe's Ghana Kitchen" in London and is the author of a cookbook of the same title.

Miss Ghana UK is a beauty pageant that has been up and running since 1995, it aims to highlight Ghana's rich cultural heritage. Attendances per show attracted more than 3,000 by the year 2009.

In London, Ghana's Official Independence Celebration is a celebration of the African nation's independence. The event was founded by Abrantee Boateng also known as DJ Abrantee and business partners, Alordia and Edmond in 2000.

The GUBA Awards, formerly known as the "Ghana UK-Based Achievement Awards", were founded in 2009 by UK-based Ghanaian TV personality Dentaa to promote and celebrate the successes of British Ghanaians. Those honoured have included photographer James Barnor, who was presented with a "Lifetime Achievement" award in 2011.

At the time of the 1961 United Kingdom census, around 10,000 people born in Ghana were resident in the UK. The 2001 UK census recorded 56,112 Ghanaian-born people. The 2011 UK census recorded 93,312 Ghanaian-born residents in England, 534 in Wales, 1,658 in Scotland, and 162 in Northern Ireland. The Office for National Statistics estimates that the Ghanaian-born population of the UK was 114,000 in 2019.

Most Ghanaians in the UK live in Greater London. At the time of the 2011 census, the largest Ghanaian-born populations were found in the London boroughs of Lambeth, Southwark, Croydon, Newham, Barnet, Enfield, Hackney, Haringey, Lewisham, Waltham Forest, Brent and Barking and Dagenham, and in Milton Keynes, the county of West Midlands, and Greater Manchester.

Research published in 2005 showed that 63.70% of recent Ghanaian immigrants to the UK of working age were employed (compared to 73.49% for British-born people regardless of race or ethnic background). 17.19% of recent immigrants were low earners, paid less than £149.20 per week (compared to 21.08% for British-born people), and 3.13% were high earners, paid more than £750 per week (compared to 6.98% for British-born people). The percentages for settled immigrants were slightly different: 69.51% were employed, with 15.04% being low earners and 5.31% high earners.



Diana Pharaoh Francis

Diana Pharaoh Francis (born c. 1967) is an American fantasy author and professor, best known for her novels "Path of Fate" and "The Cipher".

Francis grew up on a cattle ranch in Northern California, near Lincoln. She attended Oakmont High School in Roseville, California, and in 1983, was Honored Queen of Bethel No. 336 in Job's Daughters International at Roseville.

Francis graduated with a BA from University of California, Davis in 1989, and then gained an MA from Iowa State University, both in creative writing, and a PhD from Ball State University in literature and literary theory. Her thesis focused on British women novelists (1858–65) and their portrayal of women. She then linked that to British post-colonial theory of controlling native populations in their colonies. She previously taught literature and writing at the University of Montana Western, and now teaches in the MFA program at Southern New Hampshire University. She lives in Oregon with her family.

Francis' first book, "Path of Fate", was favorably reviewed by Victoria Strauss. According to WorldCat, this is her most widely held book; it is held in 247 libraries.








Autovía A-60

The Autovía A-60 is a proposed highway in Central Spain between Valladolid and Leon. It will be an upgrade of the N-601.

Porkbelly Futures

Porkbelly Futures is a Canadian blues music group based in Toronto, Ontario. The latest lineup of the band included lead singer Paul Quarrington (1953-2010),; guitarist/harmonica player Stuart Laughton, bass player Chas Elliott (Toronto Symphony) and vocalist Rebecca Campbell.

Porkbelly Futures was formed in the late 1990s by writer and filmmaker Quarrington, Laughton, Elliott, and drummer-songwriter Martin Worthy. The band started out performing in bars and clubs in Toronto.

Their first album, "Way Past Midnight", was released by Opening Night Recordings and Judy Collins's Wildflower Records and spent six months on the American roots/blues charts. Richard Bell played keyboards until his death in 2007. Campbell joined the band in time to contribute to the band's second album, "Porkbelly Futures", which was released in April 2008 on Cordova Bay Records.

Quarrington was diagnosed with cancer while the band was working their third album. He continued to work on the recording of the album and to tour Canada with the band until shortly before his death in January, 2010. Worthy took over vocals some of the vocals in place of Quarrington, while guitarist Teddy Leonard also joined, and Chris Brown contributed on keyboards. The CD, "The Crooked Road", was released November 2010 on Cordova Bay Records.



Flamborough railway station

Flamborough railway station was located in the village of Marton, and was originally named after that location. However, there were several other railway stations also called Marton, so on 1 July 1884 the North Eastern Railway renamed it after the village of Flamborough several miles away. It was situated on the Yorkshire Coast Line from Scarborough to Hull and was opened on 20 October 1847 by the York and North Midland Railway.

The station was north of Hull, and south of railway station.

The station was opened by the York and North Midland Railway in October 1847. It was on the last section of the Hull to Scarborough line to be opened; Hull to Bridlington had been achieved in October 1846, and southwards from to was in use by the same month. The station was located immediately north of the gated level crossing that spanned the road from Marton, and had a G. T. Andrews designed building. The extra effort put into Flamborough station was due to the influence of the Yarburgh family of nearby Sewerby Hall, who used the station. It was located north of Hull and south of Seamer.

The station had a small goods yard which was the nearest loading point for fish landed at Flamborough. Previous to the opening of the railway, carts of fresh fish used to travel the south to Hull. Even so, the demand of transporting the fish the to the station from Flamborough Head, was seen as a bar to good business. The distance between the station and coast was also seen as detrimental to the burgeoning tourist trade and in the 1890s, a branch was proposed by the residents, something which the North Eastern Railway considered, but refused to undertake.

The goods yard handled mostly fish (notably of herring in August 1889), corn and coal. The NER had a policy of making their stationmasters the agent for the handling of coal, which guaranteed traffic for the railway company. The station master at Flamborough in 1920 had an annual wage of £230, but the profit on the coal handled at the station was £95. Wagons loaded with fish were allowed to be attached to Hull-bound trains via gravity whilst the Hull service was waiting in the southbound platform.

Cattle and stone were also handled at the station; the chalk cutting just to the north of the station was opened out into a quarry in 1876. During the First World War, the line was singled as an economy measure. Double track was restored in 1923, though three years after the station closed (1973), British Rail singled the section between and Filey. The station was host to a LNER camping coach from 1935 to 1939.

The station closed to goods traffic in August 1964, and closed completely on 5 January 1970.

In 1976, the station was given Grade II listed building status.


McCaffrey

McCaffrey, sometimes spelled Caffrey or McCaffery, is an Irish surname. It is found mostly in the Counties Fermanagh, Monaghan, Cavan and Tyrone in the north west of Ireland. Ballymccaffrey is a townland outside Tempo in county Fermanagh. The surname is an Anglicised form of the Gaelic names "Mac Gafraidh", "Mac Gofraidh", which mean "son of "Gafraidh"", "son of "Gofraidh"". The Gaelic names are forms of the Old Norse "Guðfróðr". Notable people with the surname include:



. Member Virginia House of Burgesses. Great Grandfather of Capt. John Caffery.



HMS Tremadoc Bay (K605)

HMS "Tremadoc Bay" was a Bay-class anti-aircraft frigate of the British Royal Navy, named for Tremadoc Bay in north Wales.

The ship was ordered from Harland and Wolff at Belfast on 2 May 1943 as a to be named "Loch Arnish". The contract was changed in 1944, and the Bay-class ship was laid down on 31 August 1944, launched on 29 March 1945, and completed on 11 October 1945 after the end of hostilities.

After sea trials and weapons testing, "Tremadoc Bay" sailed on her first mission; towing a German Type XXI submarine to the Baltic Sea to be handed over to the Soviet Navy. The Tripartite Naval Agreement had agreed that all German U-boats would be sunk, apart from 30 that would be preserved and divided equally between the USSR, United Kingdom and United States for experimental and technical purposes. On 24 November, as part of "Operation Cabal", "Tremadoc Bay" left Lisahally, Northern Ireland, with in tow, in company with the frigate towing . Unfortunately bad weather in the North Sea, and problems with the towing gear forced them to divert to Rosyth. She eventually sailed again on 7 December, arriving at Libau, Latvia, on the 14th, before sailing to Plymouth.

In February 1946 she towed the Type XXIII submarine , in company with the tug "Bustler" towing the Type XXI submarine , from Lisahally to Cherbourg for hand-over to the French Navy in "Operation Thankful". Once again towing problems in heavy weather forced her to take shelter, this time in Dublin Bay.

In March "Tremadoc Bay" was deployed for training and emergency duties with Plymouth Local Flotilla. In September 1947 she was deployed with sister ship to the Mediterranean to escort the ships SS "Ocean Vigour", SS "Empire Rival" and SS "Runnymede Park" from Port-de-Bouc near Marseille to Gibraltar. These ships were transporting Jewish illegal immigrants, detained from while attempting to enter Palestine, back to Europe.

"Tremadoc Bay" then resumed Local Flotilla duties at Plymouth, remaining there until April 1951, when she was decommissioned and put into Reserve at Devonport. She remained at Devonport until 1953 when she was refitted at Falmouth, then towed to Gibraltar still in Reserve. In 1958 she was placed on the Disposal List, in 1959, prior to being sold to an Italian shipbreaker, "Tremadoc Bay" made an appearance in the Film "Silent Enemy", the film of "Lt. Lionel Buster Crabb RNVR" about the work defusing mines in Gibraltar during WW2, some time after this, she was taken under tow, and arrived at Genoa on 18 September for scrapping.


Lydford-on-Fosse

Lydford-on-Fosse is a village and civil parish in the Mendip district of Somerset, England. The parish includes the village of West Lydford and hamlet of East Lydford.

Lydford-on-Fosse straddles the Fosse Way, an ancient Roman road which linked the cities of Lincoln and Exeter. The village takes its name from two Saxon words, Lyd "torrent or noisy stream" and Ford "a passage crossing a river", and was established before the Norman Conquest. The villages of East and West Lydford are to the east and west of the ford which was where the Fosse Way crossed the river Brue.

A place where a river could be forded became a meeting place and a centre for trade and the granting of a charter for a fair and weekly market in the reign of Henry III (1216–1272) suggests that Lydford was already a place of some importance by that time. Fair Place, West Lydford, is where the fair was held.
The Manor of West Lydford was bequeathed by the 4th Earl of Derby in his will of 1593 to his second son the Hon William Stanley of Lathom, Lancashire. In 1594 William became the 6th Earl on the sudden death of his older brother Ferdinando the 5th Earl. At least 1800 years of recorded history of East and West Lydford, with entries for both in the Doomsday Book, have led to the Parish now known as Lydford on Fosse.

The parish of West Lydford was part of the hundred of Catsash, while East Lydford was in Somerton Hundred.

The modern A37 trunk road follows the route of the ancient Fosse Way through the parish.

The parish council has responsibility for local issues, including setting an annual precept (local rate) to cover the council's operating costs and producing annual accounts for public scrutiny. The parish council evaluates local planning applications and works with the local police, district council officers, and neighbourhood watch groups on matters of crime, security, and traffic. The parish council's role also includes initiating projects for the maintenance and repair of parish facilities, as well as consulting with the district council on the maintenance, repair, and improvement of highways, drainage, footpaths, public transport, and street cleaning. Conservation matters (including trees and listed buildings) and environmental issues are also the responsibility of the council.

The village falls within the Non-metropolitan district of Mendip, which was formed on 1 April 1974 under the Local Government Act 1972, having previously been part of Shepton Mallet Rural District, which is responsible for local planning and building control, local roads, council housing, environmental health, markets and fairs, refuse collection and recycling, cemeteries and crematoria, leisure services, parks, and tourism.

Somerset County Council is responsible for running the largest and most expensive local services such as education, social services, libraries, main roads, public transport, policing and fire services, trading standards, waste disposal and strategic planning.

It is also part of the Somerton and Frome county constituency represented in the House of Commons of the Parliament of the United Kingdom. It elects one Member of Parliament (MP) by the first past the post system of election.

Lydford on Fosse is served by a pub (the Cross Keys), petrol station (with shop) and a motorhome shop.

The Church of St Mary in East Lydford was built in 1866 by Benjamin Ferrey for the rector, J. J. Moss. It was last used for worship in 1987 and has been privately owned since 1993. The building is Grade II listed, but is disused and derelict, and is described in the Mendip District Council Buildings at Risk Register as being in 'poor' condition and possibly being structurally unsound.

Ferrey also built the Anglican parish Church of St Peter on the site of an earlier church in the village of West Lydford.

"William Stanley ,6th Earl of Derby"

Before I Forget

Before I Forget may refer to:

Laughter on the 23rd Floor

Laughter on the 23rd Floor is a 1993 play by Neil Simon. It focuses on the star and writers of a TV comedy-variety show in the 1950s, inspired by Simon's own early career experience as a junior writer (along with his brother Danny) for "Your Show of Shows" and "Caesar's Hour".

The play focuses on Sid Caesar-like Max Prince, the star of a weekly comedy-variety show circa 1953, and his staff, including Simon's alter-ego Lucas Brickman, who maintains a running commentary on the writing, fighting, and wacky antics which take place in the writers' room. Max has an ongoing battle with NBC executives, who fear his humor is too sophisticated for Middle America. The play is notable not only for its insider's look at the personalities and processes of television comedy writing, but also for its reflection of the political and social undercurrents of its time, in particular the rise of Joseph McCarthy, relationships between various (European) American ethnicities, and attitudes toward women.

"Laughter on the 23rd Floor" is a "roman à clef", with the characters in the play based on Neil Simon's co-writers on "Your Show of Shows". Lloyd Rose, in her "Washington Post" review, noted several of the real-life inspirations: the "Sid Caesar–inspired Max Prince", "hypochondriac Ira (played by Ron Orbach, inspired by Mel Brooks)" ... and "fussy Russian emigre Val (Mark Linn-Baker, inspired by Mel Tolkin) ... There is no character based on Woody Allen." Like many Rose attributes "dryly witty, sane Kenny (John Slattery) as inspired by Larry Gelbart and Carl Reiner when it was actually only Gelbart. The Ira Stone character is often misattributed to Allen, as the character in the play is a hypochondriac and Allen went on to use that affectation to great effect in his own comedy career. Simon actually was poking fun at Brooks. The real-life counterparts for each character are:

According to Simon, Sid Caesar's writers on the original "Your Show of Shows" (including Neil Simon and his older brother Danny Simon) held their script sessions at various times on the eleventh and the twelfth floors of an NBC-TV office building; Simon added those numbers together to put his fictional cast on the 23rd floor.

"Laughter on the 23rd Floor" opened on Broadway at the Richard Rodgers Theatre on November 22, 1993 and closed on August 27, 1994 after 320 performances and 24 previews. Directed by Jerry Zaks the cast featured Nathan Lane (Max), Ron Orbach (Ira), Randy Graff (Carol), Mark Linn-Baker (Val), Bitty Schram (Helen), J. K. Simmons (Brian), John Slattery (Kenny), and Lewis J. Stadlen (Milt). The play was first performed at Duke University. Stephen Mailer played Simon's young stand-in Lucas.

Paul Provenza was originally cast as Ira Stone, but was fired prior to opening.

A West End production headed by Gene Wilder opened on October 3, 1996, at the Queen's Theatre, where it ran for five months.

In April and May 2011, "Laughter on the 23rd Floor" received a newly conceived production in Philadelphia at 1812 Productions. This production took place in repertory with an original comedy, "Our Show of Shows", an homage to Sid Caesar's "Your Show of Shows". This was the first time "Laughter on the 23rd Floor" was presented with a companion piece. Neil Simon and Sid Caesar both gave their personal approval for this repertory production, and Eddy Friedfeld, co-author of Sid Caesar's autobiography, "Caesar's Hours", served as the dramaturg for both shows. Of the companion piece, "Our Show of Shows", Sid Caesar wrote, “To the superb cast and crew of 1812 Productions: Thank you for keeping my legacy alive.”

Lane repeated his role for the 2001 television movie written by Simon and directed by Richard Benjamin. Mark Evanier notes for the movie Simon added a new character, Harry Prince, based on Caesar's brother David and the teleplay "[uses] almost none of the play." The cast included Nathan Lane, Saul Rubinek, Victor Garber, Peri Gilpin, Mark Linn-Baker and Dan Castellaneta.

Count of Mértola

The title Count of Mértola (Portuguese: "Conde de Mértola") was granted to Frederick, 1st Duke of Schomberg by Afonso VI of Portugal, in 1663, as a reward for the Duke's service with the Portuguese Army.

The countship of Mértola was created with remainder to females, and since 1903 has been held by the Barons Fauconberg and Conyers.



Theogonia (album)

Theogonia (Greek for "Theogony") is the ninth full-length album by Greek extreme metal band Rotting Christ. It is their first release through Season of Mist, and the first to feature guitarist Giorgos Bokos (Nightfall) in the line-up.

The album includes a special edition DVD with 2005–2006 tour footage of the band in Italy, Russia, and Brazil; a "making of" documentary; and a music video for the song "Keravnos Kivernitos". A music video was also made for the song "Enuma Elish".

In 2007, "Theogonia" won the Metal Storm award for Best Black Metal Album.

All songs written by Sakis Tolis.


Chandragiri hill

Chandragiri is one of the two hills in Shravanabelagola in the Indian state of Karnataka, the other one being Vindhyagiri. It is also near Indragiri.
The recorded history surrounding the hill started in 300 BC when last "Shruthakevali" Bhadrabahu and Chandragupta Maurya visited the place in order to attain "kaivalya" (beatitude). The small hill derives its name of Chandra because Chandragupta was the first of the rishis who lived and performed penance there.

Kalbappu was the early name of the hill and it dominates the history of the town of Shravanabelagola between 3rd century BC and 12th century AD. The Jain traditions link the Mauryan Emperor Chandragupta and his teacher Bhadrabahu with this place. Of the total number of 106 memorials found at Shravanabelagola, 92 are located on the small hill. Of these, about 47 memorials of monks, 9 of nuns, and 5 of householders belong to the 7th and 8th century. This points out at the popularity of the custom, and of its extensive prevalence on the small hill.

The hill is situated about 3049 feet from mean sea level and 200 feet from the above the ground level and is situated in the northwest entrance of the town. A vast expanse of granite rock, scattered large and small boulders can be found en route to the peak.

A number of Jain basadis are found on the Hill. Some of the prominent ones are:


Apart from these a number of other monuments such as Bhadrabahu Cave, Marasimha's Manastambha, Mahanavami Mantapa, Bhadrabahu Inscriptions, Gangaraja Mantap and Nishidhi Mantaps can be found on Chandragiri.

An idol of Bharata, Bahubali's older brother, carved from soapstone can be found here. The statue is damaged below the thighs. It bears a striking resemblance to that of the Bahubali statue on the Vindhyagiri Hills.

Leopold Hofmann

Leopold Hofmann (also Ludwig Hoffman, Leopold Hoffman, Leopold Hoffmann; 14 August 1738 – 17 March 1793) was an Austrian composer of classical music.

Hofmann was the son of a highly educated civil servant, and at the age of seven became a chorister in the chapel of the Empress Elisabeth Christine, where his choral director and teacher was very likely František Tůma.

He was also a student later on of Georg Christoph Wagenseil and Giuseppe Trani (violin). His studies included at various points violin, harpsichord and composition.

In 1758 Hofmann secured what may have been his first appointment, as "musicus" at St. Michael's. He is known to have become choral director at St. Peter's Church in 1764 and, in 1766, kapellmeister. In 1769 he became a teacher to the royal family.

The position of Kapellmeister at the Cathedral of St. Stephan, a post he acquired in 1772, was among his next responsibilities. At this time he declined the directorship of the Imperial Chapel, but did apply there two years later in 1774, failing in his application. (Giuseppe Bonno became director of the Imperial Chapel instead, which had become open upon the death of Florian Leopold Gassmann.)

On 9 May 1791, at his own request, Mozart was appointed assistant-Kapellmeister to Hofmann, an unpaid position. At the time Hofmann was ill and Mozart anticipated becoming Kapellmeister upon Hofmann's death. However, Hofmann survived Mozart and kept his post as Cathedral Kapellmeister until he died.

The following list was drawn up by George Cook Kimball in his Ph.D. thesis.

The following list was drawn up by Allan Badley in his Ph.D. thesis.


His compositions have been catalogued by Allan Badley.



Lancaster Canal Tramroad

The Lancaster Canal Tramroad, also known as the Walton Summit Tramway or the Old Tram Road, was a British plateway, completed in 1803, to link the north and south ends of the Lancaster Canal across the Ribble valley (Barritt, 2000), pending completion of the canal. The canal link was never constructed.

The Lancaster Canal Company obtained an Act of Parliament, the Westmoreland Canals Act 1792 (32 Geo. 3. c. 101) in 1792 to construct a canal linking the towns of Kendal, Lancaster and Preston to the coalfields around Wigan. Coal was to be the chief traffic northwards and limestone southwards. Most of the canal was completed quickly, including the impressive aqueduct across the River Lune near Lancaster, but the part across the wide valley of the River Ribble remained to be built when the construction capital became exhausted.

The original plan foresaw an impressive stone aqueduct across the river and up to 32 locks to complete the route. As a temporary measure, the canal company constructed a tramroad to link the two halves and allow revenue traffic to start flowing. Construction took three years.

In 1794, the canal company engaged the services of William Cartwright, first to supervise the construction of the foundations for the Lune Aqueduct and later as Resident Engineer. John Rennie and William Jessop were the chief engineers to the company, but such was the demand for their services at this time of Canal Mania that they were much in demand elsewhere and Cartwright was solely responsible for the construction of the tramroad. His house in Preston is still extant and now forms the façade of a new shopping arcade.

The five-mile-long tramroad comprised a double-track plateway, except for a short section of single track through a tunnel under Fishergate in Preston, just south of the canal basin. The iron rails were 'L' shaped in section and were spiked to large limestone blocks. The wheels on the wagons were not flanged and it was the vertical section on the iron rails that kept the wheels on the track. The gauge was 4 foot 3 inches (1295 mm) between the verticals, which were on the inside of the track.

The wagons were pulled by horses, up to six at a time, and each wagon had a capacity of two tons. Originally there were three inclined planes where the wagons were hauled by stationary steam engines and a continuous chain.
The tramroad crossed the River Ribble on a timber trestle bridge. This structure outlived the tramroad by nearly one hundred years and still stands today albeit with heavy modifications (including the replacement of the wooden trestles with precast concrete ones in 1938 and the bridge deck with prestressed precast concrete in the mid sixties).

There were many accidents during the life of the tramroad, many involving the inclined planes with wagons running away.

As was common on early 'railway' systems, the wagons could be privately owned by the hauliers themselves (known locally as halers) who paid the company a toll to use the tramroad. The last haler to work the tramroad, John Procter, walked the 10-mile return journey twice a day for 32 years. It has been estimated that he walked or rode nearly during his career on the tramroad, and needed his clogs resoling once per week.

In 1813, estimates were prepared to replace the tramroad by a canal but the cost of £160,000 was too much for the company at the time. In 1831 the coming of the Preston and Wigan Railway sounded the death knell for the tramroad and proposals were made to convert it into a railway or amalgamate with the new railway company. This never happened and the tramroad became embroiled in the railway politics of the day.

In 1837 the new Bolton and Preston Railway leased the tramroad as a potential alternative route into Preston that avoided the rival North Union Railway. However, an agreement was concluded between the two parties before this proved necessary. Nevertheless, the lease arrangements were incorporated into the Bolton and Preston Railway’s Act of Parliament and the ownership of the tramroad passed to the railway. In 1844 the Bolton and Preston merged with the rival North Union Railway and shortly afterwards a branch line to the canal basin in Preston was built. This created a railhead for Wigan coal in Preston and removed the "raison d’être" of the tramroad.
Although the North Union wanted to close the tramroad immediately the canal company objected and they were forced to maintain it in an increasingly decrepit state until the Lancaster Canal Transfer Act of 1864 provided for the canal north of Preston to be leased in perpetuity to the railway and that south of Walton Summit to be leased to the Leeds and Liverpool Canal. The Act also allowed closure of the tramroad between Preston and Bamber Bridge.

In 1872, a land exchange between Preston Corporation and the railway saw the formation between Preston and Carr Wood pass into municipal ownership. This part, including the tramroad bridge over the River Ribble, was turned into a footpath, which remains to the present day.

A further Act in 1879 enabled the last part of the tramroad between Bamber Bridge and Walton Summit, to be closed. The north end of the canal was eventually sold to the London & North Western Railway and the Lancaster Canal Company was wound up at the beginning of 1886.

A well-preserved section of track from the south side of the McKenzie Inn on Station Road in Bamber Bridge was taken up and relaid in Worden Park in Leyland. Plates and stone sleepers are in South Ribble Museum in Leyland and the Harris Museum in Preston. The Harris Museum also has a model of a wagon and a wheel and axle of a wagon recovered from the bed of the River Ribble (Clegg "et al.", 2001). They had lain there since an accident involving the failure of the endless chain on the Avenham Incline, which caused a train of wagons to run away and plunge into the river at the bottom.

A later (>1885?) enlargement of the tunnel under Fishergate (Moss, 1968) continues in use for vehicle access to the Fishergate Shopping Centre car park – it formerly accessed the Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway's Butler Street goods yard (Biddle, 1989). Part of a support for a bridge over Garden Street remains. A path on the northern edge of Avenham Park follows the route of the tramway, down the Avenham Incline and over the River Ribble on the unique concrete trestle and spar bridge that still retains structural features of the original wooden structure. The footpath continues along the flood plain embankment to the Penwortham Incline.

In February 2019, the tram bridge was closed when an inspection revealed cracks putting the bridge at risk of collapse.




Sirius XM PGA Tour Radio

SiriusXM PGA Tour Radio (formerly PGA Tour Network) is a satellite radio channel on Sirius XM dedicated to coverage of golf—and in particular, the PGA Tour. The channel carries talk programming related to golf, including analysis, equipment reviews, education, as well as live hole-by-hole coverage of PGA Tour events, majors (in cooperation with terrestrial rightsholders such as Fox Sports Radio for the U.S. Open, and Westwood One for the PGA Championship), and other events. It is carried on XM channel 92, and Sirius channel 208.

The channel was established as part of a 2005 deal with its predecessor, XM Satellite Radio. The deal also included the rental and sale of XM2go receivers at PGA Tour events so that spectators could listen to the channel's coverage on-site. In 2018, Sirius XM extended its contract for PGA Tour radio rights through 2021.

In December 2013, it partnered with Golf Channel to feature audio simulcasts of its programming on the service, including its news programs "Morning Drive" and "Golf Central".


Roundabout dog

A roundabout dog () is a form of street installation that began in Sweden during the autumn of 2006 and continued for the rest of the year. There have been sporadic subsequent recurrences. The phenomenon consists of anonymous people placing homemade dog sculptures, typically made of wood (or sometimes plastic, metal or textile) in roundabouts. Occurrences were reported all over Sweden, and the phenomenon also spread to other countries, including Spain after it was mentioned on television. A Swedish tabloid paper placed one at Piccadilly Circus.

The roundabout dogs started appearing in Linköping, Östergötland, Sweden after a sculptured dog that was part of the official roundabout installation "Cirkulation II" () by sculptor Stina Opitz had been vandalised and later removed. The original dog had been made of concrete, and Opitz was planning to make a new version of it after the vandalism, when someone placed a homemade wooden dog on the roundabout. The dog was given a concrete dogbone by another anonymous artist. Soon after the media reported these developments, roundabout dogs started appearing in various places around the country.

In some smaller towns where there were no roundabouts, dog sculptures were placed in ordinary intersections with traffic islands.

In July 2007, artist Lars Vilks incited controversy by creating drawings for an art exhibition, which depicted Muhammed as a roundabout dog. The publication of these images in Swedish newspapers led to Vilks being subjected to threats of violence and put under police protection until his death in October 2021.

In 2009, similar dogs appeared on some of the roundabouts in Hemel Hempstead in England.


Descending limb of loop of Henle

Within the nephron of the kidney, the descending limb of loop of Henle is the portion of the renal tubule constituting the first part of the loop of Henle.

The permeability is as follows:

Also, the medullary interstitium is highly concentrated (because of the activity of the ascending limb), leading to a strong osmotic gradient from the descending limb to the medulla.

Because of these factors, the concentration of the urine increases dramatically in the descending limb. Osmolality can reach up to 1400 mOsmol/kg by the end of the descending limb.

The epithelium of the Thick segment is low simple cuboidal epithelium. The epithelium of the Thin segment is simple squamous.

They can be distinguished from the vasa recta by the absence of blood, and they can be distinguished from the thick ascending limb by the thickness of the epithelium.

Like the ascending limb, the descending limb has thick and thin portions. However, this distinction is not as important physiologically as in the ascending limb, so often the two are treated as one structure. The thick descending limb is less important than the thin descending limb, so often the terms "descending limb" and "thin descending limb" are used interchangeably.

Some sources simply refer to a "thin limb". In this context, the thin ascending limb of loop of Henle would be included.

Jonathan Brown

Jon or Jonathan Brown may refer to:






Nipigon River

The Nipigon River is located in Thunder Bay District in Northwestern Ontario, Canada. The river is about long (or when measured to the head of Ombabika River) and , and flows from Lake Nipigon to Nipigon Bay on Lake Superior at the community of Red Rock, dropping from an elevation of . It is the largest tributary of Lake Superior.

Since 1943, of the Ogoki River basin has been diverted to the headwaters of the Little Jackfish River, a tributary of Lake Nipigon. This diversion increases the size of the river's watershed by almost 60% to , and contributes an average of about to the Nipigon River. This increased flow has caused significant erosion and landslides along the river.

The Nipigon River was formerly known for the size and quantity of the brook trout that were to be found there. However, four dams built on the Nipigon led to a major decline in their population. The four dams are as follows:

Three hydroelectric dams on the Nipigon, Cameron Falls Dam, Alexander Dam, and Pine Portage Dam (all operated by Ontario Power Generation), provided 2,144 gigawatt-hours in 2000. This however effectively makes travel via boat between Lake Nipigon and Lake Superior impossible. The river is also a popular fishing destination.

46 fish species have been identified in the Nipigon River, including the rare sturgeon, cisco, and “coaster” brook trout.
In 1915, Dr Cook caught the world record for the largest brook trout, also known as speckled trout or coaster trout. Four years later, Prince Edward, Prince of Wales (later King Edward VIII and Duke of Windsor), spent time fishing on the Nipigon; a trout that he caught was mounted and today is displayed at the National Archives of Canada. The river also has a run of lake trout, rainbow trout and salmon during various times of the year. Fish that migrate up the river are able to get to the first dam which is located approximately from the mouth of the river system. The reservoir between the dams are good fishery, especially for large speckled trout and lake trout.

Fishing starts the first of May until freeze up at the end of November. The river can be accessed from boat, or fished by shore from various strategic locations.



Karl Storch

Karl Storch (21 August 1913 – 16 August 1992) was a German athlete, who mainly competed in the hammer throw. He was born in Fulda.

The member of SC Borussia Fulda competed for Germany in the 1952 Summer Olympics held in Helsinki, Finland in the hammer throw where he won the silver medal (invalid - 56,45m - 58,18m - 58,86m - 57,80m - 58,38m).

The coal dealer, father of four daughters, stood 1,84m, with a weight of 110 kg in competition.

Karl Storch was awarded the "Rudolf Harbig-Gedächtnispreis" in 1954.

Ascending limb of loop of Henle

Within the nephron of the kidney, the ascending limb of the loop of Henle is a segment of the heterogenous loop of Henle downstream of the descending limb, after the sharp bend of the loop. This part of the renal tubule is divided into a thin and thick ascending limb; the thick portion is also known as the distal straight tubule, in contrast with the distal convoluted tubule downstream.

The ascending limb of the loop of Henle is a direct continuation from the descending limb of loop of Henle, and one of the structures in the nephron of the kidney. The ascending limb has a thin and a thick segment. The ascending limb drains urine into the distal convoluted tubule.

The thick ascending limb is found in the medulla of the kidney, and the thick ascending limb can be divided into a part that is in the renal medulla and a part that is in the renal cortex. The ascending limb is much thicker than the descending limb.

At the junction of the thick ascending limb and the distal convoluted tubule are a subset of 15–25 cells known as the macula densa that are part of renal autoregulation through the mechanism of tubuloglomerular feedback.

As in the descending limb, the epithelium is simple squamous epithelium.

The thin ascending limb is impermeable to water; but is permeable to ions allowing for some sodium reabsorption. Na/K-ATPase is expressed at very low levels in this segment and thus this reabsorption is likely through passive diffusion. Salt moves out of the tubule and into the interstitium due to osmotic pressure created by the countercurrent system.

Functionally, the parts of the ascending limb in the medulla and cortex are very similar. 

The medullary ascending limb is largely impermeable to water. Sodium (Na), potassium (K) and chloride (Cl) ions are reabsorbed by active transport. The predominant mechanism of active transport in this segment is through the Na/K/Cl co-transporter NKCC2 as well as the sodium/hydrogen exchanger NHE3. In total this segment accounts for approximately 25–30% of total Na reabsorption along the nephron. This is of clinical importance since commonly used "loop diuretics" act by inhibiting the NKCC2. This active transport enables the kidney to establish an osmotic gradient that is essential to the kidneys ability to concentrate the urine past isotonicity.

K is passively transported along its concentration gradient through a K leak channel in the apical aspect of the cells, back into the lumen of the ascending limb. This K "leak" generates a positive electrochemical potential difference in the lumen. This drives more paracellular reabsorption of Na, as well as other cations such as magnesium (Mg) and importantly calcium Ca due to charge repulsion.

This is also the part of the tubule that generates Tamm–Horsfall protein. The function of this protein is not well understood, but is responsible for creating urinary casts.

The thick ascending limb symporter: Na-K-Cl cotransporter.



Timeshare (disambiguation)

A timeshare is a property with a particular form of shared ownership or use rights.

Timeshare, time-share, or time share may also refer to:


Meare

Meare is a village and civil parish in Somerset, England, north-west of Glastonbury on the Somerset Levels. The parish includes the village of Westhay.

Meare is a marshland village in typical Somerset "rhyne" country, standing on the site of pre-historic lake dwellings. The site of the Meare Lake Village is marked by groups of mounds. It has been occupied for thousands of years and some of the archaeological finds are now being reported.

A 14th-century fish house at Meare was once the abode of Glastonbury Abbey fishermen, who fished the, now drained, Meare Pool. The Manor Farmhouse was built at the same time as the summer residence of the Abbots from Glastonbury Abbey and is now a farmhouse. Along with its outbuildings the farmhouse has been designated as a Grade I listed building.

The parish was part of the hundred of Glaston Twelve Hides.

The parish council has responsibility for local issues, including setting an annual precept (local rate) to cover the council's operating costs and producing annual accounts for public scrutiny. The parish council evaluates local planning applications and works with the local police, district council officers, and neighbourhood watch groups on matters of crime, security, and traffic. The parish council's role also includes initiating projects for the maintenance and repair of parish facilities, as well as consulting with the district council on the maintenance, repair, and improvement of highways, drainage, footpaths, public transport, and street cleaning. Conservation matters (including trees and listed buildings) and environmental issues are also the responsibility of the council.

For local government purposes, the village falls within the Somerset Council unitary authority area, which was created on 1 April 2023. From 1894 to 31 March 1974, the village was part of Wells Rural District, and from 1 April 1974 to 31 March 2023, it fell within of the non-metropolitan district of Mendip.

Meare is part of the electoral ward of Moor, which also includes Walton to the south. At the 2011 Census, the population of the ward was 2,540. The ward itself falls within the county constituency of Wells, which has been represented in the House of Commons of the Parliament of the United Kingdom by James Heappey of the Conservative Party since 2015.

The parish Church of St Mary was formerly in the keeping of Glastonbury Abbey, and dates from 1323. It was built for Abbot Adam of Sodbury, and is a Grade I listed building.


Arkansas Highway 125

Highway 125 (AR 125, Ark. 125, and Hwy. 125) is a north–south state highway in Marion County, Arkansas. The route runs from Arkansas Highway 235 near Bruno north to the Missouri state line across Bull Shoals Lake on Arkansas' only ferry within the state highway system.

The route begins at Arkansas Highway 235 near Bruno and runs north past the historic Eros School Building to intersect US 62/US 412 in Pyatt. The routes become concurrent until George's Creek, near the George's Creek Cemetery.

Highway 125 winds north through farms and trees until forming a concurrency with Highway 14 near Lakeway. Highway 14 turns west north of Lakeway, with Highway 125 continuing north through Peel. North of Peel, Highway 125 passes the Highway 125 Use Area on Bull Shoals Lake, which features a boat ramp, public marina, playground, and campground. Highway 125 crosses the Lake on the Peel Ferry, a free ferry and the only ferry in the Arkansas state highway system. Now on the west side of the Lake, Highway 125 runs north to the Missouri state line, where it continues as Missouri Route 125.

The Peel Ferry (or Peel's Ferry) is free across Bull Shoals Lake, operating during daylight hours. A ferry has always crossed the water here, prior to the building of Bull Shoals Lake, a wooden craft crossed the White River, giving access to the Missouri side of the water. The boat runs year-round, only halted by dense fog or high wind. Without the ferry, travelers and locals would otherwise need to drive around the lake to gain access to Missouri.

Two new boats were purchased and dedicated in June 2011.

Mile markers reset at concurrencies. 


Everything in Moderation

Everything in Moderation was the only album by British-based rock trio Winterville, which was released on 14 November 2005 through Toxxic Records. It was released on CD and as a download via iTunes.

The album showcases the band's blend of 1960s blues-rock, 1990s grunge, and modern day rock. It included the band's first acoustic-only song, namely "Mr 3 Percent", which could be seen as the precursor to their later, all-acoustic EP, "The Absinthe Sessions". Three singles were released from the album. These were "Shotgun Smile", "Under My Skin" and "Breathe".

The album was listed at number 23 in "Classic Rock Magazine's" 50 Best Albums of 2005, which was a poll of critics.

All songs written by Peter Shoulder, except "Under My Skin", written by Peter Shoulder & Steve McEwan.

Luke Morley of the band Thunder is credited for "Additional production and special guidance", probably because of the friendship the two bands had after their tour together.

The version of "Breathe" included here, and later released as a single, is a completely different recording to that which appeared on the band's earlier limited release "The Fallout Sessions EP".

Like the singles, the album was released on the band's own imprint, Toxxic Records. This is typical of guitarist Peter Shoulder's attitude to the music industry, who has "absolutely no interest in playing the whole pop game". Shoulder also attacks the industry in the songs "Mr 3 Percent" and "Penny For The Fool".


Mac Guff

Mac Guff (also known as Mac Guff Ligne) is a French visual effects company based in Los Angeles, United States, Brussels, Belgium and Paris, France, where it is headquartered. Mac Guff specializes in the creation of computer graphics for commercials, music videos and feature films. 270 graphic designers, VFX supervisors and producers, computer engineers, and administrators are usually working on over 100 million files (for "Despicable Me"). In mid-2011, the company was split in two, and the animation department was acquired by Illumination Entertainment (Universal Studios). The new company was named Illumination Mac Guff (now known as Illumination Studios Paris) and has capital worth 3.2 million euro.

The company name Mac Guff was inspired by the term MacGuffin. The director and producer Alfred Hitchcock popularized both the term "MacGuffin" and the technique.



Vijay Raghav Rao

Pandit Vijay Raghav Rao (born Vijaya Raghava Rao; 3 November 1925 – 30 November 2011) was an Indian flutist, composer, choreographer, musicologist, poet and fiction writer.

He was awarded the Padma Shri by Government of India in 1970, and in 1982 the Sangeet Natak Akademi in Creative and Experimental music category, the highest for performing artist conferred by the Sangeet Natak Akademi, India's National Academy for Music, Dance and Drama.

He was born in Madras (now Chennai), India. He was married since 1947 to Smt. Lakshmi V. Rao. They had four children, nine grandchildren and one great-grandchild. He was an Indian-American, a permanent resident of the United States.


Joseph Forshaw (athlete)

Joseph Forshaw, Jr. (May 13, 1881 – November 26, 1964) was an American athlete who competed mainly in the Marathon.

Forshaw ran the Marathon in three Olympic Games. He competed for the United States in the 1908 Summer Olympics held in London, Great Britain where he won the bronze medal in the Marathon. At the 1906 Intercalated Games in Athens he finished in twelfth place, and at the 1912 Summer Olympics in Stockholm he was 10th in the event.

On May 6, 1905, Forshaw beat Sidney Hatch and Felix Carvajol to win the Missouri Athletic Club's All-Western Marathon in a time of 3:15:58. Three years later on May 2, 1908, he finished second to Hatch in the same race in 2:30:01, his best time in the event. In both races, Forshaw competed for the Missouri Athletic Club.

In March, 1912, Forshaw was one of "twenty of the best distance runners in the middle west" scheduled to participate in a 20-mile indoor marathon at Riverview Rink in Chicago, Illinois. He also finished second to Joseph Erxleben in the 25-mile Missouri Athletic Club marathon in St. Louis on May 4, 1912 to earn a spot on the United States Olympic Team.

Forshaw entered in the Missouri Athletic Club's All-Western Marathon six times between 1905 and 1912. In addition to winning the inaugural event he came in second three times and fourth twice. He reportedly finished every race in which he ever ran. After retiring from distance running he twice served as President of the Western Amateur Athletic Union.

17 years after his death his grandson would marry the daughter of Phyllis Schlafly.

Boethos

Boethos may refer to:


Davide Di Gennaro

Davide Di Gennaro (born 16 June 1988) is an Italian professional footballer who plays as an attacking midfielder for Serie D club San Marzano.

Di Gennaro is a product of Milan's youth system, which he joined from amateur side Cimiano in 1995. There he went on to become the captain of their under-20 squad. On 19 May 2007, he made his first team debut, aged 18, in a Serie A game against Udinese. For the 2007–08 season the young midfielder was loaned out to Bologna in Serie B, where he scored two goal in 22 appearances, playing an important part in the club's promotion to Serie A.

In August 2008, Di Gennaro was transferred to Genoa in a co-ownership deal, in compensation for Marco Borriello, who was brought back to Milan. Nevertheless, after only making one league appearance, he was loaned out to Reggina, just before the transfers deadline. Oddly enough, he scored his only goal of the season – his first in Serie A – in the game against Milan at the San Siro, on 7 February 2009. The "Rossoneri" later equalised and the match finished 1–1.

On 27 June 2009, Milan reclaimed Di Gennaro from the co-ownership with Genoa via a blind auction, after the two teams had failed to reach an agreement, for €1.25 million. Di Gennaro signed a new 3-year deal. However, during a pre-season friendly he suffered a broken metatarsal, which forced him out for the first months of the season. After recovering from the injury, he struggled to return to form, playing only two Coppa Italia games. To get some more playing time, on 29 January 2010 he was loaned to Livorno for the remainder of the season.

For the 2010–11 season, Di Gennaro has been sent on loan to Serie B club Calcio Padova. Like in the previous year, he suffered an injury during the pre-season, which would keep him out for one month. Following his recover, Di Gennaro made his official debut for the club in an away league game against Modena, which Padova lost 1–0, on 5 September 2010. Three weeks later, on 25 September, he also scored his first goal for the team, in a 2–0 win against Albinoleffe at home. He went on to score 5 goals in 17 league appearances throughout the season. ca. January 2011 Di Gennaro also added one more year to his Milan contract, to last until 30 June 2013.

Di Gennaro spent the 2011–12 season on another loan spell to Serie B club Modena, where he scored 10 goals in 32 league appearances.

On 14 July 2012, Di Gennaro signed a permanent deal to join newly promoted Serie B team Spezia for €500,000. During the season, he made 34 appearances in Seria B, scoring 9 goals (5 of which were penalties). He also made one appearance in Coppa Italia, scoring a goal in a 1–2 loss against Cagliari.

On 1 July 2013, he moved to Palermo for free, which Spezia write-down his residual contract value fully, Di Gennaro signed a three-year contract for Palermo.

On 8 September 2014, di Gennaro was signed by Vicenza, on loan.

After a great season with the Vicenza, in the summer of 2015 he moved to Cagliari, demoted to Serie B.

On 21 July 2017, Di Gennaro was signed by Lazio on a three-year contract.

On 17 August 2018, Di Gennaro joined Salernitana in Serie B on a season-long loan from Lazio.

On 24 July 2019, he joined Juve Stabia on loan.

On 31 January 2021, he moved to Serie C club Cesena.

On 2 September 2021, he signed with Bari on a one-year contract with an option to renew. On 31 January 2022, his contract was terminated by mutual consent.

On 8 February 2022, Di Gennaro signed with Taranto until the end of the season.

On 13 October 2022, after having been released by Taranto, Di Gennaro joined Serie D club Portici.

Di Gennaro has played at various level of youth international football, collecting a total of 15 appearances, for the Italy U-16 to U-20 sides.

He made his debut with Italy U-21 on 18 November 2008, in a friendly against Germany.

"As of 20 May 2018"


A.C. Milan
Lazio


NP-40

NP-40 (also known as Tergitol-type NP-40 and nonyl phenoxypolyethoxylethanol) is a commercially available detergent with CAS Registry Number 9016-45-9. NP-40 is an ethoxylated nonylphenol for non-ionic surfactants and can act as emulsifier and demulsifier agent.

NP-40 is often used to break open all membranes within a cell, including the nuclear membrane . To break only the cytoplasmic membrane, other detergents such as digitonin can be used. 

NP-40 has applications in paper and textile processing, in paints and coatings, and in agrochemical manufacturing.

Care should be taken to avoid confusing NP-40 with Nonidet P-40 (octyl phenoxypolyethoxylethanol) which is currently out of production. Nonidet P-40 ("Non-Ionic Detergent") was originally manufactured and trademarked by the Shell Chemical Company, but was phased out of production in the early 2000s. Confusingly, biochemical protocols published between the 1960s and 2000s refer to Shell's Nonidet P-40 as NP-40. Shell's original Nonidet P-40 had a hydrophilic-lipophilic balance (HLB) value of 13.5, as opposed to 12.9 for the currently available IGEPAL CA-630, indicating that the currently available compound is more potent than the compound used in older publications. Indeed, according to a 2017 report, an additional dilution factor of 10 was required for the currently available NP-40 ("Nonidet P-40 substitutes") to match the activity of the previously available, and now discontinued, Shell's Nonidet P-40.


HMS Veryan Bay (K651)

HMS "Veryan Bay" was a anti-aircraft frigate of the British Royal Navy, named after Veryan Bay on the south coast of Cornwall. In commission from 1945 until 1957, she saw service in the Pacific, Mediterranean, and Home Fleets, in the West Indies and in the South Atlantic.

The ship was ordered from Charles Hill & Sons of Bristol on 6 March 1943 as Admiralty Job No. J600, and laid down on 8 June 1944 as the "Loch Swannay". However the contract was then changed, and the ship was completed to a revised design as a Bay-class anti-aircraft frigate. "Veryan Bay" was launched on 11 November 1944, and completed on 13 May 1945.

"Veryan Bay" was commissioned for service on 15 May 1945 under the command of Lieutenant-Commander J.S. Brownrigg. After completing her sea trials, training, and weapons tests she sailed to join to the Escort Group of the British Pacific Fleet. She was at Malta engaged in exercises when the war ended in August, not joining the fleet at Singapore until October. She remained with the Escort Group, based at Hong Kong, into 1946, carrying out patrols in the South China Sea. She visited U.S. Naval Base Subic Bay in the Philippines in March, and travelled to HM Dockyard, Cockatoo Island, Sydney, for a refit in May and June, before visiting the Solomon Islands in August, and in November was deployed off Batavia to support military operations against nationalists opposed to the resumption of Dutch colonial rule. In early 1947 she was deployed with the Flotilla for local patrols and exercises with the Fleet, and made a visit to Japan in March.

On 21 March 1947 "Veryan Bay" was transferred to the Mediterranean Fleet, sailing via the Indian Ocean and Suez Canal, and arriving on 2 May to join the 2nd Escort Flotilla. A new Commanding Officer, Captain R.S. Wellby, was appointed three days later. The ship was then deployed to prevent the illegal immigration of European Jews to Palestine. She sailed to Leghorn on the west coast of Italy to watch for the ship SS "President Warfield", now renamed , then sailed to Piraeus in June, before returning to Malta. After a refit at Gibraltar Dockyard in July, she returned to the Palestine Patrol, based at Haifa, in August. In November she sailed to Trieste to act as guardship until January 1948.

After local exercises at Malta in February, and then a refit (at which time her pennant number was changed to F651), "Veryan Bay" was deployed to patrol in the Red Sea in April and May, before returning to the Palestine Patrol, based at Cyprus, then to Trieste for further guardship duty. On 13 December Captain H.C.N. Rolfe assumed command of the ship, and early in the new year a complement of Boy ratings joined for training. After guardship duty at Aqaba in January and February 1949, she returned to Malta for exercises and a new Commanding Officer, Captain G.T. Lambert, in April. "Veryan Bay" remained at Malta taking part in Flotilla and Fleet exercises and visits, with further spells of duty as guardship at Trieste and Aqaba, until April 1950.

Under her new commanding officer, Commander J.F.R. Crews, she was transferred on loan with the Royal New Zealand Navy, along with sister ship , exchanging with the frigates and . She arrived at Auckland on 3 July to join the 11th Frigate Flotilla. There she made visits to various ports and carried out exercises with other RNZN ships, eventually leaving on 28 October, and arriving back at Malta on 4 January 1951.

After a refit in February and March at HM Dockyard, Malta, the ship was transferred to the 7th Frigate Flotilla, Home Fleet, arriving at Plymouth on 21 April. After Fleet exercises at Invergordon, she took part in convoy defence exercises in the English Channel, and visited Cherbourg, Penzance and Swanage. In September the ship called at Holyhead while en route to Derry for joint anti-submarine exercises in the North West Approaches. In December, after her annual inspection, she sailed to Plymouth to refit.

In January 1952 command was assumed by Commander R. Horncastle. She then sailed to Bermuda, arriving on 18 February, to join the West Indies Squadron. She was promptly despatched to the Falkland Islands to act as guardship at Port Stanley, arriving in early April. In June she left the islands, taking a cargo of penguins, destined for Vancouver Zoo, to Montevideo for air transport to Canada. She spent August–September deployed in the West Indies for Flotilla duties and exercises, and in October returned to the UK and was paid-off to refit.

"Veryan Bay" was recommissioned on 5 March 1953 for service in the 7th Frigate Squadron in the West Indies, under the command of Captain R.G.W. Hare. She arrived at Bermuda on 30 April, and in June was at Kingston, Jamaica for ceremonies for the Coronation of Queen Elizabeth II. The ship then visited Antigua, Barbados, Grenada, Puerto Cabello, Trinidad, Recife and Montevideo while en route to the Falklands for another tour as guardship, arriving on 22 July. After patrols around the islands, she left on 14 October, arriving at Kingston on 19 November to embark troops, and the next day was stationed for Air-Sea Rescue duty during the Royal Flight to Bermuda from the UK. At Bermuda in December she carried out ceremonial duties during the summit meeting between U.S. President Dwight D. Eisenhower, and the British and French Prime Ministers Winston Churchill and Joseph Laniel, to discuss relations with the Soviet Union following the death of Stalin and their development of a hydrogen bomb.

In January 1954, after exercises with off Nassau, "Veryan Bay" sailed to Palm Beach and Jacksonville, Florida to exchange calls with the civil authorities and the U.S. Navy. She returned to Bermuda on 4 February, then sailed to the UK, arriving at Plymouth on the 18th to be paid-off and then refitted at the Devonport Dockyard. In May the ship was recommissioned for service on West Indies under the command of Commander L.R.P. Lawford, and after trials and exercises, she sailed for Bermuda, arriving on 17 August.

In September she sailed once more to the Falklands for guardship duty, calling at Antigua, Trinidad, Georgetown in British Guiana, and Belém and Salvador in Brazil, and Rio de Janeiro, before arriving at Port Stanley on 23 October. "Veryan Bay" visited South Georgia, and also Tristan da Cunha and the South Shetland Islands, reinforcing Britain's territorial claims, which were disputed by both Argentina and Chile. On 24 February 1955 the Commander-in-Chief of the America and West Indies Station arrived at Port Stanley, flying his flag in the cruiser .

In March "Veryan Bay" returned to Bermuda, by way of the west coast of South America, calling at Punta Arenas, Puerto Montt, and Antofagasta in Chile, Mollendo in Peru, and La Libertad, Ecuador, before transiting the Panama Canal. From May to July she was deployed at Bermuda for exercises and visits programmes, and in August returned to the UK to refit at Devonport. The ship was recommissioned on 15 October for further service with 7th Frigate Squadron, under the command of Commander J. Bitmead. After trials and exercises in January and February 1956 "Veryan Bay" sailed from Devonport on 12 March, arriving at Bermuda on the 24th. On 4 April she sailed for the Falklands for guardship duty, routed down the west coast of South America, calling at Callao, Peru, and Antofagasta and Talcahuano, Chile, before transiting the Strait of Magellan, and arriving at Port Stanley on 17 May for local patrols and exercises.

In June she visited to South American Atlantic ports, and in July was deployed on the South Shetland Patrol. In early August she began a programme of visits, first calling at Puerto Belgrano, Argentina, then Mar del Plata, before sailing 190 miles up-river to Rosario. She called at Montevideo, Uruguay, before returning to Port Stanley on 8 September. After local patrols and exercises she sailed once again to Argentina in late September, calling at Río Gallegos and Puerto San Julián, returning to Port Stanley on 11 October to prepare to return to Bermuda. The ship left Stanley on 17 October and was at Santos, Brazil, when she received orders to transfer to the South Atlantic.

"Veryan Bay" arrived at Simon's Town, South Africa, on 19 November. After a series of visits to East African ports, the ship was nominated for transfer to the Reserve. On 19 January 1957 she sailed for the UK, calling at Lobito in Portuguese West Africa, Boma in the Belgian Congo, and sailed up the Congo River to Matadi. She then called at Libreville in French Equatorial Africa, São Tomé Island in the Gulf of Guinea, Lagos, Nigeria, Monrovia, Liberia, and Freetown, Sierra Leone. "Veryan Bay" arrived at Plymouth on 11 March, paid-off and was reduced to Reserve status.

She remained in the Reserve Fleet at Plymouth until 1959 when she was placed on the Disposal List. The ship was sold to BISCO for demolition by Metal Industries and arrived in tow at the breaker's yard in Charlestown near Rosyth on 1 July 1959.

 

Scarborough Londesborough Road railway station

Scarborough Londesborough Road railway station, originally called "Washbeck Excursion Station", was built as an excursion station to ease operating pressure at Scarborough Central in the holiday resort of Scarborough. It had a through and a bay platform. Excursion trains from all over the country could be routed into it rather than the main Central station to disembark their passengers before heading onwards to the branch line to be stabled in carriage sidings at Northstead/Gallows Close on the town's northern outskirts. Return services would follow the same route in the opposite direction to load up before departure.

It was opened on 8 June 1908 by the North Eastern Railway, but it was not advertised in public timetables until 1933, after it had been upgraded to a public station. It had one through platform which could handle a 14-carriage train, and a south-facing end platform which could handle 11-carriage trains. It was closed to passenger trains by British Railways on 25 August 1963, but remained in use for stabling coaching stock until its official closure on 4 July 1966.

The station building and the remains of the 14 coach long platform can still be seen from trains on the Yorkshire Coast Line and on the York to Scarborough section of the North TransPennine route on the west side of the tracks approaching . However, most of the platform has been demolished due to the construction of a new service depot for TransPennine Express trains.


Magical Mystery Tour (disambiguation)

Magical Mystery Tour is a 1967 LP and double EP by the Beatles.

Magical Mystery Tour may also refer to:


Sergei Trufanov

Sergei Michailovich Trufanov (Russian: Серге́й Миха́йлович Труфа́нов; formerly Hieromonk Iliodor or Hieromonk Heliodorus, ; October 19, 1880 – 28 January 1952) was a lapsed hieromonk, a charismatic preacher, an enfant terrible of the Russian Orthodox church, panslavist, and actor.

He is known primarily for his semi-autobiographical book about Rasputin. In this work he was supported by Maxim Gorky, since 1902 a friend of Lenin. Gorky hoped that Trufanov's story on Rasputin would discredit the Tsar's family and eventually contribute to the revolutionary propaganda.

Sergei Trufanov was born in stanitsa Mariinskaya and grew up in a small cottage near the Don river as the son of a local deacon. He was one of thirteen children; according to himself five died young of starvation. At the age of ten he went to school in Novocherkassk. At the age of 15 he entered the local theological seminary. Five years later he graduated and went to the capital to attend the St. Petersburg Theological Academy.

In 1903 he was ordained a hieromonk under the name Iliodor; two years later he graduated from the academy. There he met Father Gapon. Iliodor worked with the poor and expected that the clergy, not the revolutionaries could change the country. He was discovered by Theofan of Poltava and met Rasputin. Iliodor was appointed a lecturer at the seminary in Jaroslavl, but returned to the capital within a year. He was invited to the Peterhof Palace but scandalized his audience in a sermon, defending a land reform, which should be ordered by the Tsar. The Russian aristocrats and the Most Holy Synod were shocked with his behavior. The Synod decided to ban Iliodor, but Rasputin and the Tsar defended him. Instead Iliodor moved to Volhynia and lived in Pochayiv Lavra, the center of Panslavism. In a paper he attacked the revolutionaries and the Jews. According to himself Iliodor turned against the right-wing Union of the Russian People and the Black Hundreds movement, because they believed in the Tsar's autocracy.

He gained notoriety for attacking the prime-minister Pyotr Stolypin, industrialists, and local politicians. Then he was prohibited to preach by the Most Holy Synod. In 1908 he was rescued by Bishop Hermogen and appointed in Tsaritsyn, where the URP had founded its first branch and Iliodor gathered huge crowds. Iliodor created Holy Spirit Monastery in 1909. In the year after he was forbidden to preach any longer and exiled to Minsk. He was invited to Tsarskoye Selo to meet with the Tsarina; not in the Alexander Palace, but in the house of Anna Vyrubova. Iliodor was allowed to go back to Tsaritsyn on request of Rasputin. Stolypin demanded Iliodor had to be banned to Novosil, and the Tsar agreed, but the abbot escaped and went back to Tsaritsyn. 

In 1909 Iliodor and Grigori Rasputin visited his village by train. Iliodor began to wonder if Rasputin was a devil or a saint, but defended him against attacks in the press in 1910. In early 1911 Rasputin traveled to the Holy Land. On his way back he visited Tsaritsyn. Iliodor had been invited by the Tsar on 21 May, who asked him not to attack his ministers, but the revolutionaries and the Jews. Five days later Iliodor was promoted and became archimandrite. In December 1911 Hermogenes and Iliodor came into conflict with Rasputin, who liked to touch and kiss and had almost free access to the Imperial family. After having been beaten by Hermogen, in a monastery on Vasilyevsky Island, Rasputin complained to the Imperial couple.

Iliodor started a slander and blackmail campaign against Rasputin. Hinting that Alexandra and Rasputin were lovers, he showed Makarov a satchel of letters, one written by the Tsarina and four by her daughters. The given or stolen letters were handed to the Tsar.

In 1912, Iliodor renounced the Russian Orthodox Church, published an apology to Jews, and was defrocked. His monastery was closed; he was banned to the Frolishi monastery in the Volodarsky District, Nizhny Novgorod Oblast. He seems to have escaped to Peter Badmayev in St Petersburg.

In Summer 1914, after an attack on Rasputin by Khioniya Kozmishna Guseva, he fled all the way around the Gulf of Bothnia to Christiania (present-day Oslo), Norway with the help of Grand Duke Nicholas and Maxim Gorki. Rasputin believed Iliodor and Vladimir Dzhunkovsky had organized the attack. Guseva, a fanatically religious woman, had been his adherent in earlier years and denied Iliodor's participation, declaring that she attempted to kill Rasputin because he was spreading temptation among the innocent.

Most of Rasputin's enemies had by now disappeared. Stolypin was dead, Count Kokovtsov fallen from power, Theofan of Poltava exiled, Bishop Hermogen illegally banished and Iliodor in hiding.

Together with Alexei Khvostov he concocted a plan to kill Rasputin early 1916. Then Iliodor tried to bribe the Tsarina with publishing his book on Rasputin. In June 1916 he sailed to New York.
In the lost silent film "The Fall of the Romanoffs" (1917), Iliodor played himself. In the following he published his book. Casimir Pilenas, in his correspondence with the American Jewish Committee, claimed to be his "agent".
In 1918, he returned to Soviet Russia, offering his services to Lenin, and lived for several years in Tsaritsyn. In 1922 he took his family to NYC, where he became a Baptist and worked as a janitor in the Metropolitan Life Insurance Tower, and spent the remainder of his life in New York City.



HMS Whitesand Bay (K633)

HMS "Whitesand Bay" was a anti-aircraft frigate of the British Royal Navy, named for Whitesand Bay in Cornwall. In commission from 1945 to 1954, she served in the Pacific, Mediterranean, West Indies and Far East Fleets, seeing active service in the Korean War.

The ship was originally ordered from Harland and Wolff of Belfast on 11 May 1943 as the "Loch Lubnaig", and laid down on 8 February 1944 as Admiralty Job Number J3932. However the contract was changed on 5 October 1944, and the ship was completed to a revised design as a Bay-class anti-aircraft frigate, launched on 16 December 1944, and completed on 30 July 1945 with the pennant number K633.

"Whitesand Bay" was commissioned under the command of Lieutenant-Commander B.C. Longbottom for service with the Pacific Escort Force. After sea trials at Tobermory in August, and weapons testing at Portland in September, she sailed on 5 October in company with her sister ship . After exercises with ships of Mediterranean Fleet she sailed to Hong Kong, arriving in December 1945.

"Whitesand Bay" was initially deployed in the South China Sea for patrols and trade defence, including the escort of colliers from French Indochina to Hong Kong. In May 1946 she sailed to Auckland, New Zealand to refit, returning to Hong Kong in August to resume patrol and escort duties. In September she was deployed in the Formosa Strait, returning to Singapore in December. In February 1947 she was deployed at Hong Kong for trade defence and patrol duties, and took part in Fleet exercises.

In March 1947 "Whitesand Bay" was transferred to the Mediterranean, along with , and for attachment to the Palestine Patrol. The ships sailed via Singapore, Trincomalee and Aden, transited the Suez Canal, and arrived at Malta on 22 April to join the 5th Frigate Flotilla of the Mediterranean Fleet. There Lieutenant-Commander R.F.C. O'Sullivan took command of "Whitesand Bay" and prepared for her new duty which was to intercept, board and detain ships carrying illegal Jewish immigrants to Palestine. Boarding ramps and protective nettings were fitted, and special training for Boarding Parties was carried out. She remained on the Palestine Patrol until March 1948, while based at Haifa.

"Whitesand Bay" then returned to Malta, and in April was sent to Trieste for guardship duties. She was refitted at HM Dockyard, Malta, from May to June, at which time she received a new Commanding Officer, Lieutenant-Commander J.V. Brothers, and a change of pennant number to F633. In July she took part in the Mediterranean Fleet's Summer Cruise Programme, and carried the Olympic Torch from the Greek island of Corfu to Bari in Italy as part of its journey from Greece to London for the Olympic Games. In August she was at Argostoli for a Regatta, and also visited Bône and Tunis, while in September she was deployed with the Flotilla and visited Sfax and Sorrento.

"Whitesand Bay" was transferred to the West Indies Station, sailing from Malta on 20 September 1948, calling at Gibraltar, Madeira, and Horta in the Azores, before arriving at Bermuda on 14 October. There she carried out patrols, made visits to various island ports, and took part in fleet and joint exercises, along with ships of the Royal Canadian and United States Navy.

In July 1949 she transferred to the 4th Frigate Flotilla in the Far East Fleet, transiting the Panama Canal and calling at Pearl Harbor before joining the Flotilla at Hong Kong on 28 August. There she was deployed in patrols off Hong Kong and the Yangtze River, and took part in Flotilla and Fleet exercises. On 9 December she began a refit at the Hong Kong Dockyard, while her crew were accommodated at the naval barracks, .

"Whitesand Bay" resumed Flotilla duties on 18 January 1950, taking part in local exercises, and in joint RN/USN exercises in February and March at Subic Bay before sailing to Singapore, where she was deployed for patrols off east coast of Malaya in support of military operations against insurgents. After further exercises and patrols in the Formosa Strait "Whitesand Bay" refitted at Hong Kong in June–July, before being detached for service with the United Nations off Korea in August.

"Whitesand Bay" proceeded to Sasebo, Japan, to join the British U.N. Task Group. As part of elaborate deception operations intended to make the enemy believe that a major U.N. amphibious invasion actually planned for Incheon on 15 September 1950 would take place at Kunsan, she landed Royal Marine Commandos and United States Army special forces troops on the docks at Kunsan, with those forces making sure that the enemy noticed their visit. She then deployed with Task Group 90.7 for blockade duty under the command of Commander A. N. Rowell. She returned to Hong Kong in December 1950.

In February 1951 "Whitesand Bay" sailed to Singapore for support duties off the Malayan coast, supporting of anti-insurgent operations by carrying out inshore patrols and shore bombardments. In May she was deployed off Borneo for anti-piracy patrols, visiting Jesselton and Sandakan. In June she began her second UN operational tour, relieving the Canadian destroyer in Task Group 95.22 off Wonsan for patrol and bombardment duties. In July she transferred to the west coast and joined the British Task Group, carrying out survey work with other British and Commonwealth ships in the Han River.

After flotilla duties at Hong Kong from August to September, "Whitesand Bay" returned to Korea in October for her third operational tour. Deployed off the west coast she carried out bombardments in the Han River and supported military operations in the Haeju estuary until February 1952, when she returned to Hong Kong where Commander M.W.B. Craig-Waller took command. Her fourth Korean tour lasted from April to June 1952 where she was again deployed with the Allied Task Group off the west coast for blockade, patrol and support bombardment duties. In July she returned to Hong Kong, then sailed to Singapore in August to refit. After post-refit trials in November she was deployed at Singapore for Flotilla for exercises and local patrol duties, returning to operate on the west coast of Korea in February 1953. In May she returned to Hong Kong for maintenance and to attend Coronation Day ceremonies on 2 June. On 13 June she sailed for Sasebo to begin her sixth and final UN operational tour, sailing to the Haeju estuary to assist in the planned withdrawal of ROK troops. On the 25th the Armistice was declared.

In August she sailed to Kure where Commander M.E. Lashmore assumed command. She returned to Korea in early September to relieve the New Zealand frigate as guardship off Yong Pyong Do. She returned to Sasebo at the end of the month, then went on to Hong Kong before being deployed in the Formosa Straits Patrol until November. Between December and February 1954 she was refitted at Hong Kong Dockyard. Resuming Flotilla duties on 8 March, she again patrolled the Formosa Strait, and acted as guardship at Pang Yong Do into April. Returning to Singapore in May she took part in patrols, escort duty and exercises before sailing for the UK, arriving at Portsmouth on 24 August.

Under her new Commanding Officer, Commander D.N. Forbes, "Whitesand Bay" was prepared for Home Fleet service, however in December she was paid off and the ship's company was transferred to the frigate , then refitting at Chatham Dockyard. "Whitesand Bay" was placed in Category III Reserve and laid-up at Rosyth without preservation or maintenance. Late in 1955 she was placed on the Disposal List and sold to the British Iron & Steel Corporation (BISCO) for breaking-up at Charlestown near Rosyth by Metal Industries. The ship arrived in tow at the Forth on 13 February 1956.

 

