London General

London General Transport Services Limited, trading as Go-Ahead London, is a bus company operating in Greater London. The London General brand is a subsidiary of Go-Ahead London and operates services under contract to Transport for London. The company is named after the London General Omnibus Company, the principal operator of buses in London between 1855 and 1933.

The modern-day London General commenced operating on 1 April 1989 when London Buses was divided into 11 separate business units. Its original logo being an omnibus in reflection of the name's history. In 1994 the company was sold in a management buyout, before being sold to the Go-Ahead Group for £46 million in May 1996.

Having previously been based at London General House in Mitcham, Surrey, the company moved its offices to an address in Merton, adjacent to the Merton bus garage. In August 2008, Go-Ahead's London bus operations all adopted the Go-Ahead London trading name, although the individual company names are still applied beneath the logo.

In October 2009, Go-Ahead completed the purchase of East Thames Buses from Transport for London and incorporated it into London General. Although Transport for London's normal practice is to put routes out for tender, London General began a new five-year contract for all East Thames Buses routes without going through the tendering process.

In March 2012, First London's Northumberland Park garage was purchased. On 1 April 2014, the London operations of Metrobus depots in Croydon and Orpington were integrated into London General. On 25 April 2014, the Vehicle and Operator Services Agency formally increased London General's licence to accommodate the Metrobus buses. However, as at September 2014, the buses continued to carry Metrobus branding.

London General operates eight bus garages.

As of March 2024, Merton garage operates routes 57, 80 (hybrid allocation only), 131, 152, 157, 163, 164, 200, 219, 280, 413, 470, 485 and 493. This garage also runs the St. Bede's School private bus services 514 and 519, which run between the Caterham area and the school, on behalf of Surrey County Council.

The garage was modernised in 1960, and again in 1991 when a new roof was fitted and various stores and welfare areas were moved to provide a larger, unobstructed parking area, which had previously been long and narrow. Merton was also responsible for the maintenance of vehicles for route 200 in 1988/9 after the withdrawal of the Cityrama sightseeing company, whilst the route was operated from Sutton garage.

The garage has become Go-Ahead London's head office, following the sale of Raleigh House, Mitcham and the acquisition of the former pub (King's Head, Merton) next door.

As of January 2024, Northumberland Park garage operates routes 67, 76, 91, 106, 184, 212, 230, 232, 357, 379, 444, 456, 476, 657, N91 and W15.

Capital Citybus was bought out by the management team in late 1995, and subsequently by FirstGroup in 1998 becoming First Capital.

In March 2012, FirstGroup sold Northumberland Park garage, together with its route contracts, vehicles and staff to the Go-Ahead Group with it becoming part of London General. On 13 October 2017, route 257 was transferred to Stagecoach London. On 2 June 2018, route 491 was transferred to Metroline. On 9 June 2018, route 231 was transferred to Metroline and route 327 was transferred to Sullivan Buses.

As of July 2023, Putney garage operates routes 14, 22, 39, 74, 209, 265, 378, 430, 533, N22, N74 and N97.

With its ancestry going back to the horse bus days of the 1880s, Chelverton Road Garage was converted to a motor-bus garage in 1912. The garage is well hidden in a side road with a modest frontage, yet it has an allocation of 112. It has been modernised twice, firstly in 1935 and then again in 1985. The garage was well known for being allocated the pre-war RTs in 1940, which displaced the STLs. During the war the garage was under-utilised and was used to store de-licensed buses. Renamed Putney, in 1963, after the closure of Putney Bridge Garage (F), it started to receive both short and long wheelbase AEC Routemasters for its Central London routes. The Routemasters remained at the garage until July 2005, when both the 14 and 22 were converted to low floor one-person-operated buses.

As of March 2024, Croydon garage operates routes 119, 127, 264, 359, 403, 434, 439, 450, 463, 633, 663, S1 and SL7. Some drivers for route 157 are based at this garage.
The Beddington Lane depot was opened by Metrobus in December 2005 to house route 127 which had been surrendered early by Centra. Work was completed on the garage buildings in February 2006. This garage took over the London routes that ran from Godstone with the exception of the 146 and 246 which moved to Orpington.
In April 2014, Go-Ahead London took over this garage (and Orpington) from Metrobus, however the garages are still in the same place.

As of August 2020, Orpington garage operates routes 126, 138, 162, 208, 227, 233, 320, 352, 353, 354, 358, 654, 664, R1, R2, R3, R4, R5, R6, R7, R8, R9, R10 and R11.
A former farm, Green Street Green depot was for many years the only garage for all of Metrobus' London tendered routes since the award of route 61 in 1986. More recently routes have been operated from Godstone and in December 2005 a new depot was constructed in Croydon to cope with new tender awards. During mid-2005 major reconstruction started on the Green Street Green site to make improvements and provide an expansion. During these works, a temporary base was being used at Sevenoaks in next to the base of what was Southlands Travel.

As of November 2023, Stockwell garage operates routes 11, 44, 77, 87, 88, 118, 155, 170, 333, 337, 424, 690, G1, N11, N44, N87 and N155.

Opened in 1952 after nearly four years of planning and building with many materials short of supply and problems re-housing residents of the houses that stood on the site. Stockwell garage is a listed building, and when built was a masterpiece of architectural design incorporating a new roof structure that did not need supports which enabled for a unobstructed parking space. The offices and workshops are on the edges of the garage but do not take up any of the parking space. In the first few days of operation the garage ran just 11 buses on route 178 which had moved from Rye Lane (Peckham), but then gained more work from the next stage of the tram replacement program for which it had been designed, but it was still well short of capacity.

More work arrived in late 1953 and early 1954 when routes 77 and 77A (now 87) moved from Victoria garage due to recruitment problems, and the closure of Nunhead which increased the PVR to 110 buses. In the early 1970s the Round London Sightseeing Tours moved to Stockwell. In 1984 Stockwell was chosen to conduct comparative testing on route 170, consisting of MCW Metrobuses, Leyland Titans, Leyland Olympians, Dennis Dominators, and Volvo Ailsas. The allocation steadied at around 120 for many years, but has increased in the last few years, partially due to taking back full control of route 11 from Waterloo garage.

As of February 2023, Sutton garage operates routes 80 (electric allocation only), 93, 151, 154, 213 and S2.

Opened by the London General Omnibus Company in January 1924 at cost of £30,000, Sutton garage had a capacity for 100 buses. During its early years, less than half of the garage was put to use, holding only 40 buses by 1926. This would change somewhat by the extension of the Underground to Morden and major house-building projects in the area. Between 1945 and 1953, it had an allocation of exactly 100 relaxed-Utility Daimlers (classed as Ds) numbered from D182 - D281. By 1952, the garage had 128 buses allocated, achieved mainly by parking buses in surrounding streets. However, this would soon fall again, to 100 in 1966, 82 in 1976 and 62 in 1987. The garage passed to the reborn London General bus company in the run-up to privatisation in 1985. Sutton Garage also partly took control of route 200 at a yard in Colliers Wood (AA) in 1989, after Cityrama withdrew from their contract. Sutton was responsible for providing drivers for the service, whilst Merton garage were contracted to do the maintenance. By 1994, the garage allocation had grown to 85 buses and again to 92 in 2001.

As of July 2023, Waterloo garage operates routes 153 and 214. During the day the buses for route SL6 are stabled at this garage.

The garage opened in the early 1980s as a Red Arrow garage and in the 1990s had an allocation of AEC Routemasters for route 11. The garage only operates Monday to Friday due to its proximity to residential properties.

In June 2002. the Red Arrow Leyland Nationals were replaced by London's first fleet of Mercedes-Benz Citaro articulated buses. Because of the extra space required to stable these, the route 11 Routemasters were transferred to Stockwell garage. In September 2009 the articulated fleet was replaced by Mercedes-Benz O530 Citaros. On 29 April 2023, routes 507 and 521 were withdrawn.

London General previously had three bus garages - Mandela Way (MW), Waterside Way (PL) and Belvedere (BV). Mandela Way and Belvedere were included in the 2009 East Thames Buses purchase. In 2017, these bus garages were closed. Waterside Way (PL) garage was temporarily closed from 25 March 2023 to 28 June 2023, but re-opened only for the commercial bus fleet and the University of Roehampton bus fleet.



Colin Clive

Colin Glenn Clive (born Clive-Greig; 20 January 1900 – 25 June 1937) was a British stage and screen actor. His most memorable role was Henry Frankenstein, the creator of the monster, in the 1931 film "Frankenstein" and its 1935 sequel, "Bride of Frankenstein".

Clive was born in Saint-Malo, France, to an English colonel, Colin Philip Greig, and his wife, Caroline Margaret Lugard Clive. He attended Stonyhurst College and subsequently the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, where an injured knee disqualified him from military service and contributed to his becoming a stage actor. He was a member of the Hull Repertory Theatre Company for three years.

Clive created the role of Steve Baker, the white husband of racially mixed Julie LaVerne, in the first London production of "Show Boat"; the production featured Cedric Hardwicke and Paul Robeson. Clive first worked with James Whale in the Savoy Theatre production of "Journey's End" and subsequently joined the British community in Hollywood, repeating his stage role in the film version.

Clive's first screen role, in "Journey's End" (1930), was also directed by James Whale. Clive played the tormented alcoholic Captain Stanhope, a character that (much like Clive's other roles) mirrored his personal life.
He was an in-demand leading man for several major film actresses of the era, including Katharine Hepburn, Bette Davis, Corinne Griffith, and Jean Arthur. He starred as Edward Rochester in the 1934 adaptation of "Jane Eyre" opposite Virginia Bruce. He was a descendant of Robert Clive and appeared in a featured role in "Clive of India" (1935), a biopic of his ancestor.

Colin Clive, together with Leo G. Carroll, starred in a radio play titled "The Other Place." It was written by John L. Balderston for the radio program "The Fleischmann's Yeast Hour" hosted by Rudy Vallee"." It was aired on 14 November 1935.

Clive was married to Jeanne de Casalis in June 1929, though they were estranged for several years before his death.

Colin Clive suffered from severe chronic alcoholism and died from complications of tuberculosis in 1937 at age 37.

Clive's alcoholism was apparent to his co-stars, as he was often seen napping on set and sometimes was so intoxicated that he had to be held upright for over-the-shoulder shots. Clive was tormented by the medical threat of amputation of his long-damaged leg.

Forrest J Ackerman recalled visiting Clive's body: "I actually saw him in death, lying in a bed at a mortuary where it was possible for the public to view his body. He looked remarkably as he had when lying in bed in "The Bride of Frankenstein"." Over 300 mourners turned out. One of the pallbearers was Peter Lorre. His cenotaph is located at Chapel of the Pines Crematory.





California College of the Arts

The California College of the Arts (CCA) is a private art school in San Francisco, California. It was founded in Berkeley, California in 1907 and moved to a historic estate in Oakland, California in 1922. In 1996, it opened a second campus in San Francisco; in 2022, the Oakland campus was closed and merged into the San Francisco campus. CCA enrolls approximately 1,239 undergraduates and 380 graduate students.

CCA was founded in 1907 by Frederick Meyer in Berkeley as the School of the California Guild of Arts and Crafts during the height of the Arts and Crafts movement. The Arts and Crafts movement originated in Europe during the late 19th century as a response to the industrial aesthetics of the machine age. Followers of the movement advocated an integrated approach to art, design, and craft.

In 1908 the school was renamed California School of Arts and Crafts, and in 1936 it became the California College of Arts and Crafts (CCAC).

The college's Oakland campus location was acquired in 1922, when Meyer bought the four-acre James Treadwell estate at Broadway and College Avenue. Two of its buildings are on the National Register of Historic Places. After the San Francisco campus was opened, the Oakland campus continued to house the more traditional, craft based studios like the art glass, jewelry metal arts, printmaking, painting, sculpture and ceramic programs.

In 1940 a Master of Fine Arts program was established.

In the 1980s, the college began renting various locations in San Francisco, and in 1996 it opened a campus in the city's Design District, converting a former Greyhound maintenance building.

In 2003 the college changed its name to California College of the Arts.

In 2016 it was decided to close the Oakland campus and consolidate all activities at the San Francisco campus. The final day of classes at Oakland was May 6, 2022. The college said it will "redevelop the campus with community gathering spaces, affordable housing, office space for arts nonprofits and bike parking while preserving the campus’s cluster of historic buildings and trees."

Clifton Hall, one of the dormitories at the Oakland campus, was bought by the city of Oakland to use for public housing. Other parts of the Oakland campus remained unused in 2024, with plans to create a mixed-use development with hundreds of residential units.

CCA offers 22 undergraduate and 10 graduate majors. In 2021, CCA unveiled a BFA in Comics. CCA confers the bachelor of fine arts (BFA), bachelor of arts (BA), bachelor of architecture (BArch), master of fine arts (MFA), master of arts (MA), master of architecture (MArch), master of advanced architectural design (MAAD), masters of design (MDes) and master of business administration (MBA) degrees.

The CCA Wattis Institute for Contemporary Arts, located near the San Francisco campus in a facility on Kansas St., is a forum for contemporary culture. In 2013 the Wattis Institute recruited a new director, Anthony Huberman, formerly of Artist's Space in New York.

In the U.S. News & World Report rankings for 2020, CCA ranked #10 in the country for graduate fine arts programs, #4 in graphic design, and #6 in ceramics. PayScale lists CCA as the #1 art school in the United States for return on investment and #4 for average alumni salary (bachelor's degree). As of 2022, Niche rated CCA with an overall grade of B− (with B− for academics, A+ for diversity, and B− for value), reporting an acceptance rate of 85%, graduation rate of 67%, and average alumni starting salary of $29,400. The average class size is 13 for undergraduate programs and 12 for graduate. The student to faculty ratio is 8:1.

CCA is accredited by the Western Association of Schools and Colleges (WASC), the National Association of Schools of Art and Design (NASAD), and the National Architectural Accrediting Board (NAAB).

 


Wilanów

Wilanów () is a district of the city of Warsaw, Poland. It is home to historic Wilanów Palace, the "Polish Versailles," and second home to various Polish kings. Wilanów is home to many villas and, despite being relatively far away from the city center, the district ranks among the most expensive in Warsaw.

The first mentions of a settlement in the area can be traced to the 13th century, when a village named "Milanów" was founded by the Benedictine monastery of Płock. In 1338 it became a private property of the Dukes of Mazovia and in 1378 Prince Janusz I of Warsaw gave it to one of his servants. It was he who established the first mansion and a chapel in the village. His descendants adopted the name "Milanowski", after the name of the village.

In the 17th century the village was bought by the family of Stanisław Leszczyński, who started the construction of a new palace; however, the works were stopped by The Deluge when the forces of Sweden captured the area and plundered it completely. In 1676 the depopulated village was bought by King Jan III Sobieski. By his order, Tylman van Gameren and Augustyn Wincenty Locci erected the new baroque-style palace and St. Anne's Church. Initially the palace was named "Villa Nova" ("New Village"), to distinguish it from the nearby village of "Stara Wieś" ("Old Village"). However, soon the name was polonised to Wilanów, similar to the former name Milanów.

Thanks to the proximity of both the kings' summer residence and the city of Warsaw, Wilanów has for ages been a suburb of Warsaw and a popular holiday spot for Polish magnates. It was also the final point on the historical Royal Road. In the 18th century, the palace became the property of Hetman Adam Mikołaj Sieniawski. His widow, Elżbieta Sieniawska, joined the village with the nearby villages of Kabaty, Powsin and . After that both the so-called "key" of villages (group of villages run together by a common owner) and the palace changed hands several times, with each new owner changing something in the look of the palace.

In 1863, after the fall of the January Uprising, the Russian authorities introduced a new administrative division, stripping the "key" of the rest of villages and making Wilanów a capital of all the communes located south of it. The area became one of the most important providers of food for ever-growing Warsaw and in 1890 a horse-drawn railway was opened for transport of grain and passengers. The line linking Wilanów with Warsaw's Lublin Union Square proved to be a major success and in 1892 the line was extended and started to run steam-drawn trains. Also, new railway stations were built on both ends of the line.

After World War II the palaces in Wilanów, Natolin and Morysin were nationalised by the new communist authorities of Poland. The former was converted into a museum and in one of the palace's barracks a Museum of Posters was opened on 4 June 1968. It is probably the only such museum in Europe. In 1951 Wilanów was incorporated into Warsaw. Initially a separate unit of administrative division, in 1976 it was joined with the borough of Mokotów. In 1994 it became a separate unit of administrative division and the following year it became one of the boroughs of Warsaw.

Currently, the surrounding area is home to many expatriates living in Warsaw, as this area is home to many international schools. However, in 2000, the American School of Warsaw moved about 6 km out, to the suburb of Konstancin-Jeziorna.



Inline

General


David Aaronovitch

David Morris Aaronovitch (born 8 July 1954) is an English journalist, television presenter and author. He is a regular columnist for "The Times" and the author of "Paddling to Jerusalem: An Aquatic Tour of Our Small Country" (2000), "Voodoo Histories: the role of Conspiracy Theory in Modern History" (2009) and "Party Animals: My Family and Other Communists" (2016). He won the Orwell Prize for political journalism in 2001, and the "What the Papers Say" "Columnist of the Year" award for 2003. He previously wrote for "The Independent" and "The Guardian".

Aaronovitch is the son of communist intellectual and economist Sam Aaronovitch, and brother of actor Owen Aaronovitch and author and screenwriter Ben Aaronovitch. His parents were atheists whose "faith was Marxism", according to Aaronovitch, and he is ethnically half Jewish and half Irish. He has written that he was brought up "to react to wealth with a puritanical pout".

Aaronovitch attended Gospel Oak Primary School until 1965, Holloway County Comprehensive (now Holloway School) until 1968, and William Ellis School from 1968 to 1972, all in London. He studied Modern History at Balliol College, Oxford. Aaronovitch completed his education at the Victoria University of Manchester, graduating in 1978 with a BA (Hons) in History.

While at Manchester, Aaronovitch was a member of the 1975 "University Challenge" team that lost in the first round after answering most questions with the name of a Marxist ("Trotsky", "Lenin", "Karl Marx" or "Che Guevara"). The tactics were a protest against the fact that the University of Oxford and Cambridge University were allowed to enter each of their colleges into the contest as a separate team, even though the colleges were not universities in themselves.

Aaronovitch was initially a Eurocommunist, and was active in the National Union of Students (NUS). There he got to know the president at the time, Charles Clarke, who later became Home Secretary. Aaronovitch himself succeeded Trevor Phillips as president of the NUS from 1980 to 1982. He was elected on a Left Alliance ticket.

Aaranovitch began his media career in the early 1980s as a television researcher and later producer for the ITV programme "Weekend World". In 1988, he began working at the BBC as founding editor of the political current affairs programme "On the Record".

He moved to print journalism in 1995, working for "The Independent" and "The Independent on Sunday" as chief leader writer, television critic, parliamentary sketch writer and columnist until the end of 2002.

He began contributing to "The Guardian" and "The Observer" in 2003 as a columnist and feature writer. Aaronovitch's columns appeared in "The Guardian"s "G2" section. His desire for his pieces to appear on the main comment pages, according to Peter Wilby, was reportedly vetoed by the section editor, Seumas Milne, although Aaronovitch himself does not know if Milne was involved in the decision. Since June 2005, he has written a regular column for "The Times" that he set to depart from in March 2023 following an announcement he made in January 2023 on Twitter. He has also been a columnist for "The Jewish Chronicle". In addition, Aaronovitch has written for a variety of other major British news and opinion publications, such as the "New Statesman". In addition, he has written for "New Humanist", and is an "honorary associate" of its publisher, the Rationalist Association.

Aaronovitch also presents or contributes to radio and television programmes, including the BBC's "Have I Got News for You" and BBC News 24. In 2004 he presented "The Norman Way", a three-part BBC Radio 4 documentary looking at régime change in 1066.

Aaronovitch also hosted the BBC series "The Blair Years" (2007), which examined the prime ministership of Tony Blair. Some journalists were unimpressed with Aaronovitch or dismissed the series.

Aaronovitch said the case had "been made" for the 2003 invasion of Iraq and that he "reluctantly support[ed] military action," his "biggest reason" being "the failure of "vigilant containment" to help the people of Iraq." Since the invasion he maintains the view that it liberated Iraqis, and has played down the significance of Iraq's putative weapons of mass destruction. However, he wrote in 2003: "If nothing is eventually found, I – as a supporter of the war – will never believe another thing that I am told by our government, or that of the US ever again. And, more to the point, neither will anyone else. Those weapons had better be there somewhere." On 7 September 2018, he labelled people who ask him about the article "lamebrains". He remains a strong supporter of former Prime Minister Tony Blair.

In late 2005, Aaronovitch was co-author, with Oliver Kamm and journalist Francis Wheen, of a complaint to "The Guardian," after it published an apology to Noam Chomsky for an interview by Emma Brockes, in which she asserted that Chomsky had denied the Srebrenica massacre. A "Guardian" readers' editor found that the newspaper had misrepresented Chomsky's position on the Srebrenica massacre, and that judgement was upheld in May 2006 by an external ombudsman, John Willis.

In his column of 5 September 2013, Aaronovitch criticized the Labour leader Ed Miliband for allegedly providing no alternative to military intervention in Syria, after the use of chemical weapons in the Ghouta attacks of 21 August 2013. For Aaronovitch, "politically [Miliband] is not a presence at all, he is an absence" and "is neither hunter nor prey, he is scavenger. He is a political vulture."

During 2013, though Aaronovitch had vigorously supported the bombing campaigns against Iraq, Libya and Syria, he became the chairman of the human rights organisation Index on Censorship, succeeding Jonathan Dimbleby in the role.

In May 2014, he criticised Glenn Greenwald's involvement in the Edward Snowden NSA revelations, and characterised Greenwald as "a stilted writer of overlong, dishonest and repetitive polemics." In response to Aaronivitch's article in an interview with Media Lens Greenwald commented on "the hilarious, inane irony of having someone who publicly cheered for the worst political crime of this generation – the attack on Iraq – trying to deny other people “journalist” status on the ground that they seek to “change the world” rather than simply report."

In August 2014, Aaronovitch was one of 200 public figures who were signatories to a letter to "The Guardian" expressing their hope that Scotland would vote to remain part of the United Kingdom in September's referendum on that issue.

In 2016, he endorsed the United Kingdom's continued membership of the European Union in the 23 June referendum. Aaronovitch later said that Brexit would eventually be reversed as the number of older voters, who typically voted for Britain to leave the European Union, gradually die.

Aaronovitch lives in London with his wife and three daughters.

In 2011, Aaronovitch was the victim of a "medical accident" following routine surgery. He survived septicemia thanks to antibiotics, a treatment that was not available to his grandmother, who died of an infection following an insect bite in 1930. This experience led him to become an advocate for Antibiotic Research UK and the charity's work to promote proper antibiotic use and the development of new antibiotics.



Gradisca d'Isonzo

Gradisca d'Isonzo ( or ; ; archaic ) is a town and (municipality) in the Regional decentralization entity of Gorizia in Friuli Venezia Giulia, north-eastern Italy. The lawyer, linguist, philologist Philippe Sarchi was born in Gradisca d'Isonzo. It is one of ("The most beautiful villages of Italy").

The municipality is located in north-eastern Italy on the right bank of the Isonzo River, about southwest of Gorizia. It received town privileges on 14 July 1936. As of 2011, the population of Gradisca is about 6,580.

The town is an important centre of the Friulian culture in the Julian Venetia region.

The town's name is a Slavic toponym: in archaic Slovene, "gradišče" (cf. gord) was a term indicating a fortified site or a ruin and is a widespread toponym in the Slovene Lands. The strategically-important area on the Isonzo River was probably already settled in Roman times and under the Kingdom of the Lombards, later exposed to the attacks by Hungarian forces on Northern Italy.

The rural settlement of Gradisca is mentioned for the first time in 1176, when it had a mixed population of Slavic and Latin origin. It then belonged to the estate of Farra, held by the Patriarchs of Aquileia. From 1420 onwards their lands were gradually conquered by the Republic of Venice, annexed and incorporated into the Venetian "Domini di Terraferma" in 1473. The Venetians fortified Gradisca as a bastion against Ottoman raids, then part of a massive defence line along the Isonzo River relying on plans designed by Leonardo da Vinci.

During the War of the League of Cambrai against Venice, Gradisca was conquered by Emperor Maximilian I in 1511, and thenceforth it was a Habsburg possession ruled within the County of Gorizia as part of the Inner Austrian lands. In 1615 a Venetian attempt to reconquer it initiated the War of Gradisca. The town was however kept by the Imperial House of Habsburg; in 1647 Emperor Ferdinand III made it the capital of an autonomous County of Gradisca and sold the territory to his confident John Anthony of Eggenberg. The Eggenberg dynasty, formally elevated to Princes of the Holy Roman Empire in 1654, held Gradisca until 1717, enlarging and enriching it constantly as a princely residence.

With the extinction of the Eggenbergs, the county returned to the House of Habsburg, being re-united with the remaining County of Gorizia. The union resulted in the creation of the Princely County of Gorizia and Gradisca in 1754, which existed until the dissolution of Austria-Hungary in 1918. The town remained in the Cisleithanian side after the Compromise of 1867 as head of the district of the same name (GRADISCA), one of the 11 "Bezirkshauptmannschaften" in the Austrian Littoral province.

During Austrian domination, the town retained its predominantly Italian character. According to the last Austrian census of 1910, 60.0% of the population of the town spoke Italian or Friulian, 13.8% spoke Slovene, and a mere 2.3% spoke German as their first language.

In 1914, at the outbreak of World War I, the population of Gradisca fought under Austria-Hungary. In 1921 the town became part of Italy.




Wolstenholme's theorem

In mathematics, Wolstenholme's theorem states that for a prime number formula_1, the congruence
holds, where the parentheses denote a binomial coefficient. For example, with "p" = 7, this says that 1716 is one more than a multiple of 343. The theorem was first proved by Joseph Wolstenholme in 1862. In 1819, Charles Babbage showed the same congruence modulo "p", which holds for formula_3. An equivalent formulation is the congruence
for formula_1, which is due to Wilhelm Ljunggren (and, in the special case formula_6, to J. W. L. Glaisher) and is inspired by Lucas' theorem.

No known composite numbers satisfy Wolstenholme's theorem and it is conjectured that there are none (see below). A prime that satisfies the congruence modulo "p" is called a Wolstenholme prime (see below).

As Wolstenholme himself established, his theorem can also be expressed as a pair of congruences for (generalized) harmonic numbers:
For example, with "p"=7, the first of these says that the numerator of 49/20 is a multiple of 49, while the second says the numerator of 5369/3600 is a multiple of 7.

A prime "p" is called a Wolstenholme prime iff the following condition holds:

If "p" is a Wolstenholme prime, then Glaisher's theorem holds modulo "p". The only known Wolstenholme primes so far are 16843 and 2124679 ; any other Wolstenholme prime must be greater than 10. This result is consistent with the heuristic argument that the residue modulo "p" is a pseudo-random multiple of "p". This heuristic predicts that the number of Wolstenholme primes between "K" and "N" is roughly "ln ln N − ln ln K". The Wolstenholme condition has been checked up to 10, and the heuristic says that there should be roughly one Wolstenholme prime between 10 and 10. A similar heuristic predicts that there are no "doubly Wolstenholme" primes, for which the congruence would hold modulo "p".

There is more than one way to prove Wolstenholme's theorem. Here is a proof that directly establishes Glaisher's version using both combinatorics and algebra.

For the moment let "p" be any prime, and let "a" and "b" be any non-negative integers. Then a set "A" with "ap" elements can be divided into "a" rings of length "p", and the rings can be rotated separately. Thus, the "a"-fold direct sum of the cyclic group of order "p" acts on the set "A", and by extension it acts on the set of subsets of size "bp". Every orbit of this group action has "p" elements, where "k" is the number of incomplete rings, i.e., if there are "k" rings that only partly intersect a subset "B" in the orbit. There are formula_10 orbits of size 1 and there are no orbits of size "p". Thus we first obtain Babbage's theorem
Examining the orbits of size "p", we also obtain
Among other consequences, this equation tells us that the case "a=2" and "b=1" implies the general case of the second form of Wolstenholme's theorem.

Switching from combinatorics to algebra, both sides of this congruence are polynomials in "a" for each fixed value of "b". The congruence therefore holds when "a" is any integer, positive or negative, provided that "b" is a fixed positive integer. In particular, if "a=-1" and "b=1", the congruence becomes
This congruence becomes an equation for formula_14 using the relation
When "p" is odd, the relation is
When "p"≠3, we can divide both sides by 3 to complete the argument.

A similar derivation modulo "p" establishes that
for all positive "a" and "b" if and only if it holds when "a=2" and "b=1", i.e., if and only if "p" is a Wolstenholme prime.

It is conjectured that if

when "k=3", then "n" is prime. The conjecture can be understood by considering "k" = 1 and 2 as well as 3. When "k" = 1, Babbage's theorem implies that it holds for "n" = "p" for "p" an odd prime, while Wolstenholme's theorem implies that it holds for "n" = "p" for "p" > 3, and it holds for "n" = "p" if "p" is a Wolstenholme prime. When "k" = 2, it holds for "n" = "p" if "p" is a Wolstenholme prime. These three numbers, 4 = 2, 8 = 2, and 27 = 3 are not held for () with "k" = 1, but all other prime square and prime cube are held for () with "k" = 1. Only 5 other composite values (neither prime square nor prime cube) of "n" are known to hold for () with "k" = 1, they are called Wolstenholme pseudoprimes, they are

The first three are not prime powers , the last two are 16843 and 2124679, 16843 and 2124679 are Wolstenholme primes . Besides, with an exception of 16843 and 2124679, no composites are known to hold for () with "k" = 2, much less "k" = 3. Thus the conjecture is considered likely because Wolstenholme's congruence seems over-constrained and artificial for composite numbers. Moreover, if the congruence does hold for any particular "n" other than a prime or prime power, and any particular "k", it does not imply that
The number of Wolstenholme pseudoprimes up to formula_19 is formula_20, so the sum of reciprocals of those numbers converges. The constant formula_21 follows from the existence of only three Wolstenholme pseudoprimes up to formula_22. The number of Wolstenholme pseudoprimes up to formula_22 should be at least 7 if the sum of its reciprocals diverged, and since this is not satisfied, the counting function of these pseudoprimes is at most formula_24 for some efficiently computable constant formula_25; we can take formula_25 as formula_21.

Leudesdorf has proved that for a positive integer "n" coprime to 6, the following congruence holds:




Jonathan Freedland

Jonathan Saul Freedland (born 25 February 1967) is a British journalist who writes a weekly column for "the Guardian". He presents BBC Radio 4's contemporary history series "The Long View". 
Freedland also writes thrillers, mainly under the pseudonym Sam Bourne, and has written a play, "Jews. In Their Own Words", performed in 2022 at the Royal Court Theatre, London.

The youngest of three children and the only son of a Jewish couple, biographer and journalist Michael Freedland, and Israeli-born Sara Hocherman, he was educated at University College School, a boys' independent school in Hampstead, London. As a child, Freedland periodically accompanied his father for broadcasting work. On one occasion, his father was interviewing Eric Morecambe, who comically assumed the 10 year-old Freedland was married. After a gap year working on a kibbutz in Israel with the Labour Zionist Habonim Dror (where Freedland had been mentored by Mark Regev, and Freedland was in turn, a mentor to Sacha Baron Cohen), he studied Philosophy, Politics and Economics (PPE) at Wadham College, Oxford. While at Oxford, he was editor of "Cherwell", the student newspaper.

Freedland began his Fleet Street career at the short-lived "Sunday Correspondent". In 1990 he joined the BBC as a news reporter across radio and television, including for "The World at One" and "Today" on Radio 4. In 1992, he was awarded the Laurence Stern fellowship on "The Washington Post", serving as a staff writer on national news. He was Washington Correspondent for "The Guardian" from 1993 until 1997, when he returned to London as an editorial writer and columnist.

Between 2002 and 2004, Freedland was an occasional columnist for the "Daily Mirror" and from 2005 to 2007 he wrote a weekly column for the London "Evening Standard". He writes a monthly column for "The Jewish Chronicle". He has also been published in "The New York Times", "The New York Review of Books", "Newsweek" and "The New Republic".

Freedland was named "Columnist of the Year" in the 2002 "What the Papers Say" awards and in 2008 was awarded the David Watt Prize for Journalism, in recognition of his essay "Bush's Amazing Achievement", published in "The New York Review of Books". Nominated on seven occasions, Freedland was awarded a special Orwell Prize in May 2014 for his journalism. In 2016, he won the "Commentariat of the Year" prize at the Comment Awards.

Freedland was executive editor of the opinion section of "The Guardian" from May 2014 till early 2016 and continues to write a Saturday column for it.

In November 2019, Freedland apologised for making a "very bad error" in falsely reporting that a shortlisted Labour prospective parliamentary candidate had been fined for making antisemitic remarks on Facebook. He attributed the mistaken identification by confusing two lawyers with the same name to a "previously reliable Labour source" whose information he had "passed on too hastily".

Freedland has published twelve books: three non-fiction works under his own name and nine novels, eight of them under the pseudonym Sam Bourne.

"Bring Home the Revolution: The case for a British Republic" (1998), Freedland's first book, argued that Britain should reclaim the revolutionary ideals it exported to America in the 18th century, and undergo a constitutional and cultural overhaul. The book won a W. Somerset Maugham Award for non-fiction and was later adapted into a two-part series for BBC Television.

"Jacob's Gift" (2005) is a memoir recounting the lives of three generations of his own Jewish family as well as exploring wider questions of identity and belonging. In 2008, he broadcast a two-part series for BBC Radio 4 – "British Jews and the Dream of Zion" – as well as two TV documentaries for BBC Four: "How to be a Good President" and "President Hollywood".

"The Righteous Men" (2006), is a religious thriller published under the Bourne pen name. It is about a news reporter whose life is disrupted when his wife is kidnapped while he is reporting a story of a militia man found dead. As more murders of 'righteous men' happen across the globe, Will soon finds himself in the middle of a plot to bring about nothing less than Judgement Day.
The book was followed by another Sam Bourne title, "The Last Testament" (2007), set against the backdrop of the Middle East peace process. It draws on the author's experiences in that region as a reporter for over twenty years, and a "Guardian" newspaper sponsored dialogue which was influential in the 2003 Geneva Accords. The central character finds herself involved in a mix of the modern political situation and ancient revelations. "The Final Reckoning" (2008), was based on the true story of the Avengers: a group of Holocaust survivors who sought revenge against their Nazi persecutors, and just missed the peak of "The Sunday Times" best-seller list. Just before "The Chosen One" (2010), the fourth thriller by Sam Bourne was published in the UK, "The Bookseller" reported in April 2010 that HarperCollins had signed Freedland for three more Bourne books. 

HarperCollins published "Pantheon" in July 2012. Freedland's sixth novel entitled "American Winter" was published in 2014 under the Sam Bourne name, but was withdrawn and reissued as "The 3rd Woman", published by HarperCollins in 2015 under his own name. His sixth Bourne novel, "To Kill a President," was published by HarperCollins on 4 July 2017. The seventh novel under the Sam Bourne pseudonym, "To Kill the Truth", was published in February 2019.

He is the author of "The Escape Artist: The Man Who Broke Out of Auschwitz to Warn the World," a biography of Rudolf Vrba, who participated in the first escape by Jews from the Auschwitz concentration camp. It was shortlisted for the 2022 Waterstones Book of the Year.

Freedland is also the writer of a stage play "Jews. In Their Own Words." performed at the Royal Court Theatre and directed by Vicky Featherstone in 2002.

A leading liberal Zionist in the UK, he wrote in 2012 that he uses the word "Zionism" infrequently, as the word has been misunderstood and has become defined as right-wing. On the 2014 Israel–Gaza conflict, he believes that military action perpetuates conflict and has called for negotiations to end the cycles of violence. He defends Israel's right to exist, but hopes that Israel will recognise the "high price" paid by Palestinians.

While Jeremy Corbyn was its leader, Freedland accused the Labour Party in the UK of being in denial on the issue of antisemitism, but Freedland approves of Keir Starmer's approach to the issue. He has urged the left to treat Jews "the same way you'd treat any other minority". He has also commented on the antisemitic expressions of Palestinians with whom Corbyn has associated and expressed the view that many of the Labour Party's new members were hostile to Jews. Freedland's Labour antisemitism scoop has been criticised for demonising dissent.

Beginning in 2021, Freedland has cohosted a Podcast called "Unholy: Two Jews on the News" with Israeli news anchor and journalist Yonit Levi. 

Jewish heritage

Freedland is a supporter of projects that seek to preserve Jewish identity and heritage. He has frequently written about the importance of both his faith and his cultural heritage. He has also been active in campaigns to save British Jewish heritage.

Freedland is married to Sarah Peters, a radio and podcast producer. They have two sons, Jacob and Sam, and conform to Masorti Judaism. He is a governor of Simon Marks Jewish Primary School in Stamford Hill.





Instruction scheduling

In computer science, instruction scheduling is a compiler optimization used to improve instruction-level parallelism, which improves performance on machines with instruction pipelines. Put more simply, it tries to do the following without changing the meaning of the code:

The pipeline stalls can be caused by structural hazards (processor resource limit), data hazards (output of one instruction needed by another instruction) and control hazards (branching).

Instruction scheduling is typically done on a single basic block. In order to determine whether rearranging the block's instructions in a certain way preserves the behavior of that block, we need the concept of a "data dependency". There are three types of dependencies, which also happen to be the three data hazards:

Technically, there is a fourth type, Read after Read (RAR or "Input"): Both instructions read the same location. Input dependence does not constrain the execution order of two statements, but it is useful in scalar replacement of array elements.

To make sure we respect the three types of dependencies, we construct a dependency graph, which is a directed graph where each vertex is an instruction and there is an edge from I to I if I must come before I due to a dependency. If loop-carried dependencies are left out, the dependency graph is a directed acyclic graph. Then, any topological sort of this graph is a valid instruction schedule. The edges of the graph are usually labelled with the "latency" of the dependence. This is the number of clock cycles that needs to elapse before the pipeline can proceed with the target instruction without stalling.

The simplest algorithm to find a topological sort is frequently used and is known as list scheduling. Conceptually, it repeatedly selects a source of the dependency graph, appends it to the current instruction schedule and removes it from the graph. This may cause other vertices to be sources, which will then also be considered for scheduling. The algorithm terminates if the graph is empty.

To arrive at a good schedule, stalls should be prevented. This is determined by the choice of the next instruction to be scheduled. A number of heuristics are in common use:


Instruction scheduling may be done either before or after register allocation or both before and after it. The advantage of doing it before register allocation is that this results in maximum parallelism. The disadvantage of doing it before register allocation is that this can result in the register allocator needing to use a number of registers exceeding those available. This will cause spill/fill code to be introduced, which will reduce the performance of the section of code in question.

If the architecture being scheduled has instruction sequences that have potentially illegal combinations (due to a lack of instruction interlocks), the instructions must be scheduled after register allocation. This second scheduling pass will also improve the placement of the spill/fill code.

If scheduling is only done after register allocation, then there will be false dependencies introduced by the register allocation that will limit the amount of instruction motion possible by the scheduler.

There are several types of instruction scheduling:

The GNU Compiler Collection is one compiler known to perform instruction scheduling, using the (both instruction set and scheduling) or (only scheduling) flags. It uses descriptions of instruction latencies and what instructions can be run in parallel (or equivalently, which "port" each use) for each microarchitecture to perform the task. This feature is available to almost all architectures that GCC supports.

Until version 12.0.0, the instruction scheduling in LLVM/Clang could only accept a (called in LLVM parlance) switch for both instruction set and scheduling. Version 12 adds support for () for x86 only.

Sources of information on latency and port usage include:

LLVM's should be usable on all machines, especially to gather information on non-x86 ones.



Albert Driedger

Albert Driedger (January 18, 1936 – July 18, 2011) was a politician in Manitoba, Canada. He was a member of the Legislative Assembly of Manitoba from 1977 to 1999, and a cabinet minister in the government of Gary Filmon from 1988 to 1997.

Driedger was born in Steinbach, Manitoba, and was educated at the University of Manitoba. He returned to the Steinbach area after graduation, and worked as a real estate broker and farmer. In 1958, Driedger married Mary Penner. Between 1967 and 1972, he served as reeve of the municipality of Hanover. He was also a director of the Elim Mennonite Church. On July 15, 1970, his frog Georges won the "First International Frog Jumping Championship" in St. Pierre-Jolys, Manitoba, as part of a series of festivities surrounding a royal visit.

Driedger was first elected to the Manitoba legislature in the provincial election of 1977 as a Progressive Conservative, defeating incumbent New Democrat Steve Derewianchuk by about 1000 votes in the rural southeastern riding of Emerson. In his first term, he served as a backbench MLA supporting the Progressive Conservative government of Sterling Lyon.

The NDP defeated Lyon's government in the 1981 provincial election, although Driedger was able to retain Emerson by 356 votes over his NDP challenger Paul Dupuis. He was re-elected by a greater majority in the 1986 election, which the NDP won by a narrow margin.

In 1988, disgruntled NDP backbencher Jim Walding brought down his government and forced a new election. Driedger was again re-elected without difficulty, and was appointed Minister of Government Services and Minister of Highways and Transportation on May 9, 1988.

Following the redistribution of provincial electoral districts for the 1990 election, Driedger ran in the riding of Steinbach; he once again won without any difficulty. He lost his position as government services minister on February 5, 1991, and on September 10, 1993, was transferred from highways and transportation to the Ministry of Natural Resources. Once again, he experienced no difficulties in the 1995 provincial election. He supported Jean Charest's bid to lead the Progressive Conservative Party of Canada in 1993 ("Winnipeg Free Press", 12 June 1993). Driedger was dropped from cabinet on January 6, 1997, and did not seek re-election in 1999.

After leaving politics, he was chairman of the board for the Menno Home for the Aged in Grunthal. Driedger died on July 18, 2011, at the age of 75, days after suffering a stroke.

Hot Streets

Hot Streets is the tenth studio album (and twelfth overall album) by the American rock band Chicago, released on October 2, 1978, by Columbia Records. This was the band's first album with all-new material released since their second that did not have a numbered title. It was also the first album not to feature original guitarist/vocalist Terry Kath, who died from an accidental self-inflicted gunshot wound in January 1978. He was replaced by Donnie Dacus on this album.

Having worked with James William Guercio since their 1969 debut, Chicago decided to part ways with the producer following the release of "Chicago XI" in 1977. Another major change for the group was the death of guitarist Terry Kath in January 1978, who accidentally shot himself at a roadie's house while playing with a gun. The members of the band were devastated by his death and considered breaking up. After the initial shock waned, the group decided they still had something to offer musically and carried on.

Phil Ramone, who had mixed some of their earlier albums, was called upon to co-produce their new effort. But before Chicago could begin recording, they had to contend with the difficult process of finding a new guitarist. Accomplished guitarist Donnie Dacus was chosen, bringing his own distinctive style to the group's music. Prior to joining Chicago, Dacus had worked with both Roger McGuinn and Stephen Stills.

Recording sessions took place both in Miami and Los Angeles that spring, after years of working at Guercio's Caribou Ranch in Colorado. By the end of the sessions, the band felt as though they were still in a strong musical position even after the loss of Kath. Some of the tracks featured the Bee Gees and their keyboardist, Blue Weaver, who were recording the album "Spirits Having Flown" next door at the same Miami studio. The Gibb brothers added vocals to the song "Little Miss Lovin'" while Weaver added synthesized strings to "No Tell Lover" and "Show Me The Way". In turn, Chicago's horn section played on "Spirits Having Flown", most notably on the hit single "Too Much Heaven".

To mark their new beginning, the band broke with tradition by giving their album a title, rather than a number. Having chosen the title "Hot Streets", the album cover featured a picture of the band (shot by photographer Norman Seeff) rather than just the group logo. Because a later marketing survey noted that consumers expected to see the logo on the cover, Chicago's logo returned in the form of a high-rise building for the follow-up album, "Chicago 13".

The album was released in October 1978, preceded by a release of the lead single "Alive Again". "Hot Streets" was another hit for the group, who had been concerned that the public might not accept them without Kath. Although the album went platinum, and Chicago scored a second top-twenty hit with "No Tell Lover", "Hot Streets" was the first Chicago album since their debut that failed to reach the US Top 10; fittingly, the band's twelfth album peaked at #12.

Following the release of "Chicago 13" and at the end of the Christmas 1979 tour, Dacus would be released from the group, bringing his short tenure with Chicago to an abrupt end.

In 2003, "Hot Streets" was remastered and reissued by Rhino Records with an alternate version of Lamm's "Love Was New" sung by Dacus as a bonus track.

Although unsuccessful commercially, "Cash Box" said of the single "Gone Long Gone" that the guitar introduction sounds like George Harrison and said that it has "slick harmonies and smooth production" and praised "Donnie Dacus' guitar shadings." "Record World" said it is "a soft, mid-tempo rocker propelled by Peter Cetera's familiar vocals and some compelling lofty guitar work."




Singles – "Billboard" (North America)

Bedazzled (2000 film)

Bedazzled is a 2000 fantasy romantic comedy film directed by Harold Ramis and starring Brendan Fraser and Elizabeth Hurley. It is a remake of the 1967 British film of the same name, written by Peter Cook and Dudley Moore, which was itself a comic retelling of the Faust legend.

The Devil runs a computer simulation to analyze souls to determine individual weaknesses to exploit. The program settles on Elliot Richards, a sweet, geeky, over-zealous man working a dead-end job in a San Francisco computer company. He has no friends and his co-workers avoid him. He has a crush on colleague Alison Gardner, but lacks the courage to ask her out. After Elliot is ditched by his co-workers at a bar while trying to talk to Alison, he says he would give anything for Alison to be with him. The Devil, in the form of a charming and beautiful woman, overhears him and offers to give Elliot seven wishes in exchange for his soul.

As a test, Elliot wishes for a Big Mac and a large Coke. The Devil takes him to McDonald's and places the order. Elliot has to pay for it, because, "There's no such thing as a free lunch." After taking Elliot to her office, based at a nightclub in Oakland, the Devil convinces Elliot to sign her contract, and delivers further wishes. Each wish has Elliot living them out with Alison and his co-workers in surrogate roles. However, the Devil always spoils his wishes by adding something he does not expect or want.

After going through five wishes, Elliot is arrested after confessing his story to a priest who believed he was drunk. The Devil, dressed as a police officer, throws him in a cell, telling him that she likes him, and it would not hurt to have her as a friend. Elliot's friendly cellmate tells him that he cannot sell his soul as it belongs to God, and although the Devil may try to confuse him, in the end he will realize who he truly is, and what his purpose is. Elliot questions the man as to his identity, but the response is simply "a really good friend".

Elliot asks the Devil to cancel their contract. When the Devil refuses, Elliot states he will not use his final wish. The Devil teleports them to Hell. When the Devil pushes him to make a final wish, Elliot wishes that Alison could have a happy life – with or without him. The Devil sighs and Elliot falls into the depths of Hell. He wakes up on a marble staircase, wondering if it is Heaven. The Devil tells him that a provision in the contract's fine print states that a selfless wish voids the contract. Elliot admits that despite her manipulation of him he has come to like the Devil and regards her as a friend. She advises that Heaven and Hell can be found on Earth; it is up to humans to choose. Elliot asks Alison out, but discovers she is already dating another man. He continues with his life, with a better understanding of who he is.

Elliot is confronted by Bob, one of his co-workers, who ridicules Elliot at the encouragement of his co-workers. Elliot grabs a terrified Bob by the shirt, but lets go, simply saying, "Nice talking to you." At home, he meets a new neighbor, Nicole, whose looks resemble Alison's but whose personality, interests and fashion sense are much closer to his. He offers to help her unpack and they begin a relationship. While the two walk along a boulevard, the Devil and Elliot's cellmate, both dressed in white, are playing chess. The Devil's computer program lists Nicole and Elliot's foibles, which they tolerate.


"Bedazzled" was released on DVD and VHS on March 13, 2001.

The film did reasonably well at the box office. It topped British box office sales when it debuted in the UK during the weekend of 10 November 2000, and finished at #2 on its American opening weekend behind the surprise smash hit "Meet the Parents".

The film received mixed reviews from critics. Hurley's performance was praised, but her attendance of its premiere was met with backlash from the Screen Actors Guild because it occurred during a strike it was holding. On Rotten Tomatoes the film has an approval rating of 50% based on 117 reviews, with an average of 5.5/10. The site's general consensus states: "Though it has its funny moments, this remake is essentially a one joke movie with too many flat plots, and not a patch on the superior original." On Metacritic the film has a score of 49 out of 100 based on reviews from 34 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews".

Michael Wilmington of the "Chicago Tribune" wrote, disappointedly, that "'Bedazzled' recycled is not the finest hour for Fraser or Hurley—though Fraser, Elliot Richards in this movie, comes closer. It isn't Ramis' finest hour either—though he's one American moviemaker who excels at concept comedies, as he's proved in "Groundhog Day", and the best parts of the crude and lewd "Caddyshack." "Bedazzled," one of the best comic premises ever, should have been duck soup to him." Wilmington's rival, the "Chicago Sun-Times" Roger Ebert, commented that "the new movie has been directed by Harold Ramis from a screenplay that uses the 1967 film more as inspiration than source. It is lacking in wickedness. It doesn't smack its lips when it's naughty. When its hero sells his soul to the devil, what results isn't diabolical effrontery, but a series of contract negotiations and consumer complaints. This is twice in two weeks (after the Winona Ryder exorcism movie "Lost Souls") that Satan loses on points." The "Los Angeles Times" Kenneth Turan stated that "as written by Larry Gelbart, director Harold Ramis and Peter Tolan, this 'Bedazzled,' though amusing from moment to moment, is erratic, unfocused and uncertain where it's going. And whenever it gets too insecure about itself, the film falls back, in classic the-devil-made-me-do-it Hollywood fashion, on explosions, gunfights, helicopter stunts, car crashes and computer-generated effects. What should be a drawing-room comedy ends with moments best left to "Gone in 60 Seconds"."


Alexander Chancellor

Alexander Surtees Chancellor, CBE (4 January 1940 – 28 January 2017) was a British journalist.

Born in Dane End, Hertfordshire, the youngest of his parents' four children. Alexander Chancellor was educated at Eton College and Trinity Hall, Cambridge.

He was the editor of the conservative "Spectator" magazine from 1975 to 1984. In 1986, after a spell as deputy editor of "The" "Sunday Telegraph", he became the first Washington correspondent of the newly-launched quality broadsheet, "The Independent," and subsequently launched and edited the paper's first Saturday magazine. In 1993, he spent a year in the United States working as an editor at "The New Yorker" magazine, where he oversaw the "Talk of the Town" section. This experience was the basis of a memoir, "Some Times in America", which both satirised the ordeal and recorded his deep affection for New York and the United States. It was published in both the UK and the U.S. in 2000.

In June 2014, he became editor of "The Oldie" magazine in succession to Richard Ingrams. Until January 2012, he contributed a weekly column in "The Guardian", published in the "Weekend" supplement each Saturday. In March 2012, he began to contribute to "The Spectator" again, with a column entitled "Long Life".

Chancellor lived in Northamptonshire. He was the father of British model Cecilia Chancellor, and Eliza, who married the writer Alexander Waugh. Chancellor was the grandson of Sir John Chancellor, the first Governor of Southern Rhodesia, and was the uncle of British actress Anna Chancellor. He was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) in the 2012 Birthday Honours for services to journalism.

Chancellor died at his home in Northamptonshire on 28 January 2017, aged 77. His final column for the "The Spectator" was published on the day he died.


Fore River (Maine)

The Fore River is a short horn-shaped estuary, approximately long, separating Portland and South Portland in Maine in the United States. Many of the port facilities of the Portland harbor are along the estuary, which is formed just southwest of Portland by the confluence of several creeks. The estuary was initially known as Levett's River, so named by the first English settler of the Casco Bay region, Capt. Christopher Levett. But shortly afterwards, the estuary came to have the name by which it is known today.

The Stroudwater River flows into the Fore River estuary. The Cumberland and Oxford Canal connected the estuary with Sebago Lake via the Stroudwater River from 1832 through 1870. The estuary enters Casco Bay on the southeast edge of Portland. Like other coastal areas along the Gulf of Maine, it experiences moderately high tides, and thus the water level in the estuary and the harbor varies greatly throughout the day, leaving mud flats at low tide. It is spanned by the Pan Am Railways bridge and three highway bridges: the Casco Bay Bridge which connects Portland to South Portland, Veterans Memorial Bridge which carries Route 1, and a causeway which carries I-295.

Thirroul, New South Wales

Thirroul () is a northern seaside suburb of the city of Wollongong, Australia. Situated between Austinmer and Bulli, it is approximately 13 kilometres north of Wollongong, and 73 km south of Sydney. It lies between the Pacific Ocean and a section of the Illawarra escarpment known as Lady Fuller Park, adjacent to Bulli Pass Scenic Reserve.

Thirroul was originally called Robbinsville in 1880 by its settler community after a local landowner, Frederick Robbins. In 1887 the Railways Department opened a railway station in the town, and sometime later officially adopted the term "Thirroul". The source for this suggestion was probably Archibald Campbell, then owner and editor of the Illawarra Mercury, a man who was interested in indigenous terminology. His original manuscript transcription of the aboriginal word for the cabbage tree palm which flourished in the area was "Dthirrawell", which was later transcribed as Thirroul. As the word circulated, in 1892 a Port Kembla Aboriginal elder William Sadler objected to 'Thirroul' as meaningless. The proper term must be, he claimed, "throon", referring to the bush leeches collected in the escarpment below the town and at the site of what would later become the Excelsior Colliery. A local historian, Joseph Davis, cleared up the confusion in the November 1994 edition of the Illawarra Historical Society Bulletin. Campbell's original manuscript transliteration of the aboriginal term, "Dthirrawell", was close to an illegible scrawl for the clerk who partially misread it and simplified the term as "Thirroul".

Before European settlement, the territory belonged to the Wodiwodi Aborigines, who spoke a dialect of Tharawal, which some sources still suggest as an alternative etymology for the Thirroul toponym. Cabbage tree palms were once plentiful in the area and early white settlers harvested them to make strong fence posts. Stands of these trees are still visible on either side of Bulli Pass.

Early settlement began in the late 1860s in the hilly area of the village as the lower beachside area was swampy and susceptible to flooding with high tides sometimes combining with heavy rain. Occupations consisted of farming, cedar logging, whaling and fruit growing and eventually mining when the Bulli Mine was opened in 1859 and the Bulli Jetty which shipped the coal from the mine opened in 1863. The township was known as North Bulli until February 1880 when the name of Robbinsville was chosen. The new name was decided upon at a meeting of ten men (including Frederick Robbins) in George's Whitford's "big new House" (located on the site of today's Ryans Hotel) in 1880. One suggestion for a name for the place was "Mudmire" but somehow Robbins convinced the others to call the town after himself. It only had a total population of 490 in 1891.

In 1888 the rail link with Sydney was finished. Early construction workers on the railway caused a population increase, and the eastern side of the town progressed rapidly. The Thirroul Locomotive Depot opened in 1917. It closed in 1965 and only the barracks for the accommodation of the railway crews remain. The Railway Institute Hall (opened in 1920) where workers once studied has been classified as a heritage building. The construction of the rail link also created an increase in tourism for Thirroul. It became a popular family seaside holiday destination with boarding houses and holiday cottages in demand.

Two known early residents include Samuel McCauley and Frederick Robbins. McCauley was one of the oldest residents of the Illawarra district when he died in June 1899 in Thirroul. A street in Thirroul has been named McCauley street. Robbins was a prominent resident who gave his name to the township of North Bulli as it was then called. He was made the first postmaster of Robbinsville in 1888 after, along with other residents, lobbying the government to supply a post office and railway platform.

In 1898 the "Amy" was shipwrecked on the rocks at the southern end of Thirroul beach. All of its crew died. A memorial plaque to the Amy and her crew is located in the Thirroul Beach Park.

Coal mining operations began at the start of the 20th century and miners needed residences, though logging had been occurring before for some time.
The world-famous English author, D. H. Lawrence visited Thirroul in 1922 and wrote the novel "Kangaroo" about Australian fringe politics after the First World War whilst there. Overlooking the Pacific Ocean, his house Wyewurk is the earliest Australian bungalow to show the influence of the Californian Bungalow style of architecture. He gave this description of the town: "... The town trailed down from the foot of the mountain towards the railway, a huddle of grey and red painted iron roofs. Then over the rail line towards the sea, it began again in a spasmodic fashion ... There were wide unmade roads running straight as to go nowhere, with little bungalow homes ... Then quite near the inland, rose a great black wall of mountain or cliff ...".

A park and a monument (dedicated 21 November 1998) commemorate D H Lawrence's time at Thirroul, located on the same street as the house he stayed in.

The book "D.H. Lawrence at Thirroul" by lifelong Thirroul resident Joseph Davis was published by Collins (Sydney) in 1989 and questioned many of the assumptions made by Robert Darroch in his 1981 work entitled "D.H. Lawrence in Australia" published by Macmillan (Melbourne). The Cambridge edition of Kangaroo (edited by Bruce Steele) tended to accept the views of Davis rather than those of Darroch. Davis has gone on to write numerous articles and a number of books about art and the environment in Thirroul and the local area, including "Greetings from Thirroul" (1994), "Greetings from Wollongong" (1995), "The Illawarra Society of Artists" (2001), "Lake Illawarra: an ongoing history" (2005), "John Brown of Brownsville" (2011), "Gooseberry & Hooka" (2012),"One Hundred Seasons" (2014), "Wobbly Wollongong" (2016), "The Real Alexander Harris" (2018), "Rachel Henning and Deighton Taylor in Illawarra 1853-1896" (2019) and "D.H. Lawrence at Thirroul: one hundred years on" (2022).

Michael Bialoguski, later to become a prominent player in the Petrov Affair (1954) and later still an orchestral conductor in the UK and Europe, had a medical practice in Thirroul in the late 1940s. The artist Brett Whiteley died from a heroin overdose in the Beachside Motel in Thirroul on 15 June 1992, aged 53. The artist Paul Ryan is a long-term resident of Thirroul, as is the artist Frank Nowlan.

The Thirroul Village Committee (TVC) was formed in 1983 because, in the words of Don Gray, "the town was looking rather tatty" and something needed to be done. Don was the founding chairperson and Lynne Jones, the founding Secretary. In 1983 the population of less than 5,000 qualified Thirroul as a village. In 1993 the TVC won the Basil Ryan gold award at the Rise & Shine Awards presentation for improved streetscapes. The Thirroul Seaside and Arts Festival, which is a successful community event, was the idea of Don Gray. The first festival was run in 1993. Lynne Jones organised the Festival for many years, building to the point where it was handed over to the Lions Club.

Another community event was "the Growing Green Kids Festival' – a not-for-profit event which was the brain-child of resident Cate Wilson (1948–2012). Cate was also President of the Thirroul Action Group (TAG) - an environmental group which has functioned for around 30 years. Residents concerned about health risks picketed against the Telstra phone tower in 1997. Storms and floods severely affected the Thirroul area in August 1998.

In August 2007, Thirroul's CBD and beach was declared an alcohol-free zone as a council initiative to prevent public drinking on streets and footpaths within the designated area.

In 2011 Thirroul resident Don Gray released a self-published book of his memories called "My Thirroul" illustrated by local artist, Christine Hill. A children's playground was opened by Wollongong Council with a plaque carrying their names on 4 July 2012. Some of the artwork evokes Gray's memories of an elephant stuck in the former Thirroul Beach lagoon on the current site of the playground – a story he recalled (and which Christine Hill illustrated) in his book. Gray died on 28 April 2013, aged 93 ("Illawarra Mercury", 30 April 2013).

King's Theatre, located at 264-270 Lawrence Hargrave Drive, was designed by renowned theatre architects Kaberry and Chard, and built for Wollongong Theatres in 1925. Officially opened on 22 October 1925, it accommodated an audience of 1,560, with 1,202 stalls seats, 248 circle seats, and four boxes along the side walls. The theatre was in continuous operation as a cinema until 1965 or 1966.

In April 1968, after all seating had been removed and a flat concrete floor laid, the building was converted into a roller-skating rink and opened as Skateland. It remained open as such until the mid-1990s.

In 2003, businessman John Comelli purchased the derelict building, and undertook extensive refurbishment to convert it back into a theatre. In 2007 it reopened as Anita's Theatre, to commemorate Comelli's deceased wife. Since then it has operated as a live performance venue, hosting concerts and live music. 

In June 2011 the theatre was purchased for million by a consortium headed by Rennie Cristini. In 2013, the property sold for million.("Illawarra Mercury", 15 November 2013).

In 2019, Midnight Oil launched their "The Final Tour" at Anita's Theatre.

In July 2022, Live Nation Australia Venues Pty Ltd acquired the operations of Anita's Theatre, with a view to providing a good regional live music venue for Australian artists.

Thirroul has a number of heritage-listed sites, including:

The town's major commercial area lies between an area just north of Bulli Pass, where the Princes Highway splits to form the Lawrence Hargrave Drive, to Thirroul Station, over the bridge and past the main centre and the Anita's Theatre building. Supermarkets include a Coles and IGA. Thirroul is steadily growing in population, and many new shops are added regularly. Many cafes now exist in Thirroul's main commercial area, adding to its popularity as a seaside holiday town. The Beaches Hotel (originally the Thirroul Rex Hotel) and Ryans Hotel are lively pubs for locals and tourists alike, both located on the main road. Thirroul has many fashion, gift and lifestyle shops along the main streets. Thirroul is also home to King's Theatre (1913), which underwent large-scale renovations in 2006/2007 and was renamed to Anita's Theatre by the developer John Comelli, in honour of his late wife. Anita's Theatre was for sale as of May 2010 but was purchased for 1.05 million dollars in 2011 by a Balgownie business man. The boutique clothing and jewellery shops, florists, supermarkets, news agencies and other shopping essentials make it the main shopping area for the northern suburbs of Wollongong. Thirroul also has a sub-branch of the Returned and Services League of Australia (RSL).

Thirroul is part of the Northern Illawarra Chamber of Commerce, which was established in 1996 and is recognised as an official body by the Wollongong City Council. Its aim is to promote the identity of the Northern Illawarra in co-operation with local business owners, the residents community, and government and tourism bodies to generate local business growth for the region.
There are two primary schools, St. Michael's and Thirroul Public School. St. Michael's is a Catholic school that was established by the Sisters of St. Joseph in 1940 and is located in Station Street. The current principal is Mrs. Belinda Hughes. Thirroul Public school was established in 1889 after Frederick Robbins sold one acre of his land, "well situated and elevated, being the centre of population", to the Department of Education for the purpose of building a school and teacher's residence. The school subsequently opened in 1889 with 154 children on the roll. Thirroul Public School is located in Roxburgh Avenue. The current principal is Kath Parker. Thirroul also has a Thirroul Scout Group as part of the Scout Association of Australia, NSW Branch.
In June 2009, the new Thirroul District Library and Community centre was opened. This library offers email and word processing, inter-library loans, photocopying and printing, free Internet access and children's programs.

The annual Thirroul Seaside & Arts Festival is held over a weekend in the first week of April. It includes activities such as art exhibitions and workshops, kids activities, live stage entertainment, buskers, a variety of stalls, pony and carnival rides and face painting. The festival won the 2003 Illawarra tourism Award in the events/festivals category. Involved in organising the event is the Austimer-Thirroul Lions Club. The festival actively involves community organisations, educational institutions, sporting groups, performing and visual art studios, scouts, surf lifesavers and the general public.

In the 2016 census, there were 6,083 people in Thirroul. 79.9% of residents were born in Australia compared to 72.7% for the Wollongong Local Government LGA. The next most common countries of birth in Thirroul were England at 5.5% and New Zealand at 1.7%. In addition, 89.7% of the Thirroul population only spoke English in the home, compared with 78.2% for the Wollongong LGA.

The most common responses for religion were No Religion 37.8%, Catholic 24.4% and Anglican 16.7%.

The median weekly household income for Thirroul was $1947, which is higher than the Wollongong LGA median of $1339. Levels of qualification in Thirroul are also higher than the Wollongong LGA, with 60% of population completing tertiary education compared with an average of 47% across the LGA. Of the employed people in Thirroul, 5.0% worked in Higher Education. Other major industries of employment included Hospitals 4.8%, Secondary Education 4.0% and Primary Education 4.0%. 
Many former Sydneysiders have moved to Thirroul and now commute to work from the northern area. Real estate prices have significantly increased in recent years. The price of a now near derelict house with ocean glimpses in Spray Street Thirroul increased from $80,000 in 1986 to selling for $1,560,000 on 7 May 2016 - an increase of some 1900%. Few employment opportunities exist in the suburb with much of the labour force commuting to Sydney for work.

Thirroul railway station is a major station on the NSW TrainLink South Coast line. Although not as important as in steam days, it is the major station between Wollongong and the Sydney metropolitan area. Local Wollongong suburban services terminate at Thirroul, while all Intercity services stop at Thirroul, both express and all stations trains. In 2005, the station was equipped with lifts.

Thirroul retains a number of passing / refuge sidings for the many coal trains from Metropolitan Colliery and the western coalfields which pass through the town.

Lawrence Hargrave Drive starts just south of Thirroul at the Princes Highway in Bulli and travels north through Thirroul, connecting with the Old Princes Highway and Southern Freeway at the Helensburgh exit.

Thirroul beach is a prominent feature, as well as the backdrop of the high escarpment, attracting many bush-walkers to northern Austinmer and surfers to both beaches. The beach is popular with both locals and tourists, becoming particularly busy in summer months and long weekends. The beach is long and backed by a large, grassy reserve. Swimming can be potentially hazardous because of permanent and shifting rips. The beach is patrolled in summer and a ocean pool is located near the beach.

The Thirroul Surf Lifesaving Club was established in 1907 as one of 14 foundation clubs in NSW. The SLSC is the home of the Thirroul Seagulls IRB (inflatable rescue boat) Racing Team, who have competed strongly for the last 15 years. Former Ironman champions Darren and Dean Mercer are from Thirroul and their parents still reside in the town.

The southern end of Thirroul Beach is also known as McCauley's Beach. McCauley's Beach is separated from Thirroul Beach proper by rock platforms and is a popular off-leash dog beach.

Thirroul is an exposed beach and reef break, and has reliable surf all year. The most desirable wind for surfing there is offshore winds from the west north-west. Most of the surf comes from |groundswells, with the best swell direction the south-east. The beach break provides for both left and right-handers. Caution should be taken with rips, rocks, sharks and, during the summer, bluebottles.

The Sandon Point Stockland development, has given rise to much controversy and conflict between developers and environmental and Aboriginal groups over Aboriginal heritage and coastal wetland and floodplain since 1989, is just south in Bulli. Dootch Kennedy, Al Oshlack and Karen Gough have co-ordinated a series of legal actions against the development's impact on Aboriginal heritage. This protest is ongoing, and included a 24/7 picket for five years before an arson attack, and a continuing Aboriginal Tent Embassy. Resident Jill Walker has been heroic in taking Stockland and the Minister for Planning to both the Land and Environment and Supreme Courts over a number of outstanding non-Aboriginal environmental issues relating to the development. It is also the starting/finishing point to the bike track that runs south to Wollongong, the Wollongong to Thirroul Bike Track. The escarpment area is rich in its variety of birdlife. Recorded birds in the northern suburbs of Wollongong include the Australian King Parrot, Crimson Rosella, Eastern Sea Eagle and the Brown Gerygone.

Sporting teams have been a prominent part of Thirroul history and the "working class" people that established the village. Many of the existing sporting clubs having history dating back to the early settlement.

Thirroul is represented in the Tooheys Illawarra Rugby League by the Thirroul Butchers. The Butchers were established in 1913. Star players include Ben Couchman, Brendon Smith, Aaron Beath and Fuad Suljkanovic. The Thirroul Butchers attract crowds between 500 and 1500 a game, depending on their opponents.

Thirroul is also home to the Thirroul Junior Football Club (TJFC). The club consists of many male & female junior teams ranging from under 6's to under 18's, 4 senior women's sides and 3 senior men's. In 2002 the first senior women's football side was entered into the local IWSA competition, that team went on to finish third in their inaugural season. The first senior men's side, the Thunder, was established for the 2008 season. That same year the women's sides became affectionately known as: 'The Thunderbirds'. As of Thirroul is the only club in the Illawarra to enter a women's team into each of the IWFA's 4 competitions: Premier / Reserve Grade, Division 1 and Over 30s.

Football (soccer) is played at the southern end of the local Thomas Gibson Park and rugby league is held at the northern end which has a large grandstand. Thirroul is also part of the Northern Suburbs Netball Club. The Thirroul Amateur Swimming Club has been operating in Thirroul since 1954. Swim nights are conducted weekly between October and March. The club is non-profit and affiliated with NSW Swimming.

Thirroul District Cricket Club was established in 1896. It is believed the original home ground was the current site of Slacky Flat, before games moved to Gibson Park in the early 1900s. In 1976/77, Woonona Cricket Club folded and merged with Thirroul Cricket Club. In the mid-1990s, the unenviable decision to relocate the club's home ground to Hollymount Park, Woonona was made and in 1996 the Senior division of the club underwent a name change from Thirroul Cricket Club to Northern Districts Cricket Club. Initially matches were played on the western turf pitch of Hollymount Park however in 2005 a new five (5) pitch turf wicket square was installed on the Eastern side of Hollymount Park and the Eastern clubhouse was redeveloped. The junior division of the club incorporates both names as Thirroul & Northern Districts Cricket Club.

It is an easy commute from Thirroul to Sydney CBD by train. This has made it a popular destination for city dwellers looking for a ‘sea-change’. Thirroul has many well-proportioned housing blocks. These are either being re-developed, or dual-occupied, increasing housing density in the Suburb. This has put pressure on the road infrastructure. Lawrence Hargrave Drive is the only through road in the northern suburbs of the Illawarra. The increased dwelling density is seeing a growth in congestion on the main arterial route.

Thirroul is one of only two designated villages in the Wollongong Local Government Area. The backdrop to the Thirroul town centre is the iconic Illawarra escarpment. Key to the village atmosphere is the shopping strip where residents and tourists can easily park in the village to visit local cafes and shops. Residents are concerned that the village feel of the suburb is threatened by the increased development pressures being placed on the area.

In early 2020 a large development application was lodged for the redevelopment of the Thirroul Plaza site. The current plaza is a single storey, purely commercial enterprise, and contains no residences.  The application (DA-2020/363) proposes a three-storey structure that would retain the commercial operation and see 80 residential units developed on the site. The size of the structure would also significantly impair the view to the escarpment from the village shopping strip. The development also requires the elimination of most of the kerbside parking in the village. Business owners and residents alike are very concerned about the impact this development will have on Thirroul village.

In 2020 a group called Save Thirroul Village was set up to work alongside the Thirroul Village Committee to oppose the development application proposing the redevelopment of the Thirroul Plaza site. STV was formed to assist the community in lodging objections. A number of objections from local residents and businesses were lodged against this development over the four iterations of the application. The groups are working together to promote the best outcomes for development within Thirroul.

Thirroul features in the musical piece "Small Town" by Australian composer Peter Sculthorpe. A note published by Faber Music states that forty years after the visit of D.H. Lawrence and his novel "Kangaroo", "Peter Sculthorpe envisaged Thirroul as the quintessential Australian town, frozen in a more innocent time". The music evokes the architecture of the town, the township monument and includes a rendering of the Last Post evoking an Anzac Day ceremony at the town war memorial.




Associated Equipment Company

Associated Equipment Company (AEC) was a British vehicle manufacturer that built buses, motorcoaches and trucks from 1912 until 1979. The name Associated Equipment Company was hardly ever used; instead, it traded under the AEC and ACLO brands. During World War One, AEC was the most prolific British lorry manufacturer, after building London's buses before the war.

The London General Omnibus Company (LGOC) was founded in 1855 to amalgamate and regulate the horse-drawn omnibus services then operating in London. The company began producing motor omnibuses for its own use in 1909 with the X-type designed by its chief motor engineer, Frank Searle, at works in Blackhorse Lane, Walthamstow. The X-type was followed by Searle's B-type design, considered to be one of the first mass-produced commercial vehicles.

In 1912, LGOC was taken over by the Underground Group of companies, which at that time owned most of the London Underground, and extensive tram operations. As part of the reorganisation following the takeover, a separate concern was set up for the bus manufacturing elements, and was named Associated Equipment Company, better-known as AEC.
AEC's first commercial vehicle was a lorry based on the X-type bus chassis. With the outbreak of World War I in 1914, AEC's ability to produce large numbers of vehicles using moving-track assembly lines, based on American principles, became important in supplying the increasing need for army lorries. AEC commenced large-scale production of their 3-ton Y-type lorry in 1916, including some with Daimler-built engines, badged and supplied as Daimler. Continued beyond the end of the war, over 10,000 Y-type lorries were manufactured – making AEC Britain's largest domestic provider of lorries for the nation's military. From then on, AEC became associated with both lorries and buses.

In 1926, AEC and Daimler formed the Associated Daimler Company, which was dissolved two years later. In 1927, AEC moved its manufacturing from Walthamstow to a new plant at Southall.

G. J. Rackham was appointed Chief Engineer and Designer in 1928. He had previously worked for Leyland Motors. His ideas contributed significantly to AEC's reputation for quality and reliability.

From 1929, AEC produced new models: the names of lorries began with "M" (Majestic, Mammoth, Mercury, and so on), and those of buses began with "R" (Regent, Regal, Renown, and so on). These original "M-models" continued in production until the end of World War II. AEC introduced diesel engines across the range in the mid-1930s.

From 1931 to 1938, AEC and English Electric co-produced trolleybuses. AEC supplied the chassis, and English Electric the electric motors and control equipment.

In 1932, AEC took a controlling interest in the British subsidiary of the American Four Wheel Drive (FWD) company, and began to use more standard AEC components in those vehicles. To avoid confusion, these were marketed under the name "Hardy". Production ceased about 1936.

Non-military production stopped in 1941, from then until 1944 AEC produced nearly 10,000 vehicles for the war effort. During the war, AEC produced their 10-ton 4x4 Matador artillery tractor (an adaptation of their commercial 4x2 Matador lorry that exploited AEC's experience with the Hardy FWD venture). The Matador was used for towing guns such as the 5.5-inch medium gun and the 3.7-inch AA gun. The Matador chassis was used as the basis for the Deacon a self-propelled 6-pounder anti-tank gun, which was used briefly in North Africa.

A 6x6 version was designated as the "AEC Marshall" but almost always called the Matador.

Four hundred AEC Armoured Command Vehicles, popularly known as the "Dorchester" (after the hotel), were built on the Matador and Marshall chassis.

Production of the AEC Armoured Car started in 1941. Three Marks were built, with guns from 40mm to 75mm, totalling 629 vehicles. They remained in use post-war.

In 1946 AEC and Leyland Motors formed British United Traction as a joint venture to manufacture trolleybuses and traction equipment for diesel railcars since reduced demand would not require the existing capacity of both parents.

In 1946 AEC resumed civilian production with the 0661/20 Regent II and the 0662/20 Regal I. These were not new models but a recommencement of the most basic AEC 1939 specification bus models. The single-decker was going to be marketed as Regal II until somebody at Southall remembered the 1936-8 lightweight 0862 model of that name and as a result the name was corrected after the launch publicity had been printed. At the end of 1946 the postwar 0961 RT was in build and by 1948 Mammoth Major, Matador and Monarch Mk IIIs were in production, followed by the 'provincial' Regent III and the Regal III.

Also in 1948 AEC acquired Crossley Motors and the Maudslay Motor Company and on 1 October 1948 AEC set up Associated Commercial Vehicles (ACV) as the holding company for the newly acquired businesses and its own manufacturing firm, which was renamed AEC Limited. The initials AEC remained on its vehicles, with the exception of some badge-engineered versions, such as the Crossley Regent bus. In 1949 ACV acquired the bus coachbuilding company Park Royal Vehicles, along with its subsidiary Charles H Roe. Park Royal designed a new cab for the AEC Mercury in the mid-1950s, which appeared on all models across the range about this time.

In 1961 ACV acquired Thornycroft. The Thornycroft name disappeared from all the vehicles except the specialist airport crash tenders, such as the Nubian, and the Antar off-road tractor unit. Production of the AEC Dumptruk was transferred to Basingstoke, and the Thornycroft six-speed constant-mesh gearbox and later nine and ten-speed range-change versions were fitted to AEC, Albion and Leyland buses and lorries.

The AEC engines were used in Finnish Vanaja lorries and buses in the 1960s.

Leyland Motors acquired ACV in 1962. AEC lorries were given the same "Ergomatic" cabs used across several Leyland marques (including Albion). In 1968, all AEC double-decker buses ceased production with the completion of the last Routemasters, and its last buses, motorcoaches and lorries were built in 1979. The AEC name actually disappeared from commercial vehicles in 1977, but the Leyland Marathon was built at the Southall plant until British Leyland closed it in 1979. In 1979, the production of Leyland (AEC) vehicles was transferred to remaining Leyland Truck and Bus plants.

ACLO was the brand name used by AEC in Latin America and in Spain to sell all their products.

ACLOs were principally found in Argentina, Brazil, and particularly in Uruguay, where there were two ACLO fleets (150 buses in total) built by Verheul in the Netherlands on the Regal Mark IV chassis. They were interesting buses, faster than Leyland Tiger in use by other fleets. It was said at the time (early '60s) that the main reason was inter-urban gearing instead of purely urban gearing present in Leylands. An interesting feature was the preselector gear-change, similar to those in Leyland buses, controlled by a small gated lever installed by the steering wheel, with a reversed gate, with first gear to the right and up, and fourth gear to the bottom and left. In Argentina, 25 Verheul buses also built on the Regal Mark IV chassis were sold in 1961.

In Spain, ACLOs could be seen mainly as double-deck buses in Barcelona, and as line coaches in ALSA fleet.

In Portugal, the AEC vehicles, mainly coaches and buses but also lorries, were assembled and bodied by , a large coachbuilding firm based in Lisbon and Oporto, and were marketed under the UTIC-AEC badge. AEC based vehicles were market leaders in Portugal, for instance, by the time of creation of Rodoviária Nacional, in 1975, those accounted for 67.5% of the more than 2500 buses and coaches inherited fleet. Production remained strong throughout the late 1970s and would cease in the autumn of 1980.

From 1971 to 1973 the Loughborough based dealer Moseley imported nine UTIC U2043 coaches which were marketed as the Moseley Continental Tagus. They were mechanically equivalent to a rear-engined Reliance or a coach version of the Swift 691 which AEC had planned but never marketed. They were expensive to buy new and the square sided styling looked dated to British eyes in the age of the Elite and Dominant coaches, thus they were slow selling. These were probably the only right hand drive coaches built by UTIC. At the time Moseley also marketed Salvador Caetano Coaches under its own name.
In the late 1950s, Spanish government restrictions on imports reduced AEC sales in Spain to virtually nil. As a consequence, AEC approached a Spanish truck manufacturer, Barreiros Diesel, to jointly produce buses and coaches based on AEC designs. The venture started in 1961, used Barreiros AEC as brand name, disregarding ACLO, and seemed very promising; production of the AEC off-road dump trucks being planned too. Nevertheless, the Leyland takeover in 1962 soon undermined the agreement, as Leyland was partnering with Barreiros's Spanish arch-rival, Pegaso; and eventually Barreiros looked for another collaborator in the bus arena, signing in 1967 an agreement with Belgian company Van Hool.

AEC's first purpose-built commercial vehicle, the Y Type was introduced in 1915. The improved YA Type appeared in 1917. More than ten thousand of these vehicles were supplied to the War Department by 1919. Many of these were acquired by civilian operators following the war. YB and YC Types continued in production until 1921.





The AEC Roadtrain was an experimental early 1930s road train.

There were three distinct incarnations of the AEC Majestic:
The AEC Mammoth was introduced in 1930, being largest truck in the AEC range and the first to be available as a cabover. It was originally a 7/8 ton 4x2 lorry with a six-cylinder overhead valve engine developing on a wheelbase of 16 ft 7 in. A 6x4 variant was the "Mammoth Major". From 1934 a distinction was made between the lighter Mammoth Minor, and the heavier Mammoth Major 6 (6x4) and Mammoth Major 8 (8x2 or 8x4), which appeared in 1934. The Mammoth Major Mk II was introduced in 1935; the eight-wheeler could carry 15-ton loads. It remained in production until 1948 when it was superseded by the Mk III, which was mechanically similar, but had the Park Royal cab. Subsequent Mammoth Majors featured the Mk V cab, and finally the tilting Ergomatic cab. The original 4x2 Mammoth and lightweight Mammoth Minor were relatively short-lived models, but both names were later re-used.


Normal control variants of the Mammoth family were also available, although much less common that the cabovers:

The AEC Mandator name was originally used for medium-duty models in the 1930s, but in 1949 the Matador 4x2 was renamed Mandator. The name was used for the heavier AEC 4x2s until the end of production in the 1970s, and was especially popular as a tractor unit.


The Leyland Marathon (1973–79) was a high powered 4x2 or 6x4 tractor unit with a modified Ergomatic cab, which was built at the AEC factory in Southall. A few were given AEC badges to satisfy individual customer preferences. The Marathon name had formerly been used on a Maudslay bus chassis.

Pre-war 6x4 3ton military lorry built with various body styles- some were employed by the Royal Air Force as cranes (using the Coles Crane). The name was reintroduced for 6x2 and 6x4 medium-duty lorries from the 1960s-1970s.


The original AEC Matador five-ton 4x2 commercial lorry was introduced in 1932, but the name was most famously used for the 4x4 artillery tractor version introduced in 1938. These vehicles exploited AEC's experience with four-wheel drive that it had gained from its involvement in the British Four Wheel Drive vehicles marketed under the name Hardy. AEC produced 9,620 artillery tractors; 514 6x6 bowsers for the Royal Air Force; 192 6x6 lorries (some of which had Coles Cranes mounted); and 185 similar vehicles, but 6x4, for mobile oxygen plants. They were known by the nickname "Mat". New civilian Matadors appeared after the war, and many ex-military Matadors were adapted for post-war commercial use, especially as timber lorries and recovery vehicles. There was a final short run of the 0853 4x4 Matador for the Army in the early fifties, due to ongoing issues with the introduction of the replacement Leyland. The last Matador was a 4x4 variant of the Mercury, introduced in 1960.


The Matador name is often used for the 10-ton 6x6 military vehicles of Model 854/O854 (built 1940–44), but this model was never given an official name. It was an extended Matador chassis, mated to a Marshal double-drive bogie.

The AEC Mercury (Model 440) was first built in 1928. This was a forward-control lorry with a wheelbase of for 4 ton payloads. The Model 640 was introduced in 1930, with a four-cylinder petrol engine developing 65 bhp.

The name was resurrected for medium-duty 4x2 lorries and tractors built from the 1950s to the 1970s.

The AEC Militant - or "Milly" - was the 1952 replacement for the Matador; a 6x4 or 6x6 artillery tractor/military lorry which continued in various forms until the 1970s. The Militant name had earlier been used by Maudslay in the 1930s.


The AEC Mogul model GM4 (1959–67) was a normal-control 4x2 built primarily for export markets. The Mogul name had originally been used on Maudslay lorries.

The original AEC Monarch was built from 1931 to 1939 at AEC's Southall works. The first version had payload of 7 tons (increased to tons from 1933) and was fitted with either an four-cylinder 5.1-litre diesel engine or an 80 hp four-cylinder 5.1-litre petrol engine. This was a robust and well-designed lorry, popular with both drivers and operators. The model was discontinued in the 1950s, although the name lived on into the 1970s in some export markets. TL 3513 (1934) KYE 402 (1949)


The AEC Mustang model GM6 (1956–61) was a medium-weight, twin-steer ("Chinese six") 6x2 cabover, derived from the Mercury

From 1957 to 1971 AEC built a series of large off-road dump trucks:

2012 was the centenary of the founding of AEC Ltd, and to mark this, a number of events took place throughout the year. By far the biggest was hosted by The AEC Society, and was held over the weekend of 26 and 27 May 2012 at Newark Showground in Nottinghamshire. It was the biggest ever gathering of AECs vehicles, and over 225 attended, as well as more than 350 vehicles of other marques. It was the biggest rally ever held by The AEC Society and was closed by a flypast by the Battle of Britain memorial flight.



Constitution of Vietnam

The Vietnamese Constitution or the Constitution of Vietnam (), fully the Constitution of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam (), is the fundamental and supreme law of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam. The current constitution was adopted on November 28, 2013, by the Thirteenth National Assembly and took effect on January 1, 2014, being the third constitutions adopted by the Vietnamese state since the political reunification of the country in 1976.

The current constitution, known as the 2013 Constitution, contains a preamble and 11 chapters:

The Democratic Republic of Vietnam (DRV) had two constitutions: 

The former Republic of Vietnam also had two constitutions, adopted in 1956 and 1967. Neither of these constitutional documents is in force, as the 1967 Constitution was abrogated when the government of the Republic of Vietnam collapsed in 1975.

Upon political reunification of the country in 1976, the 1960 Constitution of the Democratic Republic became the constitution of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam. Since then, the Vietnamese government adopted two constitutions before the 2013 Constitution:

The 1946 constitution adopted a semi-presidential system similar to the French constitution; it allowed for multiple parties to participate in elections.

According to the 1946 constitution, the president of the republic, was the head of government, rather than a ceremonial head of state. The president also had significantly more power than the current office of president. The later 1959 constitution turned the president into a ceremonial head, while giving de facto power to the party leader.

Despite the changes in later constitution, the current Vietnamese government still heavily praises it, calling it "one of the world's most democratic constitution[s] at the time."

While the 1946 constitution was a superficially liberal democratic document, its 1959 successor was a fully communist document. Its preamble defined the DRV as a "people's democratic state led by the working class", thus codifying the actual state of affairs that had prevailed since 1945. The document provided for a nominal separation of powers among legislative, executive, and judicial branches of government. On paper, the legislative function was carried out by the National Assembly. The assembly was empowered to make laws and to elect the chief officials of the state, such as the president (who was largely a symbolic head of state), the vice president, and cabinet ministers. Together those elected (including the president and vice president) formed a Council of Ministers, which constitutionally (but not in practice) was subject to supervision by the Standing Committee of the National Assembly. Headed by a prime minister, the council was the highest executive organ of state authority. Besides overseeing the Council of Ministers, the assembly's Standing Committee nominally supervised the Supreme People's Court, the chief organ of the judiciary. The assembly's executive side nominally decided on national economic plans, approved state budgets, and acted on questions of war or peace. In reality, however, the final authority on all matters rested with the Political Bureau.

The 1959 document had been adopted during the tenure of Ho Chi Minh and demonstrated a certain independence from the Soviet model of state organization. The 1980 Constitution was drafted when Vietnam faced a serious threat from China, and political and economic dependence on the Soviet Union had increased. Perhaps, as a result, the completed document resembles the 1977 Soviet Constitution, which is evident in the principle of dictatorship of the proletariat, the exclusive leadership of the Communist Party, the centrally planned economy, the citizen's duties and statist rights, and the Leninist constitutional structure consisting of the supreme National Assembly, the collective presidency called the Council of State, the subordinate government called Council of Ministers, the procuracies, and the courts.

The reunification of North and South Vietnam (the former Republic of Vietnam) in 1976 provided the primary motivation for revising the 1959 constitution. Revisions were made along ideological lines set forth at the Fourth National Congress of the Vietnamese Communist Party (VCP) in 1976, emphasizing popular sovereignty and promising success in undertaking "revolutions" in production, science and technology, culture, and ideology. In keeping with the underlying theme of a new beginning associated with reunification, the constitution also stressed the need to develop a new political system, a new economy, a new culture, and a new socialist person.

The 1980 Vietnamese Constitution concentrates power in a newly established Council of State, much like the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet, endowing it nominally with both legislative and executive powers. Many functions of the legislature remain the same as under the 1959 document, but others have been transferred to the executive branch or assigned to both branches concurrently. The executive branch appears strengthened overall, having gained a second major executive body, the Council of State, and the importance of the National Assembly appears to have been reduced accordingly. The role of the Council of Ministers, while appearing on paper to have been subordinated to the new Council of State, in practice retained its former primacy.

Among the innovative features of the 1980 document is the concept of "collective mastery" of society, a frequently used expression attributed to the late party secretary Le Duan (1907 - 1986). The concept is a Vietnamese version of popular sovereignty, which advocates an active role for the people so that they may become their own masters as well as masters of society, nature, and the nation. It states that the people's collective mastery in all fields is assured by the state and is implemented by permitting the participation in state affairs of mass organizations. On paper, these organizations, to which almost all citizens belong, play an active role in government and have the right to introduce bills before the National Assembly.

Another feature is the concept of socialist legality, which dictates that "the state manage society according to law and constantly strengthen the socialist legal system." The concept, introduced at the Third National Party Congress in 1960, calls for achieving socialist legality through the state, its organizations, and its people. Law, in effect, is made subject to the decisions and directives of the party.

The 1980 Constitution comprises 147 articles, in 12 chapters, dealing with numerous subjects, including the basic rights and duties of citizens. Article 67 guarantees the citizens' rights to freedom of speech, the press, assembly, association, and the freedom to demonstrate. These rights, however, were subject to a caveat stating that, "no one may misuse democratic freedoms to violate the interests of the state and the people." In practice, the party and the government had considerable latitude to determine what was in "the interests of the state and the people."

In light of the Doi Moi (market reforms) adopted by Vietnam beginning in 1986 and the collapse of the Eastern Bloc, Vietnam adopted a new constitution in April 1992. The 1992 constitution adopted a "socialist oriented market economy", which allowed the development of private economic sectors, but it largely retained the previous Leninist constitutional structure.






Anode ray

An anode ray (also positive ray or canal ray) is a beam of positive ions that is created by certain types of gas-discharge tubes. They were first observed in Crookes tubes during experiments by the German scientist Eugen Goldstein, in 1886. Later work on anode rays by Wilhelm Wien and J. J. Thomson led to the development of mass spectrometry.

Goldstein used a gas-discharge tube which had a perforated cathode. When an electrical potential of several thousand volts is applied between the cathode and anode, faint luminous "rays" are seen extending from the holes in the back of the cathode. These rays are beams of particles moving in a direction opposite to the "cathode rays", which are streams of electrons which move toward the anode. Goldstein called these positive rays "Kanalstrahlen", "channel rays", or "canal rays", because these rays passed through the holes or "channels" in the cathode.

The process by which anode rays are formed in a gas-discharge anode ray tube is as follows. When the high voltage is applied to the tube, its electric field accelerates the small number of ions (electrically charged atoms) always present in the gas, created by natural processes such as radioactivity. These collide with atoms of the gas, knocking electrons off them and creating more positive ions. These ions and electrons in turn strike more atoms, creating more positive ions in a chain reaction. The positive ions are all attracted to the negative cathode, and some pass through the holes in the cathode. These are the anode rays.

By the time they reach the cathode, the ions have been accelerated to a sufficient speed such that when they collide with other atoms or molecules in the gas they excite the species to a higher energy level. In returning to their former energy levels these atoms or molecules release the energy that they had gained. That energy gets emitted as light. This light-producing process, called fluorescence, causes a glow in the region behind the cathode.

An anode ray ion source typically is an anode coated with the halide salt of an alkali or alkaline earth metal. Application of a sufficiently high electrical potential creates alkali or alkaline earth ions and their emission is most brightly visible at the anode.



İlhan Mansız

İlhan Mansız (born 10 August 1975) is a German-born Turkish former professional footballer who played as a forward. He is also a competing figure skater. He is of Crimean Tatar descent.

Mansız gained international recognition at Istanbul's Beşiktaş J.K., and was later acquired by the Vissel Kobe football club in Japan.

After his Japan journey, he signed a contract with Hertha BSC, but, because of his injury, he never had a chance to play for the first team. His contract was cancelled due to a clause in the contract saying that if his knee was injured again, they would release him. After his short stint with Hertha BSC, İlhan signed a one-year contract with Turkish club Ankaragücü. He was slowly but surely coming back from his plague of injuries and helping Ankaragücü in the Turkcell Super League.

Before the 2006–07 season, he declared his decision to retire from football. As of 2007 there were rumors that he was getting training in Los Angeles, US, to make a comeback to football. These rumors are revealed by İlhan Mansız and he declared to sign contract with Ankaragücü again. However, this final comeback attempt was abandoned before the 2007–08 season, as he announced his retirement.

After a car accident in 2007, it seemed the career of İlhan Mansız had ended. In July 2009, after seven knee operations, he tried to make a comeback by training with German second-division side TSV 1860 Munich.

İlhan made his debut for Turkey as a substitute during their final group-stage qualifier against Moldova in October 2001. The speedy striker earned his way onto coach Şenol Güneş' squad on the strength of an outstanding 2001–02 season for Beşiktaş, when he led the Süper Lig in scoring and helped the squad to a third-place finish.

The best goal of his career came in the 2002 FIFA World Cup quarter final against Senegal. He came on as a substitute for Hakan Şükür in the 67th minute, and netted a golden goal in the 94th minute to send Turkey through to the last four of the competition, in which they ended up taking third place. This was the last time where the golden goal was used in World Cup for extra-time matches. In the third place game İlhan Mansız assisted Hakan Şükür to score the fastest goal ever in a World Cup finals match, and went on to score his team's two other goals in the match.

He is also remembered by his rainbow flick against Brazilian defender Roberto Carlos in 2002 World Cup semifinal clash, which was one of the best skill displays of the cup.

Mansız was a relative unknown in international circles prior to the 2002 World Cup. Despite his display of prodigious talent on the world stage, his health concerns and advanced age precluded serious consideration on the part of European clubs. Mansız declared "It is too late for me, I wish I had been discovered sooner in my career."

On 11 July 2018, Beşiktaş J.K. announced via their social media accounts that Mansız was appointed as assistant coach to the club, along with Guti, another former player of club. Mansız quit his job at Beşiktaş on 6 February 2019 due to health concerns.

Mansız learned to skate at the relatively late age of 33 when he competed on the Turkish show Buzda Dans, as a pair skater with partner Oľga Beständigová, who is also his girlfriend.

After winning the show, Mansız announced his goal was to represent Turkey at the 2014 Winter Olympics, hoping to become the first athlete to compete in both the football World Cup and the Winter Olympics since Aleksandar Shalamanov of Bulgaria.

Mansız and Beständigová made their competitive debut at the 2013 Nebelhorn Trophy, which was also the final qualifying opportunity for the 2014 Olympics. They finished 19th and last in the pairs event, ending their hope of skating at the Olympic Games. Nonetheless, they continued to compete.

Beşiktaş

Turkey

Individual


Stadion Dziesięciolecia

Stadion Dziesięciolecia (), opened in 1955, was for decades the largest stadium in Warsaw, and one of the largest in Poland. Under the Polish People's Republic, it was one of the most advertised construction sites and a principal venue for Party and state festivities. In the 1980s the stadium became dilapidated, as no funds could be found to refurbish it. After 1989 it was used mainly as a bazaar called Jarmark Europa, becoming famous as the place to buy a whole range of goods, most notably clothes, software, hardware and media. Its demolition began in September 2008, and the new National Stadium was constructed in its place to serve as one of the venues for Euro 2012.

In 1953 the Association of Polish Architects held an open contest for the project of an "Olympic Stadium for the city of Warsaw". It was won by the team led by Jerzy Hryniewiecki, Zbigniew Ihnatowicz, and Jerzy Sołtan and later the same year the construction was started. The stadium was constructed mostly with rubble from buildings destroyed during the Warsaw Uprising of 1944.

The project involved the construction of an open air oval-shaped Olympic stadium: it contains a football pitch and a 400-metre racing track. Theoretically, the terraces with wooden benches provided seats for 71,008 people, but during the biggest festivals organised there, it accommodated more than 100,000 spectators. In addition, the stadium was equipped with a practice field, a small sports dome, 900 parking spaces and was surrounded by a park. The stadium was also connected to a nearby bus station and a railway station opened specifically for the transport of spectators.

Soon after its opening, it became Poland's national stadium. It housed the most important international football matches and athletics competitions, as well as communist party galas, concerts, and commemorative festivals. In addition, it served as the final lap of the Peace Race. In 1968, it was the site of Ryszard Siwiec's self-immolation in protest at the invasion of Czechoslovakia during a propaganda festival.

In 1983, due to technical problems, the stadium was abandoned. In 1989 it was rented by the City of Warsaw to a company that turned the stadium into an outdoor market known as Jarmark Europa, which soon became Europe's largest open-air market. With over 5,000 traders (and many more unregistered; a large number of traders were from other countries) it was the biggest facility of its kind in Poland. Official figures state an annual turnover of 500 million zlotys, which is generally believed to be an underestimate. 

The top tier of the market included vendors of clothing, souvenirs, and bootlegged CDs and movies. Police say the market was the main selling point for black market goods in the country. Between 1995 and 2001 more than 25,000 traders were prosecuted, while approximately 10 million infringing CDs and videotapes were confiscated. Amongst the English-speaking community in Warsaw, the stadium was often referred to as the "Russian market".

The old stadium was demolished to prepare for the construction of the new National Stadium accommodating 55,000 spectators. Construction on the stadium was finished in 2011, and was one of the stadiums hosting the Euro 2012. Adjoining the new stadium there are to be erected the following structures: a 15,000-seat indoor arena, a new railway station "Warszawa Stadion", a modern hotel, a covered Olympic swimming pool with seats for 4,000 spectators, a meeting hall and a metro station "Stadion" on a yet-to-be built subway line. During the European Championship itself, the following matches are to be played at the stadium: the opening match, group matches, a quarterfinal and a semifinal.

Stadion Dziesięciolecia and its grounds are the property of the Government of Poland, and the City of Warsaw has declared that for this reason, it would be illegal for the city to financially participate in the project, which is to be financed by the national government.

The building of the National Stadium was delayed by disputes with vendors who protested against orders to leave the 10th-Anniversary Stadium.



Fore River

Fore River may refer to:


London General Omnibus Company

The London General Omnibus Company or LGOC, was the principal bus operator in London between 1855 and 1933. It was also, for a short period between 1909 and 1912, a motor bus manufacturer.

The London General Omnibus Company was founded in 1855 to amalgamate and regulate the many independent horse-drawn omnibus services then operating in London. Originally an Anglo-French enterprise, also known as the Compagnie Generale des Omnibus de Londres, the LGOC soon became the largest omnibus operator in London. It bought out hundreds of independently owned buses and established a consistent level of service for its fleet. Within a year, the LGOC controlled 600 of London's 810 omnibuses.

Under its chairman Sir John Pound, in 1902 it looked at an option to purchase a competitor, the Star Omnibus Company, but it was unable to complete negotiations. LGOC began using motor omnibuses in 1902, and the last LGOC horse-drawn bus ran on 25 October 1911.

In 1908 the LGOC bought the Road Car Company, the Vanguard Company, and its other main rivals, thereby gaining a virtual monopoly in London.

The merger of these three companies (the Road Car Company was also known as "Union Jack" owing to its habit of flying the British flag on its vehicles) gave the new and enlarged LGOC the most experienced operating and engineering personnel of any operator - and perhaps manufacturer - in the country at the time.

The LGOC absorbed the Great Eastern London Motor Omnibus Company (previously known as London Motor Omnibus Company) in March 1911.

In 1912, the Underground Group, which owned most of the London Underground, bought the LGOC. This followed the start of negotiations between the two companies in 1910 that finally led to the publication of an official statement regarding the proposed terms of the merger on 19 January 1912. By early February 1912 the majority of shareholders in the LGOC had accepted the terms. This in time allowed increasing co-ordination between LGOC bus and tube services, with integrated fares, such as was seen with the opening of the bus station adjacent to Hammersmith station in April 1914.

In 1933, the LGOC, along with the rest of the Underground Group, became part of the new London Passenger Transport Board. The name London General fell into disuse, and London Transport instead became synonymous with the red London bus.

LGOC began producing motor omnibuses for its own use in 1909 at works established in premises inherited from Vanguard at Blackhorse Lane, Walthamstow, London. The first model built was the LGOC X-type, which was designed by Frank Searle, LGOC's chief engineer. The X-type was followed by the LGOC B-type, from the same designer.

After the Underground Group's acquisition of the LGOC in 1912, the bus manufacturing elements of the LGOC were split out to create the Associated Equipment Company (AEC).

In the privatisation of London bus services in the 1990s, London Transport created a series of shadow bus operating companies with names of geographic or historic significance, and one of these was christened London General in honour of the LGOC. The new London General was initially privatised by management buy-out, and acquired by the Go-Ahead Group in 1996.

“Did you see that bus parked outside the theatre as you came in? It had ‘Private’ on the front. Looked very lonely, it did. I can remember when it was a General!” -Michael Flanders, "A Transport of Delight," "At The Drop Of A Hat", 1957

The London General Omnibus Company was featured in the opening ceremony of the 2012 Summer Olympics in London. Isambard Kingdom Brunel, played by actor Kenneth Branagh, was depicted arriving in a green horse-drawn London General Omnibus Company Limited bus at the start of the ceremony.

In the video game "Assassin's Creed Syndicate" published by Ubisoft in 2015, assassins come to the aid of Edward Hodson Bayley and company, who was said to be responsible for the founding of the united London General Omnibus Company in the storyline campaign, supplying omnibuses for the city.


Felix Steiner

Felix Martin Julius Steiner (23 May 1896 – 12 May 1966) was a German SS commander during the Nazi era. During World War II, he served in the Waffen-SS, the combat branch of the SS, and commanded several SS divisions and corps. He was awarded the Knight's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves and Swords. Together with Paul Hausser, he contributed significantly to the development and transformation of the Waffen-SS into a combat force made up of volunteers and conscripts from both occupied and un-occupied lands.

Steiner was chosen by Heinrich Himmler to oversee the creation of and then command the SS Division Wiking. In 1943, he was promoted to the command of the III SS Panzer Corps. On 28 January 1945, Steiner was placed in command of the 11th SS Panzer Army, which formed part of a new Army Group Vistula, an ad-hoc formation to defend Berlin from the Soviet armies advancing from the Vistula River.

On 21 April 1945, during the Battle for Berlin, Steiner was placed in command of Army Detachment Steiner, with which Adolf Hitler ordered Steiner to envelop the 1st Belorussian Front through a pincer movement, advancing from the north of the city. However, as his unit was outnumbered ten to one, Steiner made it clear that he did not have the capacity for a counter-attack on 22 April during the daily situation conference in the "Führerbunker".

After the capitulation of Germany, Steiner was imprisoned and investigated for war crimes. He faced charges at the Nuremberg Trials, but they were dropped and he was released in 1948. In 1953, Steiner was recruited by the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency to found the "Gesellschaft für Wehrkunde" ("Society for Defense Studies"), composed of former German military officers, as a propaganda tool and a military think tank for the rearmament of West Germany.

Along with other former high-ranking Waffen-SS personnel, Steiner was a founding member of HIAG, a lobby group of negationistic apologists formed in 1951 to campaign for the legal, economic and historical rehabilitation of the Waffen-SS. He died in 1966.

Steiner was born on 23 May 1896 in Stalluponen in Prussia, (in East Prussia) German Empire. He joined the Royal Prussian Army as an infantry cadet. During World War I, he was awarded the Iron Cross 1st and 2nd class. In 1919, Steiner joined the paramilitary "Freikorps" in the East Prussian city of Memel during the German Revolution and was later incorporated into the "Reichswehr" in 1921. In 1933, he left the army having attained the rank of major.

Steiner first joined the Nazi Party (NSDAP) (membership number: 4,264,295) and the "Sturmabteilung" (SA). In 1935 he enlisted in the SS. He took command of a battalion of "SS-Verfügungstruppen" (SS-VT) troops, and within a year had been promoted to SS-"Standartenführer"; and later was put in command of the "SS-Deutschland" Regiment.

At the outbreak of World War II, he was SS-Oberführer (senior leader) in charge of the Waffen-SS regiment "SS-Deutschland". He led this regiment through the Invasion of Poland and the Battle of France, for which he was awarded the Knight's Cross of the Iron Cross on 15 August 1940. Steiner was introduced to Heinrich Himmler, the head of the SS, to oversee the creation of, and then command the new SS Division Wiking. This division was militarily successful but also very barbaric in the invasion of the Soviet Union, for example killing 600 Jews in Zboriv, Ukraine. At the time of its creation, the division consisted mostly of non-German volunteers (Dutch, Flemish, Finns and Scandinavians), including the Danish regiment Frikorps Danmark.

In April 1943, he was placed in command of a newly formed III SS Panzer Corps. The unit participated in anti-partisan actions in Yugoslavia. In November/December 1943 his corps was transferred to the Eastern Front and positioned in the northern sector at Leningrad under Army Group North. Steiner's Panzer Corps played a leading role during the Battle of Narva and the Battle of Tannenberg Line. His unit then withdrew with the rest of Army Group North to the Courland Peninsula.

In January 1945, Steiner along with the III SS Panzer Corps was transferred by ship from the Courland Pocket to help with the defence of the German homeland. The corps was assigned to Army Group Vistula under the new Eleventh SS Panzer Army although the army really existed only on paper. Once the Soviet Army had reached the Oder River, the Eleventh SS Panzer Army became inactive, and the III SS Panzer Corps was reassigned to the German Third Panzer Army as a reserve during the Soviets' Berlin Offensive Operation. During the Battle of Seelow Heights, the first major battle of the offensive, General Gotthard Heinrici, the commander of Army Group Vistula, transferred most of the III SS Panzer Corps' divisions to General Theodor Busse's Ninth Army.

By 21 April, Soviet Marshal Georgi Zhukov's 1st Belorussian Front had broken through the German lines on the Seelow Heights. Hitler, ignoring the facts, started to call the ragtag units that came under Steiner's command, the Army Detachment Steiner ("Armeeabteilung Steiner").

Hitler ordered Steiner to attack the northern flank of the huge salient that had been created by the 1st Belorussian Front's breakout. Steiner's attack was supposed to coincide with General Theodor Busse's Ninth Army attacking from the south in a pincer attack. The Ninth Army had been pushed to south of the 1st Belorussian Front's salient. To facilitate the attack, Steiner was assigned the three divisions of the Ninth Army's CI Army Corps: the 4th SS Panzergrenadier Division "Polizei", the 5th Jäger Division and the 25th Panzergrenadier Division. All three divisions were north of the Finow Canal on the Northern flank of Zhukov's salient. General Helmuth Weidling's LVI Panzer Corps, which was still east of Berlin with its northern flank just below Werneuchen, was also ordered to participate in the attack. The three divisions from CI Army Corps planned to attack south from Eberswalde on the Finow Canal towards the LVI Panzer Corps. The three divisions from CI Army Corps were 24 kilometres (about 15 miles) east of Berlin, and the attack to the south would cut the 1st Belorussian Front's salient into two. Steiner called Heinrici and informed him that the plan could not be implemented because the 5th Jäger Division and the 25th Panzergrenadier Division were deployed defensively and could not be redeployed until the 2nd Naval Division arrived from the coast to relieve them. That left only two battalions of the 4th SS Panzergrenadier Division available, and they had no combat weapons.

Based on Steiner's assessment, Heinrici called General Hans Krebs, Chief of Staff of the German General Staff of the Army High Command ("Oberkommando des Heeres" or OKH), and told him that the plan could not be implemented. Heinrici asked to speak to Hitler but was told Hitler was too busy to take his call. On 22 April 1945, at his afternoon conference, Hitler, becoming aware that Steiner was not going to attack, fell into a tearful rage. Hitler finally declared that the war was lost, blamed the generals for the Reich's defeat and announced that he would remain in Berlin until the end and then kill himself. On the same day, General Rudolf Holste was given the few mobile forces that Steiner commanded so that he could participate in a new plan to relieve Berlin. Holste was to attack from the north while General Walther Wenck attacked from the west and General Theodor Busse attacked from the south. The attacks amounted to little, and on 25 April, the Soviet forces attacking to the north and the south of Berlin linked up to the west of the city.

After the surrender, Steiner was incarcerated until 1948. He faced charges at the Nuremberg Trials, but they were dropped and he was released.

In 1953, Steiner was recruited by the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency to found the "Gesellschaft für Wehrkunde" ("Society for Defense Studies"), composed of former German military officers, as a propaganda tool and a military think tank for West German rearmament. With Paul Hausser, Herbert Gille and Otto Kumm, Steiner became a founding member of HIAG, the lobby group founded by former high-ranking Waffen-SS officers in West Germany in 1951.

From his home in West Germany he published "Die Freiwilligen der Waffen-SS: Idee und Opfergang" ("The Volunteers of Waffen-SS: Idea and Sacrifice") in 1958. Steiner's books and memoirs have been characterised by historian Charles Sydnor as one of the "most important works of apologist literature," together with warfare analyses "Grenadiere" by Kurt Meyer and "Waffen-SS in Action" by Paul Hausser. These works demanded rehabilitation of the military branch of the NSDAP, with Steiner's works being important in stressing the theme of the purely military Waffen-SS.

A second book was published in 1963 under the title "Die Armee der Geächteten" (English: "The Army of the Outlaws") and was also tendentious.

Steiner died on 12 May 1966, 11 days before his 70th birthday.





Papillon Rose

"Papillon Rose" started out as a metafiction joke on what was claimed to be the website for a new anime project "Lingerie Fighter Papillon Rose". The website posted pictures of characters (which were usually copied from scenes in "Sailor Moon", with the artwork changed) and a lyrics to opening and ending theme songs. Demand grew due to people finding the page and assuming it was for an actual series. Subsequently, an episode guide for the (non-existent) first series and manga was also made available, as well as a set of CD-ROMs containing a 2-minute animated promotional clip, eight tracks (six BGM and two vocal songs), system voice clips for computers, a "Papillon Rose" mahjong game, and two screen savers. The CDs were only made available for Comiket, and were not distributed outside Japan. The project homepage was redesigned and fake manga illustrations and notes from the fictional author were added. Amateur voice actors and singers were also contacted online to provide sample character voice clips for a handful of the villains and heroines. A 25-episode ONA series was promised in 2001 along with the release of an animated teaser trailer. Nothing other than the trailers were ever released online or elsewhere.
In January 2002, a second season concept was introduced, named "Lingerie Soldier Papillon Rose R", aiming to be released as an artbook on Comiket. In April 2004, a movie finale concept was introduced as well, named "Lingerie Soldier Papillon Rose G".
Subsequently, all of the project websites were either taken down or replaced with a blank page with the former content removed. There is no evidence that any fan-submitted material was ever used for either the OVA episode or the TV series.

In the fall of 2014, a blog was opened featuring new artwork for what claimed to be a new version of the "Papillon Rose" series, a rebuild of the original idea as a film trilogy. A new website was opened a few days afterwards, advertising a "Papillon Rose" booth in the 2015 Comiket. A new doujinshi artbook was released together with two pencil boards, featuring new artwork for the characters and a similar storyline to the original incarnation of the web series.

 was released as a single 24-minute OVA episode, produced by Echigoya. This one-episode OVA was distributed on VHS and DVD formats by Pink company and Office F&O in 2003.

This OVA episode is included in the 2010 North American DVD release with the six-episode "Papillon Rose: The New Season" TV series.

A six-episode TV series titled "Papillon Rose: The New Season" was broadcast in Japan in 2006. The TV series images and dialog are toned down considerably from the 2003 OVA. The TV series covers a time beginning a year after the ending of the OVA events and introduces new characters.

We find the girls in town going about their lives without any memories of their past exploits or ability to transform. Tsubomi is approached by Rama, the cat, whom, at first, she does not understand. But the Earth, specifically the Tokyo otaku district of Akiba, is under attack by a trio of powerful alien women along with their minions. The explosions around her restore her memories and she reassembles the rest of the Papillon team to defend the town. The Papillon team is reassembled and the enemies are won over by the team's magical-girl powers and their "charms".

In March 2010, Section23 Films announced plans to release the six-episode TV series and the OVA on DVD for North America on behalf of Maiden Japan. The collection was released on June 8, 2010, on a single DVD titled "Papillon Rose." This title was the first licensed by Maiden Japan for release in North America. It is in the Japanese language with English subtitles.

In January 2014 the six episodes of the TV series and the single OVA episode were posted on the Anime Network website for online streaming.

The North American DVD release was reviewed by Chris Beveridge on the popular media blog Mania.com and given an overall grade of B. He summarizes his review:
″Papillon Rose serves up just the right kind of parody of the Sailor Moon and magical girl world with this release. I do admittedly prefer the OVA more than the TV series because it's concise and has a much dirtier mindset to it. The TV series tones things down for obvious reason but it still has a good deal of fun and manages to get dirty in its own way. This was the kind of show where its reputation certainly it and you always fear it may not live up to expectations. With the broadcast version of the TV series here, that's a definitely downside. But for what we do get, it's a lot of fun and a good way to spend an evening watching pretty anime girls doling out justice in a slight smutty way with smiles on their faces. It's a title for discerning tastes, to say the least.″


Stegodon

Stegodon ("roofed tooth" from the Ancient Greek words , , 'to cover', + , , 'tooth' because of the distinctive ridges on the animal's molars) is an extinct genus of proboscidean, related to elephants. It was originally assigned to the family Elephantidae along with modern elephants but is now placed in the extinct family Stegodontidae. Like elephants, "Stegodon" had teeth with plate-like lophs that are different from those of more primitive proboscideans like gomphotheres and mammutids. The oldest fossils of the genus are found in Late Miocene strata in Asia, likely originating from the more archaic "Stegolophodon," subsequently migrating into Africa. While the genus became extinct in Africa during the Pliocene, "Stegodon" remained widespread in South, Southeast and East Asia until the end of the Pleistocene.

The skull of "Stegodon" is relatively tall but short. The lower jaw in comparison to early elephantimorphs is shortened (brevirostrine), and lacks lower tusks/incisors. The molar teeth are superficially like those of elephants, consisting of parallel lamellae that form ridges but are generally relatively low crowned (brachydont), the numbers of ridges are greater in later species. Members of the genus lack permanent premolars. The tusks are proportionally large, with those of the biggest species being among the largest known tusks in proboscideans, with a particularly large tusk of "S. ganesa" from the Early Pleistocene of India measured to be long, with an estimated mass of approximately , substantially larger than the largest recorded modern elephant tusk.

Some species of "Stegodon" were amongst the largest proboscideans. The Chinese species "S. zdanskyi" is known from an old male (50-plus years old) from the Yellow River that is tall and would have weighed approximately in life. It had a humerus long, a femur long, and a pelvis wide. The Indian "S. ganesa" is suggested to have a shoulder height of about , and a body mass of around . The Javanese species "S. trigonocephalus" is suggested to have been around tall, with a body mass of around .

Similar to modern-day elephants, stegodonts were likely good swimmers, allowing them to disperse to remote islands in Indonesia, the Philippines and Japan. Once present on the islands, due to the process of insular dwarfism, as a result of decreased land area and the reduction of predation and competition pressure, they reduced in body size, with the degree of dwarfism varying between islands as the result of local conditions. One of the smallest species, "Stegodon sumbaensis" from Sumba in Indonesia, is estimated at around 8% of the size of mainland "Stegodon" species, with a body mass of . Sometimes the same island was colonised multiple times by "Stegodon," as in Flores, where the Early Pleistocene strongly dwarfed species "Stegodon sondaari", which was tall at the shoulder and weighed about , was replaced by the species "Stegodon florensis" during the Middle Pleistocene which was initially substantially larger, but progressively reduced in size over time, with the earlier subspecies "Stegodon florensis florensis" from the Middle Pleistocene estimated to be around 50% the size of mainland "Stegodon" species with a shoulder height of around and a body mass of around 1.7 tons, while the later "Stegodon florensis insularis" from the Late Pleistocene is estimated to be around 17% the size of mainland "Stegodon" species, with a shoulder height of around , and a body mass of about .

Like modern elephants, but unlike more primitive proboscideans, "Stegodon" is thought to have chewed using a proal movement (a forward stroke from the back to the front) of the lower jaws. This jaw movement is thought to have evolved independently in elephants and stegodontids. "Stegodon" populations from the Pliocene of the India are suggested to have been variable mixed feeders based on isotopic analysis. Based on dental microwear analysis, populations of "Stegodon" from the Pleistocene of China ("Stegodon orientalis" and "Stegodon huananensis") and mainland southeast Asia ("S. orientalis") were found to be browsers, with clear niche differentiation from sympatric "Elephas" populations, which tended towards mixed feeding (both browsing and grazing). In contrast, specimens of "Stegodon trigonocephalus" from the Early-Middle Pleistocene of Java were found to be mixed feeders to grazers, with a diet similar to that of sympatric "Elephas hysudrindicus". The dwarf species from Flores, "Stegodon sondaari" and "Stegodon florensis", are suggested to have been mixed feeders and grazers, respectively, based on stable carbon isotopes. Specimens of "Stegodon kaiesensis" from the Pliocene of East Africa were found to be browsers to mixed feeders, based on mesowear analysis.

Tracks of a group of "Stegodon" from the Late Pliocene of Japan suggest that like modern elephants, "Stegodon" lived in social herds.

On Flores, where dwarf "Stegodon" species were the only large herbivores, they were likely the main prey of the Komodo dragon. Claims that "Stegodon florensis" was hunted by "Homo floresiensis" are based on ambiguous circumstantial association between bones and stone tools, and the rarity of cut marks makes it unclear to what if to any degree, hunting of "Stegodon" was actually practiced by "Homo floresiensis."

In the past, stegodonts were believed to be the ancestors of the true elephants and mammoths, but currently they are believed to have no modern descendants. "Stegodon" is likely derived from "Stegolophodon", an extinct genus known from the Miocene of Asia, with transitional fossils between the two genera known from the Late Miocene of Southeast Asia and Yunnan in South China. "Stegodon" is more closely related to elephants and mammoths than to mastodons. Like elephants, stegodontids are believed to have derived from gomphotheres.

The following cladogram shows the placement of the genus "Stegodon" among other proboscideans, based on hyoid characteristics:

An indeterminate "Stegodon" molar of an uncertain locality and age is known from Greece, representing the only record of the genus in Europe. Indeterminate remains are also known from the Early Pleistocene and early Middle Pleistocene of Israel.

The oldest fossils of "Stegodon" in Asia date to the Late Miocene, around 8-11 million years ago, with the oldest fossils of the genus in Africa being around 7-6 million years old. "Stegodon" became extinct in Africa during the late Pliocene, around 3 million years ago suggested to be the result of expansion of grassland habitats. The Javanese species "Stegodon trigonocephalus" became extinct around 130-80,000 years ago during the latest Middle Pleistocene-early Late Pleistocene (Marine Isotope Stage 5) following a change to more humid conditions, which may have reduced grazing habitat. "Stegodon florensis" became extinct around 50,000 years ago, around the time of arrival of modern humans to Flores. "Stegodon" became extinct in the Indian subcontinent ("Stegodon namadicus"/"Stegodon" sp".)," mainland Southeast Asia and China ("S. orientalis") at some point during the Late Pleistocene epoch, while Asian elephants, which existed in sympatry with "Stegodon" in these regions, are still extant. The precise timing of extinction is uncertain for these regions. The survival of the Asian elephant as opposed to "Stegodon orientalis" in Southeast Asia and South China has been suggested to be due to its more flexible diet in comparison to "S. orientalis". A review of 130 papers written about 180 different sites with proboscidean remains in southern China revealed "Stegodon" to have been more common than Asian elephants; the papers gave many recent radiocarbon dates, the youngest being 2,150 BCE (4,100 BP). However, Turvey "et al." (2013) reported that one of the faunal assemblages including supposed fossils of Holocene "Stegodon" (from Gulin, Sichuan Province) is actually late Pleistocene in age; other supposed fossils of Holocene stegodonts were lost and their age cannot be verified. The authors concluded that the latest confirmed occurrences of "Stegodon" from China are from the Late Pleistocene, and that its Holocene survival cannot be substantiated.

Kevin Peter Hall

Kevin Peter Hall (May 9, 1955 – April 10, 1991) was an American actor. Hall stood tall, and frequently played monster characters during his career. He was the original title character in the science fiction "Predator" franchise, appearing in the first 1987 film and its 1990 sequel. Hall also portrayed the eponymous Harry in the fantasy comedy film "Harry and the Hendersons" (1987), a role he reprised for the first season of NBC's television adaptation (1990–1991). His human roles included Dr. Elvin "El" Lincoln on the NBC science fiction series "Misfits of Science" (1985–1986) and Warren Merriwether on the sitcom "227" (1989–1990).

Hall was born in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Hall came from a tall family. His father, Charles Hall, stood , and his mother, Sylvia, stood . At , Hall was the tallest of his brothers, all of whom were at least tall.

During his high school years at Penn Hills High School, he was a star basketball player. He subsequently attended George Washington University in Washington, D.C., where he played for its basketball team and majored in Theatrical Arts.

After graduation, Hall moved to Venezuela to play professional basketball.

Due to Hall's height, he was often cast in monster roles. He made his acting debut in the 1979 horror film "Prophecy". He appeared as the alien in the 1980 horror film "Without Warning" and as Gorvil in the 1982 television movie "Mazes and Monsters". In 1985, he co-starred in the short-lived series "Misfits of Science". He guest-starred on the sitcom "Night Court" as a huge but gentle mental patient who humorously towered over bailiff Bull Shannon, played by Richard Moll, who is , and a fellow mental patient, played by James Cromwell, who is . The next year, Hall portrayed yet another monster in the horror film "Monster in the Closet", followed by the role of Harry, the Bigfoot, in "Harry and the Hendersons".

In 1986, Hall was cast as the main antagonist in "Predator", opposite Arnold Schwarzenegger. During its developmental stages, the Predator was going to be played by Jean-Claude Van Damme, who played the Predator for the first few scenes, but was uncredited in the end credits. The producers decided to recast the role with Hall so that the Predator could more convincingly dominate the film's human characters with its greater size. Hall also appeared unmasked as a helicopter pilot at the end of the film. Hall would go on to reprise the role in the 1990 sequel, this time opposite Danny Glover and Gary Busey.

Following his role in "Predator", Hall appeared in the feature film "Big Top Pee-wee" (1988) and had a guest spot on ""; Hall had been one of the actors considered for the role of Geordi La Forge on the latter, before the role went to LeVar Burton. From 1989 to 1990, he had a recurring role on the NBC sitcom "227". In 1990, Hall reprised his role as Harry in the television series "Harry and the Hendersons", based on the 1987 film of the same name. He died during the series' first season.

Hall met actress Alaina Reed while taping a guest role on the television show "227". The couple would marry both on the show and in real life.

While working on the TV series "Harry and the Hendersons", Hall announced that he had contracted HIV from a blood transfusion during surgery for injuries he sustained in a car accident. He died from AIDS-related pneumonia on April 10, 1991, a month short of his 36th birthday.

Hall was posthumously inducted into the Penn Hills Hall of Fame as part of the inaugural class on May 8, 2009.



Fairfield, New South Wales

Fairfield is a suburb of South Western Sydney, in the state of New South Wales, Australia. Being in the centre of the Cumberland Plain, Fairfield is located west of the Sydney central business district and is the administrative heart of the Fairfield City Council (local government area) – despite a very small portion of it belonging to the Cumberland Council. Fairfield supports a mixture of commercial and residential developments, mostly characterised by medium-density buildings and some new high-rise apartments.

Fairfield is one of the most multicultural and culturally diverse cities in Australia, with more than half of the residents having been born overseas, mostly in non-English speaking countries. The majority of the suburb's dwellers speak a language other than English at home, with the two most common ones being Arabic and Assyrian Neo-Aramaic. Fairfield is an ethnic enclave of Assyrian Christians (mostly from Iraq, and more recently Syria). Fairfield's large Iraqi and Assyrian community has had the media describe the suburb as Little Iraq or Little Assyria.

For more than 30,000 years, Aboriginal people from the Cabrogal-Gandangara tribe have lived in the Fairfield area.

The earliest recorded white settlement in the Fairfield district is described in William Bradley's Journal where he noted an expedition from Rose Hill to Prospect Creek to determine whether Prospect Creek led to Botany Bay. Bradley described a place on the Creek where the water changed from fresh to salt with a drop of . The presence of salt water confirmed Prospect Creek's connection to the sea. 

Breton Gabriel Louis Marie Huon de Kerrileau, a soldier in the NSW Corps arrived in the colony in 1794, having fled France during the French Revolution. In 1807 he received a grant of in the centre of Fairfield, which he named "Castel Paul". This was an Englished form of the town in which he was born in Brittany, Kastell-Paol, Saint-Pol-de-Léon in French. By 1814 "Castel Paul" had been combined, by subsequent owners, with several similarly sized grants to form a largely uncleared estate.

The free settler John Horsley purchased the estate in that year and named it "Mark Lodge", after family properties in Essex, England. Horsley, a Magistrate and Coroner at Liverpool (1825-1834), and his large family were among the pioneers of white settlement in the Fairfield District. Later, a Colonial Treasurer, Thomas Ware Smart (1810–1881) bought the estate and in the 1860s built the mansion, 'Fairfield House'. 

Fairfield railway station was opened in 1856 and has the oldest surviving railway building in New South Wales. Development began in the mid 19th century supported by railway construction in 1856. The railway aided with the enlargement of local industries including timber, fruit development and agricultural produce. Around the start of the 20th century the area had a population of 2,500 people and with fertile soils, produced crops for distribution in Sydney. Electricity was connected in 1921.

Rapid population increase after World War II saw the settlement of many ex-service men and European migrants, with Ware Street becoming the new main street, which featured the city's only escalator. The street at that time featured prominent hardware, furniture, menswear and homeware stores, including a Bing Lee. Large scale Housing Commission development in the 1950s swelled the population to 38,000. The Civic Centre was established in the 1960s in Spencer Street and featured many businesses, including the nearby Civic Hotel. Fairfield Hospital was opened in September 1956 on The Horsley Drive, but was relocated to Prairiewood in 1988.

By 1979, the population had reached 120,000 and the city was becoming one of the larger Local Government Areas in New South Wales. In the early 1980s, Fairfield Forum was opened and Ware Street was shut for traffic, with a pedestrian zone established in its stead with a water fountain imported from Italy being the ornament of the civic area. However, the pedestrian plaza was deemed unsuccessful, despite the annual street parades occurring there, and thus Ware Street once again was open to traffic.

During the mid to late 1980s war between Iraq and Iran, large number of Assyrians fled Iraq and settled in Fairfield, making it the most popular settlement for Assyrians. In 1990, Neeta City was opened due to the rapid growth of Fairfield's commercial centre. An amphitheatre situated in Spencer Street with chess board was closed in the early 2000s with the street reopening to traffic. In the mid-2000s, Fairfield's first high rise apartment building (around 9 to 11 storeys) was constructed, with a number of other high rise buildings which were built consequentially throughout the city centre.

In 2015, the Abbott government granted 12,000 extra humanitarian visas to persecuted groups in the war-torn Middle Eastern countries, namely Syria. The Department of Social Services confirmed that 11,400 Iraqi and Syrian refugees (many of whom being Assyrian) were admitted to Australia as part of its one-off humanitarian intake, with half of them primarily settling in Fairfield and also Liverpool. Fairfield City
accommodated 3,000 humanitarian arrivals in 2016, taking in 75% of all western Sydney's refugee intake, with Liverpool City Council second at 14%. Fairfield City Centre today features a concoction of retail, commercial and residential developments, including medium density edifices and medium to high-rise shop-top housing developments.

In July 2021, Fairfield was one of the "suburbs of concern" and became a hotspot due to rising COVID-19 cases in the region that resulted in a strict lockdown in the area, transforming the CBD into a ghost town, with heavy police patrol compliance checks. Fines were issued for those who did not comply with the state public health order. Workers from Fairfield were ordered to stay at home by NSW premier Gladys Berejiklian unless they had leave the house for emergency reasons or that they had produced a negative COVID-19 test.

Fairfield consists of a combination of main street retail centred in Smart and Ware Streets, arcade and larger shopping centres, with a variety of activities including retail, café/restaurant/take away foods, supermarkets (with some displayed in a bazaar-style environment), personal services and commercial uses. Although most of these commercial precincts are not a leading part of Fairfield's night time attribute at present, wedding receptions, however, do prevail night activity on the weekends. 

A couple of shop fronts along The Crescent are in the Federation and Art Deco style, which date from the late 1890s to 1920s, respectively, reflecting its former role as an early main street. The CBD is surrounded by a halo of three-storey residential flats, which are beneficial for pedestrian activity to the City Centre. The community holds public gathering and interaction in a high regard, which is manifested by the CBD's active shopping streets and daily social assemblage for playing chess on Kenyon Street.

Fairfield has three shopping malls which were established between the 1980s and early 1990s. The two largest are the "Fairfield Forum" and "Neeta City" (later renamed to "Fairfield City Central") and the smaller "Fairfield Chase". Forum contains Kmart, Aldi and Coles. Fairfield City Central, formerly Neeta City (name changed in late 2021), features a Woolworths supermarket. The "Fairfield Chase Commercial Tower" was Fairfield's first high-rise structure. It has a lower level of commercial shops, a medical centre and food outlets open to the public while the higher levels function as private office building spaces are occupied by government agencies such as Legal Aid NSW, the NSW Service for Treatment and Rehabilitation of Torture and Trauma Survivors and private companies such as a child care centre and employment agencies. Fairfield does not feature a formal ‘City Square’, though "The Crescent Plaza", opened to the public in December 2016, and "Thomas Ware Plaza" in Nelson Street, provide a similar sense of fashion to a City Square. The Crescent, Nelson, Ware and Nelson Streets are ornamented by a number of London planetrees.

A cinema at Fairfield Forum was opened as 'Hoyts Forum Twin' on 17 March 1983 with around 400 seating. In 1992, the complex was renamed Fairfield Cinema, with a third screen installed in 1996. In 2006, it was reestablished as the World Cinemas (primarily exhibiting Bollywood films). The cinema was altogether closed in 2010 and its site became a fitness/gym centre.

‘Fairfield’ has been synonymised with ‘Assyrian’, as people overseas have been familiar with its Assyrian culture. Iraqi and Assyrian businesses have opened in Fairfield, mostly around Ware Street. These businesses include everything from jewellery shops to restaurants, making the area favourite entertainment and shopping hotspot for the Iraqi and Assyrian community. Elderly Assyrian men gather daily to play dominoes in the outdoor tables, which are printed with chess board. Fairfield's culturally diverse population is reflected in multicultural local businesses such as over twenty different types of cafés and restaurants that include Assyrian, Iraqi, Italian, Chinese, Lebanese, Vietnamese, South American and Thai cuisine.

Sydney's Iraqi community congregated in Fairfield to celebrate Iraq qualifying for the Asian Football Cup finals in 2007. More than 7000 people joined in street celebrations around Fairfield on Sunday 29 July 2007 after Iraq won the Asian Cup finals. Similar events took place in January 2023 when Iraq won the 25th Arabian Gulf Cup by defeating Oman in the final, 3-2 in extra time with Iraq scoring the winning goal deep into stoppage time of the 2nd half of extra time.

There is a 1,000 sqm public library in Hamilton Road, which was previously located in Kenyon Street. Fairfield has a few Assyrian churches, sporting clubs, cultural associations and health groups.

The "School of Arts Building", established in the late 19th century, is a social and historical significance and is an example of Victorian and Federation period styles which are uncommon
in the suburb. The "Uniting Church" is made up of two churches – One of which was built in 1894 and the other in 1927. The first fire brigade built in the city, the Fire Station in William Street, is a free classical style building and is also a historical significance. A federation weatherboard cottage located in Lawson Street was established in around 1910.

Made up of two red brick entrance pillars, Honour Avenue was built in honour of the Fairfield residents who served in the World Wars and it includes the names of World War II personnel. Its connecting metal arch exhibits the words: '1939 Honour Avenue 1945'. The avenue therein contains large brush boxes on both sides and public seating.

Fairfield has a number of heritage-listed sites, including:

Fairfield has two local newspapers, The "Fairfield Advance" and the "Fairfield Champion", which are issued every Wednesday.

Fairfield railway station is on the Old Main South. Trains run frequently from Fairfield to Leppington, Parramatta and the City Circle. Fairfield also has a major bus interchange adjacent to the railway station. For details of bus services from the interchange see Fairfield railway station. The Horsley Drive is a prominent road in Fairfield, with a high amount of traffic, and acts as a pivotal entrance to the city from the north and southeast. Hamilton Road to the southwest is another.

Public schools in Fairfield include Fairfield High School and Fairfield Public School. Private Schools include Patrician Brothers' College and Our Lady of the Rosary Primary School, which are both catholic schools. Patrician Brothers' Primary School was also previously located in Fairfield but closed in 2006. Alternative High Schools for students who have been expelled or unfit for mainstream include Indie School - Fairfield campus, and Warakirri College - Fairfield campus. 

Much of the original bushland cover within the city has been cleared through past land management practices. A few small areas of this original bushland remain, including examples of Cumberland Plain vegetation and Cooks River/Castlereagh Ironbark Forest, which are listed under the Threatened Species Conservation Act. The Australian white ibis are specifically present in The Crescent, opposite of the train station.

Eight creeks, 80 kilometres in length, have their headwaters in Fairfield City and flow into the Georges River and Hawkesbury Nepean catchments. The impact of development over the past 50 years has resulted in severe degradation of the natural habitat in the creek banks and water quality has been assessed as very poor in recent years. Strategies are being implemented so that this trend is being reversed. Air quality in the city is heavily impacted upon by an insufficiently integrated public transport system, creating an over reliance upon private vehicles for moving people and freight.

Fairfield has a humid subtropical climate (Köppen climate classification: "Cfa"). Summer weather may come from north-east (humid) or the north west (dry). Fairfield is usually a few degrees warmer than Sydney on summer days and a few degrees cooler on winter nights. There could be a temperature differential of 5 degrees Celsius in summer due to sea breezes in the City that don't generally penetrate inland, and in extreme cases there could be a 10 degrees differential. It receives less annual rain than Sydney CBD by about 400mm. Late winter and early spring receive the least rainfall, whilst late summer and autumn receive more rain.

According to the 2021 census, the suburb of Fairfield had a population of 18,596 people, the majority of whom (67.3%) were born outside of Australia.

The largest groups were born in Iraq (22.6%), Vietnam (9.8%), Syria (8.3%), China (2.7%) and Cambodia (2.1%).

Only 16.0% of people spoke English as their only home language. The most common language spoken other than English is Arabic at 16.7% (mostly Iraqi Arabic and Syrian Arabic), Assyrian Neo-Aramaic at 15.2%, Vietnamese at 12.0%, Chaldean Neo-Aramaic at 5.9% and Mandarin at 3.0%. If the Assyrian and Chaldean varieties were combined, then Neo-Aramaic will be the most common language at 21.1%. 

The most common ethnic groups were Assyrian (15.5%), Vietnamese (11.2%), Chinese (10.2%), Iraqi (10.1%) and Australian (6.9%).

The top responses for religious affiliation were Catholic (31.1%), No Religion (11.8%), Buddhism (11.7%), and Islam (8.5%). Christianity was the largest religious group reported overall (61.8%).

47.2% were couple families with children, 24.9% were couple families without children and 24.6% were one parent families. Of people over 15 years, 45.5% were married and 13.3% were either divorced or separated. Of all households, 74.4% were family households, 23.1% were single person households and 2.4% were group households.

Of occupied private dwellings in Fairfield, 40.0% were separate houses, 13.4% were semi-detached or townhouses and 46.0% were apartments. 21.0% of the dwellings were owned and 57.5% were rented.

"Fairfield Adventure Park", a large playground for older children and teens, was opened in April 2015. Nearby is the "Fairfield Youth and Community Centre" and the "Fairfield Leisure Centre", an aquatic centre. These facilities are all situated in Fairfield Park Precinct, a large urban park and sports ground. Prospect Creek winds through it.

Fairfield is also the home suburb of the Fairfield Bulls and Fenix FCS football clubs.

"The Crescent Park" is adjacent to the station, which features public seating surrounded by native and exotic plants. Another green space in the city is the "David Carty Reserve", which is a small, round islet, surrounded by Fairfield Street and The Horsley Drive, that features a number of prominent Hill's weeping figs, and camphor trees – which are introduced evergreens native to East Asia.



Apple Productivity Experience Group

Apple Productivity Experience Group (known as APEX) is an operating unit of Microsoft that, as of 2009, is the largest software developer outside of Apple Inc. for the macOS and iOS operating systems. Formed as Macintosh Business Unit on January 7, 1997, it was initially composed of over 100 individuals from the existing cross platform Word, Excel, and PowerPoint teams in Microsoft's Office Division, and grew to 180 people the next year, with the addition of the Internet Explorer for Mac and Outlook Express for Mac teams. In 2000, it moved from the Office Division to the Specialized Devices and Applications Group inside the Entertainment and Devices Division, and is now back inside the Microsoft Office division.

Prior to the creation of the Mac BU, Microsoft had developed Macintosh software, starting in 1984 with Word 1.0 for Macintosh. During the early and mid 1990s, Microsoft's Word, Excel, and Powerpoint teams simultaneously developed Windows and Macintosh versions of these applications, but after releasing Office 97 for Windows, Microsoft decided, in January 1997, to form a separate Macintosh Business Unit to focus on creating applications optimized for the Macintosh platform. In August 1997, as part of a broader partnership agreement with Apple, Microsoft committed to continue developing and supporting Macintosh software for at least 5 more years, renewing this pledge on January 10, 2006 at the Macworld Conference & Expo. Ben Waldman was the Mac BU's founder and first General Manager (GM), serving from its inception in January 1997 through January 2000, when he was succeeded by Kevin Browne, who served through December 18, 2002, and Roz Ho, who served from December 18, 2002 to June 8, 2007; after that, Craig Eisler became the GM. In October 2008, Eisler was tapped by Robbie Bach to lead all Entertainment Client efforts, and Eric Wilfred became the GM of MacBU.

APEX develops macOS and iOS versions of Microsoft Office and OneNote. Previously developed software by the Mac BU include Internet Explorer (development ceased in 2003), Virtual PC, and the MSN for Mac OS X browser (cancelled May 31, 2005).

Boris Asafyev

Boris Vladimirovich Asafyev (; 27 January 1949) was a Russian and Soviet composer, writer, musicologist, musical critic and one of founders of Soviet musicology. He is the dedicatee of Prokofiev's First Symphony. He was born in Saint Petersburg.

Asafyev had a strong influence on Soviet music. His compositions include ballets, operas, symphonies, concertos and chamber music. His ballets include "Flames of Paris", based on the French Revolution, and "The Fountain of Bakhchisarai", which was first performed in 1934, and was performed at the Mariinsky Theatre in St. Petersburg in 2006.

His writings, under the name Igor Glebov, include "The Book about Stravinsky" and "Glinka" (for which he was awarded the Stalin Prize in 1948).





Gerry McAlpine

Gerry McAlpine (born May 26, 1939) was a politician in Manitoba, Canada. He was a member of the Legislative Assembly of Manitoba from 1990 to 1999, representing the riding of Sturgeon Creek as a Progressive Conservative. He was the vice-chairperson of the standing committee on public utilities and natural resources.

The son of Donald McAlpine, he was born in Dubuc, Saskatchewan and was educated at the University of Manitoba. McAlpine worked as an insurance adjustor, as a claims manager for Merit Insurance and then operated his own company, McAlpine Investigations. He subsequently worked in real estate and as a nutritional food distributor.

McAlpine was first elected to the Manitoba legislature in the provincial election of 1990, defeating incumbent Liberal Iva Yeo by 769 votes in the riding of Sturgeon Creek. He was re-elected by a greater margin in the general election of 1995.

In the provincial election of 1999, McAlpine lost to NDP candidate Bonnie Korzeniowski by 638 votes in the redistributed riding of St. James. He did not contest the seat in 2003.

Robert Swenson

Robert Alexander "Jeep" Swenson Jr. (January 5, 1957 – August 18, 1997) was an American professional wrestler, stuntman and actor.

Swenson wrestled for World Class Championship Wrestling in 1987 and 1988 as Jeep Swenson for manager Gary Hart. He debuted on March 7, 1987, defeating Perry Jackson in a 2-minute challenge match. His main feud was with Bruiser Brody, who was wrestling as the masked "Red River Jack". Brody defeated him at the Parade of Champions 1987 event. According to Swenson, he had the largest biceps in the world at that time (they were recorded in the Guinness Book of World Records). From 1993 to 1994, he wrestled for Global Wrestling Federation in Texas, where he feuded with Ahmed Johnson. 

Swenson returned to wrestling for a match at World Championship Wrestling's Uncensored pay-per-view on March 24, 1996. He performed as a member of the "Alliance to End Hulkamania". He was named The Final Solution, but following complaints from Jewish organizations to the Turner corporate offices, his character was renamed The Ultimate Solution. WCW claimed they were unaware that The Final Solution was the name Adolf Hitler gave to his plan to destroy the Jews. The Alliance consisted of the Dungeon of Doom, the Four Horsemen, The Ultimate Solution and Z-Gangsta, working to end Hulk Hogan's career.

Swenson boxed as an amateur middleweight and later had a short career as a professional boxer. He won his first two bouts by knockouts, but his third fight was stopped in round one after he was knocked down twice by Frankie Garcia in his pro debut.

Swenson's first role was as an uncredited thug in early Jackie Chan movie The Big Brawl. Swenson also appeared as pit fighter "Lugwrench" Perkins in the 1989 Hulk Hogan film "No Holds Barred". He played the masked version of Dorian in the 1994 film "The Mask". He also played James Caan's bodyguard Bledsoe in the Damon Wayans and Adam Sandler film "Bulletproof", before playing possibly his best known character Bane in the 1997 film "Batman & Robin". His actual blood vessels were outlined in ink for “Batman” by the makeup experts at Warner Bros. He was also featured in many magazines and television commercials.

Swenson was highly criticized for his performance as Bane, as it was infamously unfaithful to the original character, who was portrayed as being both intelligent and strong, while the movie depicted him as a mindless goon for Poison Ivy instead, he also rarely spoke and when he did, it would usually be one or two-word sentences, or his own name.

Swenson was born in San Antonio, Texas, the son of Patricia Maxine (née Wells) and Robert Alexander Swenson Sr. His nickname, "Jeep", was derived from his dad (a soldier known as "Tank"), whose logic was that every tank needed a Jeep. He was married to Erin Hillsman; the couple had a daughter named Kayleigh. 

On August 18, 1997, Swenson died of a heart attack at the UCLA Medical Center at the age of 40. Hulk Hogan, Davey Boy Smith, and James Caan gave eulogies at his funeral. He was an avid user of steroids and started to use them in his early 20s. Because of this, he reportedly could not take a shower properly, put on a shirt, or walk up stairs. His death also shocked George Clooney, Arnold Schwarzenegger, and Uma Thurman, his co-stars in the "Batman & Robin" film. After the funeral, Swenson was cremated, and his ashes were scattered in an undisclosed location.



USS S-32

USS "S-32" (SS-137) was an "S"-class submarine of the United States Navy.

"S-32" was laid down on 12 April 1918 by the Union Iron Works in San Francisco, California. She was launched on 11 January 1919, sponsored by Miss Margaret Tynan, and commissioned on 15 June 1922.

Soon after commissioning, "S-32", assigned to Submarine Division 17 and home-ported at San Pedro, California, was ordered to New London, Connecticut. She was decommissioned there on 25 September 1922 and, after engineering alterations by the prime contractor, the Electric Boat Company, and the engineering sub-contractor, the New London Ship and Engine Company, she was recommissioned on 21 February 1923. Temporary duty with Submarine Division 11 then took her south to the Caribbean Sea and the Panama Canal Zone for 1923 winter exercises with the Fleet, after which she rejoined the S-boats of her division, now designated Submarine Division 16, and returned to San Pedro.

During the summer of 1923, she participated in cold-weather exercises in the Aleutian Islands. In the fall of 1923, she resumed local operations off Southern California, and during the winter of 1923–1924 she returned to the Panama Canal Zone. In April 1924, she moved back to San Pedro, from which she operated until 1925. Early in 1925, her division was transferred to the United States Asiatic Fleet in the Philippines, and its submarines shifted to Mare Island, California, to prepare for the trans-Pacific crossing.

On 15 April 1925, "S-32" departed San Francisco for the Philippines. She arrived at Cavite on Luzon in mid-summer 1925 and through the winter of 1926 conducted local exercises in the Luzon area. In the spring of 1926 she deployed to the coast of China, conducting exercises both en route to and from her summer base, the former Imperial German Navy base at Tsingtao. Overhaul followed her September 1926 return to the Philippines. She repeated this annual employment schedule for the next six years.

In 1932, Submarine Division 16 was transferred to Pearl Harbor, Hawaii. "S-32" departed Manila Bay on 2 May 1932 and, at arrived at Pearl Harbor at the end of May 1932. Pearl Harbor was her home port for the next five years.

In June 1937, "S032" departed Pearl Harbor for the United States East Coast. In August 1937, she reported for inactivation at Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, and on 7 December 1937 she was decommissioned and berthed at League Island in Philadelphia.

In the summer of 1940, "S-32" began reactivation. Recommissioned on 18 September 1940 and assigned to Submarine Division 52, "S-32" conducted trials from New London through November 1940 and, in December 1940, proceeded to the Panama Canal Zone, from which she operated until April 1941. She then returned to New London but, toward the end of April 1941, she moved to Bermuda. Through May 1941, she patrolled and conducted training exercises out of the base at St. George, Bermuda, that the United States had acquired from the United Kingdom in the Destroyers for Bases Agreement of 2 September 1940.

In late June 1941, "S-32" returned to New London and resumed exercises. In September 1941, she moved to Philadelphia for an overhaul and, by December 1941, she was back at New London.

The Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor brought the United States into World War II on 7 December 1941, and early in 1942 "S-32" received orders to return to the Panama Canal Zone. She arrived at Coco Solo, Panama, in February 1942. During the spring of 1942, she conducted two defensive war patrols in the Pacific approaches to the Panama Canal.

On 3 June 1942, the Aleutian Islands campaign began with the Battle of Dutch Harbor, followed quickly by the Japanese occupation of Attu and Kiska. In June 1942, "S-32" proceeded to San Diego, California, en route to the Aleutian Islands. In early July 1942, she arrived at Dutch Harbor on Amaknak Island off Unalaska in the Aleutians, and on 7 July 1942 she departed Dutch Harbor on her first offensive war patrol and third patrol overall. She patrolled the fog-covered waters of the Rat Islands and Amchitka into August 1942, then shifted to an area north of Attu. She returning to Dutch Harbor on 10 August 1942.

On 22 August 1942, "S-32" departed Dutch Harbor on her fourth war patrol. Moving westward, she hunted for Japanese ships in the sea lanes between Kiska and Attu during the first week of the patrol. On 28 August, leaks developed in her after trim tank, but her crew compensated for them by placing of water in the forward trim tanks. Although this meant that space was left to accommodate water for only one torpedo reload, "S-32"′s crew regained depth control, and with fuel suction shifted forward, reload capability slowly improved.

On 29 August 1942, "S-32" was off Amchitka to check for Japanese shipping in sheltered areas on Amchitka's north coast. On 31 August 1942, she headed east to cover the Allied occupation of Adak Island. On 14 September 1942, she returned to the junction of Rat Island and Amchitka, where she continued her patrol for another six days. On 20 September 1942, she headed for Dutch Harbor, which she reached on 23 September 1942.

"S-32" departed Dutch Harbor on 8 October 1942 to begin her fifth war patrol. During a trim dive, her crew discovered a fuel shortfall of about caused by the presence of water in the line during fueling at Dutch Harbor. As a result, she ran out of reserve fuel in the number three main ballast tank on 12 October 1942, but she nonetheless continued west to a patrol area in the Kuril Islands.

On 17 October 1942, "S-32" arrived off Paramushiro at the northern end of the Kurils, and that evening she took up station off the southeast coast of the island to patrol the entrances to Musashi Bay and Onekotan Strait. On the morning of 18 October 1942, she sighted two ships at anchor in Musashi Bay, and, after a periscope check disclosed no other ships in the area, she began working her way to an attack position west or southwest of the ships. Moving slowly through the calm and poorly charted bay with only short and infrequent periscope exposures, she went up for a final check at 10:23. While looking, she struck an uncharted sand bar. "S-32", her torpedo tubes ready for firing, angled up 10 degrees. Her depth gauge showed . During the next few seconds she slid over the bar, apparently showing her periscope shears, bow, and possibly her whole bridge structure above water; then, over the bar, she took a down angle at high speed. At 10:25, she fired two torpedoes set to run at a depth of at each of the ships. On firing the fourth and final torpedo, she changed course and maneuvered at high speed toward the open sea. Her crew heard two explosions as she cleared the immediate area.

At 10:45, "S-32" came to periscope depth to observe the damage. One of the ships was afire amidships and had settled somewhat; she was anchored in shallow water and might have been resting on the bottom. The second ship was obscured by the first. "S-32" went to and proceeded out of the bay. At 12:05, she resumed her patrol east of Onekotan Strait. That evening, she began her return voyage to the Aleutians, and on 27 October 1942 she arrived at Dutch Harbor.

From Dutch Harbor, "S-32" returned to San Diego, which she reached on 11 November 1942. An overhaul there followed, and from 21 to 25 December 1942 she tested newly installed equipment — a fathometer, radar, and keel-mounted sound gear. From 28 December 1942 to 26 January 1943, she provided services to the West Coast Sound School. On 6 February 1943, she headed north toward Dutch Harbor.

"S-32" departed Dutch Hatbor on her sixth war patrol on 25 February 1943. En route to her assigned patrol area off Attu, she encountered very rough seas, strong winds, rain, mist, and fog. On 26 February 1943, she rolled as much as 65 degrees to starboard.

Progress west was slow, but, on 1 March 1943 she set a course toward Holtz Bay on the northeast coast of Attu to check for Japanese shipping there. On 2 March 1943, heavy mist and fog hindered her reconnaissance of Stellar Cove, but she turned to the shipping lanes along the coast of Attu to intercept Japanese ships between Cape Wrangell and Holtz Bay. The entrances to Holtz Bay, Chichagof Harbor, and Sarana Bay, were her primary hunting grounds. On the night of 9 March 1942, off Holtz Bay, she attacked and damaged an Imperial Japanese Navy destroyer, then underwent a brief depth charging. The depth charging caused leaks, but her crew minimized them, and "S-32" continued her patrol.

Four nights later, on 13 March 1943, "S-32" attacked Japanese submarine which was lying to on the surface with her engines smoking north of Holtz Bay. At 20:59, "S-32" launched two torpedoes at the Japanese submarine at ten-second intervals. At 21:00, she went deep, and as she passed , one torpedo exploded. At 21:20, "S-32" came to periscope depth, but fog had closed in and the Japanese submarine was no longer visible.

On the afternoon of 15 March 1943, "S-32" sighted another Japanese submarine. For the first time during "S-32"′s patrol, according to her crew, the weather was "perfect for a periscope approach." At 17:27, "S-32" fired a three-torpedo spread and an estimated range of with a track angle favorable. About two and a half minutes later, crewmen in "S-32"′s torpedo room heard a muffled explosion, but her fire control control party heard nothing. "S-32" went to periscope depth and observed smoke was pouring skyward from the Japanese submarine's conning tower. Her crew took a periscope photograph of the scene as the damaged Japanese submarine headed for the nearest beach. At 17:36, however, the Japanese submarine disappeared from view. "S-32"′s sound operated reported that the Japanese submarine′s screws had stopped.

"S-32" departed the Attu area early on the morning of 17 March 1943. On 20 March 1943, she moored at Dutch Harbor.

On 29 March 1943, "S-32" again departed Dutch Harbor and headed west for her seventh war patrol. En route to Attu, cold weather caused icing on her superstructure, but the seas remained fairly calm and the sun was occasionally visible. On 3 April 1943, however, as she approached Attu, more normal Aleutian weather closed in. From then to 16 April 1943, snow and rain storms were almost continuous, seas were rough, winds were strong, and periods of sunlight were limited.

At 01:57 on 10 April 1943, while patrolling on a north-south line off Holtz Bay, "S-32" picked up a target on radar some away. At 02:07, "S-32"′s radar detected a second, smaller ship ahead of the first target. At 02:12, "S-32" sighted the first ship at a range of about . She launched four torpedoes. Her crew heard two very loud explosions followed by distant rumblings. At 02:19, at a range of just over , all traces of the ships disappeared from "S-32"′s radar screen.

On 16 April 1943, "S-32" set a course for Dutch Harbor. On 20 April 1943, she arrived and commenced refit.

On 4 May 1943, "S-32" again sailed west to commence her eighth and final war patrol. En route to the Kurils, she patrolled across possible Japanese reinforcement routes to Kiska and Attu, but almost zero visibility during the passage hindered hunting, an on 11 May 1943 her radar broke down. On 12 May 1943, she entered her assigned area off Paramushiro. On 13 May 1943, she obtained her first navigational fix, off Onekotan, and commenced patrolling across the approaches to Onekotan Strait and Musashi Bay. Visibility remained poor, and seas were rough. Her radar functioned improperly throughout her short time on station. On 15 May 1943, the port main motor armature developed a zero resistance to ground. Repeated repair attempts failed, and the motor was secured. "S-32" turned back toward Dutch Harbor, where she moored on 23 May 1943.

On 27 May, "S-32" departed the Aleutians for the last time. On 6 June 1943 she arrived at San Diego, where she provided training services for the remainder of World War II. Hostilities ended in mid-August 1945, and shortly thereafter "S-32" was designated for inactivation. She arrived at San Francisco on 13 September 1945.

"S-32" was decommissioned at Mare Island on 19 October 1945. Her name was struck from the Naval Vessel Register on 1 November 1945, and her hulk was sold for scrapping in May 1946 to the Learner Company of Oakland, California.


"S-32"'s five battle stars for her service in World War II was the highest number of battle stars earned by an S-class submarine.


Chicago 13

Chicago 13 is the eleventh studio album by American rock band Chicago, released on August 13, 1979, by Columbia Records. "Chicago 13" was the band's final release featuring lead guitarist Donnie Dacus, who had followed the late founding member, guitarist Terry Kath. All band members contributed to the songwriting (one of only two albums where this is the case, the other being "Chicago VII").

After recording sessions in Morin-Heights, Quebec and Hollywood, "Chicago 13"—which saw the band return to numbering its albums (the first album to use an Arabic numeral in its numbering) and displaying its logo—was released in August 1979, and was preceded by Donnie Dacus's "Must Have Been Crazy" as lead single. "Chicago 13" is the first Chicago album to bear no significant hit singles.

Despite negative reviews, "Chicago 13" reached No. 21 and went gold, although it was the band's first album to miss the Top 20 and was then the lowest charting release since their debut album. Shortly after the tour to support the album ended, Dacus was fired from the band without explanation.

In 2003, "Chicago 13" was remastered and reissued by Rhino Records with a B-Side, featuring Dacus's "Closer to You" (an outtake from the "Hot Streets" sessions), and the 12-inch single mix of "Street Player" as bonus tracks.

The opening track, the disco-fueled extended jam "Street Player" was also released as a single and hit the R&B singles chart on 12/1/1979 at 91 on the charts. The songs "Street Player" and "Closer to You" had previously been released by other artists: "Street Player" by Rufus, who recorded it before Chicago, and "Closer" by Stephen Stills, though with Donnie Dacus on lead vocals. "Street Player" did eventually reach hit status, being sampled for the 1995 hit "The Bomb! (These Sounds Fall into My Mind)" by The Bucketheads, the 2009 hit "I Know You Want Me (Calle Ocho)" by Pitbull and the 2013 remix by dance music producer "Tradelove".




Geoff Crammond

Geoff Crammond is a computer game designer and programmer who specialises in motor racing games. A former defence industry systems engineer, he claims to have had little interest in motor racing before programming his first racing game (Revs) back in 1984, but he holds a physics degree, which may explain the realism of some of his programming. As a consequence of that project he became a big fan of Formula One motor racing. At the end of the 80s, this interest, plus the ever improving capabilities of home computers, inspired him to specialise in programming Formula One racing simulations.

One of his early releases was "Aviator", a Spitfire simulator released by Acornsoft for the BBC Micro in March 1984. Having been motivated to make his own flight simulator from the hardware level upwards, Crammond identified the possibility of using one of the increasingly sophisticated home computers, if only "to cannibalise it". Recognising the potential of the BBC Micro, he ordered one in 1981 and, upon receiving it six months later, then set about familiarising himself with the system, taking a detour to produce a Space Invaders clone, "Super Invaders", which was accepted for publication and sold by Acornsoft. Discussion with Acornsoft about his plans for making a flight simulator led to the Aviator concept, and the program itself was written in a period of nine months.

Although displayed in only four colours and having few of the features of modern simulators for more powerful computers, Aviator was of unparalleled quality at the time of its release, with a realistic flight model that included g-forces that could tear the wings off in a dive. This would be accompanied by a continuous high pitched beep. The wings could be restored by removing the physical pressure on the airframe which was causing the flight envelope to be exceeded. Generally, this could be achieved by returning the joystick to a neutral centre position. The landscape was crudely rendered, and was basically a flat surface. Some scenic features were drawn as vector graphics, including low hills, fields, a lake, a suspension bridge over a river, and a small town which comprised a cluster of three buildings. Bonus points could be earned for flying under the bridge or along the main street of the town at a lower altitude than the buildings. Double points were earned for performing these stunts upside down. The game also had a shoot-'em-up mode in which alien vessels were seeded in the fields, feeding on the crops and growing until they could become airborne, at which point they headed for the town. The player could destroy the aliens on the ground as they fed, or (for reduced points) tackle them in the air (the aliens were agile but could not return fire). If an alien reached the town, the game was lost. A minor bug permitted the plane to be landed upside down without consequence, so long as the landing gear had been deployed.

Although better known for his Formula One simulation games on the PC and Amiga platforms, his first motor racing simulator was "Revs", a Formula Three simulator that debuted on the BBC Micro platform in 1984. The BBC version of "Revs" featured just one track, the Silverstone circuit, but the realistic implementation of motor racing physics and artificial intelligence of the computer controlled components gave the game enormous depth and replayability. An enhanced edition of the BBC version was later released, in 1985, called 'Revs 4 Tracks' which included Brands Hatch, Donington Park, Oulton Park and Snetterton race tracks.

A Commodore 64 version of the game, entitled "Revs Plus", was released in 1986, which added the Brands Hatch track to the game. Later the Commodore 64 version added the Nürburgring to this list to continue the "4 Tracks" theme as Brands Hatch had already been included with the initial "REVS Plus" release. The Nürburgring was chosen as its new layout had recently been completed and computer based design data was available. This gives an idea of just how accurate REVS was as a simulation rather than 'just' a game.

"The Sentinel" was published by Firebird on the BBC Micro in 1986. It was a 3D puzzle game, featuring ten thousand levels, in which the player had to manoeuvre his way through a landscape of cliffs, trees and boulders to topple the ominous Sentinel. The game was a critical and commercial success. Conversions for the ZX Spectrum, C64, Amiga, Amstrad CPC, Atari ST and PC soon followed. A sequel, "Sentinel Returns", was published by Psygnosis in 1998 on the PC and PlayStation platforms.

Crammond's attention returned to motor racing simulators. "Stunt Car Racer" was a slightly offbeat driving simulation, rewarding the player for performing outrageous stunts on a number of elevated, roller-coaster-like courses. Although less serious in tone than his previous simulators, the game nevertheless used an impressive physics engine to offer a realistic driving experience. The game enjoyed cult status among many Amiga and Atari ST gamers. Ever since the early 1990s, Crammond's primary focus has been on developing the award-winning Formula One Grand Prix series of games. The first game in the series, "F1GP" (aka "World Circuit" in the USA), was released by MicroProse on the Amiga in 1991 and is essentially the spiritual successor to "Revs". Around this time "Amiga Power" magazine began referring to him as Sir Geoff, a running gag which has caught on with many others. The game was an instant success, earning a conversion to the Atari ST and PC platforms, but the inevitable sequel, "Grand Prix 2", remained in development for three years before eventually being released on the PC in 1996.

"Grand Prix 3" was released on the PC in 2000 and was well received by fans and critics alike. Crammond's series now had considerable competition from other developers, particularly Psygnosis/Sony, who were licensed by the FIA to produce the official Formula One gaming titles. "Grand Prix 4" was released on the PC in 2002 and is generally regarded as the most accurate game in the series. After "Grand Prix 4" there were rumours that Crammond's next game would be Stunt Car Racer Pro, an updated version of his classic game. The rumours were later confirmed with an announcement that he was co-operating with Lost Toys studios. Lost Toys studios were closed in late 2003. At the beginning of 2005, the game was rumoured to be cancelled.

Crammond's most recent game release is still GP4 (2002), which is still supported by fans with annual mods, in spite of MicroProse's closure in 2001.

Following that, Crammond kept a low profile, but continues to engage in various programming projects.




Auburn, New South Wales

Auburn is a Western Sydney suburb in the state of New South Wales, Australia.
Auburn is located west of the Sydney central business district and is in the local government area of Cumberland City Council, having previously been the administrative centre of Auburn Council. 
The suburb was named after Oliver Goldsmith's poem "The Deserted Village", which describes 'Auburn' in England as the "loveliest village of the plain".

According to the 2021 census, there were 32,425 residents in Auburn. The most common reported ancestries were Chinese 30.2%, Korean 13.9%, English 6.9%, Australian 6.1% and Nepalese 5.1%. 31.3% of people were born in Australia. The next most common countries of birth were China 13.9%, Korea, Republic of (South) 11.6%, Vietnam 6.0%, Nepal 5.1% and The Philippines 2.8%. 19.8% of people only spoke English at home. Other languages spoken at home included Mandarin 15.0%, Korean 13.5%, Cantonese 10.2%, Nepali 4.9%, Vietnamese 4.7% and Arabic 4.2%. The most common responses for religious affiliation were No Religion 29.1%, Catholic 17.1%, Islam 11.1% and Buddhism 10.2%.


Auburn railway station is on the Western and Inner West & Leppington lines of the Sydney Trains network, where there are frequent services.

The Auburn Maintenance Centre, a large maintenance and storage facility which services Sydney Trains rolling stock, is located to the northwest of the town centre, close to Clyde station.

Auburn also has a number of bus services, which service Auburn and the surrounding areas.

Busways operate two routes to and from Auburn station:

Transit Systems operates four routes via Auburn station:

Auburn railway station is served by two NightRide routes:

The Auburn area was once used by Aboriginal people as a market place for the exchange of goods, a site for ritual battles and a 'Law Place' for ceremonies. The area was located on the border between the Darug inland group and the Eora/Dharawal coastal group. The Wangal and Wategoro, sub-groups or clans, are the groups most often recognised as the original inhabitants of the Auburn/Homebush Bay region.

Bennelong, one of the most famous Natives of the time, was a member of Wangal, as was his wife, Barangaroo. Pemulwuy, who organised tribes to resist the white settlement of the Sydney region from 1790 to 1802 was also a member of the Wangal.

On 5 February 1788, soon after the landing of Captain Phillip at Sydney Cove, Captain John Hunter and Lieutenant William Bradley sailed up what is now known as the Parramatta River, as far as Homebush Bay. Captain Hunter was the first European to set foot within the Auburn Local Government Area. Ten days later, the Governor, along with a well-armed party in three boats, reached Homebush Bay. They ventured about inland. The following day a party of explorers traced the river in a westerly direction, coming to the place where the Duck River enters the Parramatta River. They explored the tributary as far as the depth of water permitted. Seeing what appeared to be ducks rising out of a swamp covered with reeds, they named the river Duck River. The ducks were actually Eastern Swamp Hens, but the name Duck River remained. The Eastern Swamp Hen featured prominently on the council's Coat of Arms and was part of the former Auburn City Council logo.

In February 1793, Auburn area was established as the first free-agricultural settlement thanks to Governor Phillip's repeated applications to the British government for free settlers. Phillip was of the opinion that only free settlers with the assistance of convicts will be able to create an environment in which a country could support its inhabitants. Secretary Dundas endorsed Governor's opinion and secured an agreement with several farmers, some of whom were members of the Religious Society of Friends (Quakers), to settle in the colony. The first grants were given to Thomas Rose, Frederic Meredith, Thomas and Joseph Webb as well as Edward Powell. The deeds of the land described the farms' location as Liberty Plains and this is the name given to the neighbourhood of their farms by the first settlers, although the actual area bearing that name was a little further, lying at the upper part of Port Jackson. Dwellers of the Liberty Plains Parish were very proud of the fact that in the colony of felons they were the first people who came to Australia as free men and were given a privilege of choosing their own grants. This proud heritage is reflected in the motto on the Auburn coat of arms: "Liberty, with steady zeal".

In the late 1870s a "township" was surveyed "in the centre of the Liberty Plains… 11 miles from Sydney, on the Suburban Railway line" and divided into "fine township allotments all fronting grand wide streets". The subdivision was named 'Auburn', being a reference to Goldsmith's poem 'The Deserted Village'. The poem begins: "Sweet Auburn! Loveliest village of the plain". Advertisements for the sale of allotments in May 1878 quoted the poem and added: "So wrote the poet in years gone by in describing the 'Auburn' of Old England, and fitly does it describe the new Auburn of the Sunny South".

One of the early settlers in the area was Fred Chisholm, who had an estate west of the present site of Auburn railway station. In the 1880s, John Buchanan, a timber merchant, purchased land from Fred Chisholm and built his home, 'Duncraggarn Hall', a two-storey Italianate mansion with a central tower and elaborate wrought-iron balconies. In 1892, Buchanan sold his thirteen-acre estate to the Sisters of Charity, who turned the house into St Joseph's Hospital for Consumptives. In 1903, extensions to the hospital were constructed and the house itself became a convent for the sisters. Further modifications and extensions took place over the years, with the eventual result that the old hospital site became St Joseph's Village—a retirement village—with a modern hospital next door. 'Duncraggarn Hall' is heritage-listed.

The formal Auburn Local Government Area was formed in 1948, when Auburn and Lidcombe Councils merged into Auburn Municipal Council. In 2006 it became the City of Auburn which in 2016 was split between other local government areas.

In the late 20th century and , Auburn became a popular point of settlement for successive waves of immigrants. In the post-World War II era, immigrants from Ukraine, Russia, Italy and Greece settled in Auburn, who were succeeded in the 1960s by immigrants from Turkey and Vietnam. More recently, in the early of 21st century, a large number of immigrants have settled in Auburn from China, South Korea, Nepal, Iran and Afghanistan. The history of immigrant settlement in Auburn has resulted in a suburb which is noted for its multicultural environment.

Auburn has a number of heritage-listed sites, including:

Auburn has a mixture of residential, commercial and industrial areas. A commercial area is located close to Auburn railway station. There are many multicultural restaurants and cafes.

South of the railway station, the commercial area stretches for approximately and features many shops, restaurants and supermarkets, including a number of shops and restaurants specialising in Middle Eastern, Turkish and East Asian products and cuisine. This reflects Auburn's history as a popular place of settlement for successive waves of immigrants in Sydney.

Some distance north of the town centre clustered around the railway station, commercial and industrial developments are also located along the length of Parramatta Road and surrounding streets.

It is home to the LFL team Auburn Wildcats who play in the Australian Eastern Conference as it is one of 6 teams in Sydney who represent this league. There are 40 teams in total of the LFL Australia and 12 are located in NSW.


The Auburn Baptist Church opened in 1888 and since 1928 has resided at its present location on Harrow Road.

The Sri Mandir in Auburn is Australia's oldest Hindu temple, having opened in 1977.

The Auburn Gallipoli Mosque took thirteen years to construct and was largely funded by the Turkish community in the area. The name of the mosque reflects the legacy of Gallipoli in Turkey and the shared bond between Australian society and the Australian Turkish Muslim Community who constructed the mosque




Absenteeism

Absenteeism is a habitual pattern of absence from a duty or obligation without good reason. Generally, absenteeism refers to unplanned absences. Absenteeism has been viewed as an indicator of poor individual performance, as well as a breach of an implicit contract between employee and employer. It is seen as a management problem, and framed in economic or quasi-economic terms. More recent scholarship seeks to understand absenteeism as an indicator of psychological, medical, or social adjustment to work.

High absenteeism in the workplace may be indicative of poor morale, but absences can also be caused by workplace hazards or sick building syndrome. Measurements such as the Bradford factor, a measurement tool to analyze absenteeism which believes short, unplanned absences effect the work group more than long term absences, do not distinguish between absence for genuine illness reasons and absence for non-illness related reasons. In 2013, the UK CIPD estimated that the average worker had 7.6 absent days per year and which cost employers £595 per employee annually. Measurement methods are not exact and all encompassing, resulting in skewed results depending on variables being observed. As a result, employees can feel obliged to come to work while ill, and transmit communicable diseases to their co-workers. This leads to even greater absenteeism and reduced productivity among other workers.

Work forces often excuse absenteeism caused by medical reasons if the employee provides supporting documentation from their medical practitioner. In Poland, if employees themselves, or anyone under their care including children and elders, falls ill, sick leave can be applied.

The psychological model that discusses this is the "withdrawal model", which assumes that absenteeism represents individual withdrawal from dissatisfying working conditions. This finds empirical support in a negative association between absence and job satisfaction, in particular, the satisfaction with the work itself. Factors attributed to absence from work can include stress, family related concerns, work culture, the employees' ability to do the job, and supervisor–subordinate relationship.

Medical-based understanding of absenteeism finds support in research that links absenteeism for medical reasons with mental and behavioral disorders, diseases of the digestive system, neoplasms, and diseases of the genitourinary system. This excludes pregnancy, childbirth, and puerperium. The cost of this, in euros, is 7.43 billion per year for men and 9.66 billion for women (6.7 billion euro after taking out pregnancy, childbirth, and puerperium.) Research shows that over one trillion dollars are lost annually due to productivity shortages as a result of medical-related absenteeism. The line between psychological and medical causation is blurry, given that there are positive links between both work stress and depression, and absenteeism. Depressive tendencies may lie behind some of the absence ascribed to poor physical health, as with adoption of a "culturally approved sick role". This places the adjective "sickness" before the word "absence", and carries a burden of more proof than is usually offered.

Evidence indicates that absence is generally viewed as "mildly deviant workplace behavior." For example, people tend to hold negative stereotypes of absentees, under report their own absenteeism, and believe their own attendance record is better than that of their peers. Negative attributions about absence then bring about three outcomes: the behavior is open to social control, sensitive to social context, and is a potential source of workplace conflict.

One tactic companies use to combat unplanned absences is the notion of paying back unused sick time. Moreover, high levels of work social capital can reduce absenteeism. While a distinction can be made between types of work social capital (bounding, bridging, direct-leader-linking, and top-level-linking), relationships with the immediate leader and the top management (direct-leader-linking and top-level-linking WSC) are most important to reduce employees’ absenteeism.

Pandemic absenteeism 

Absence due to illness and disability has ballooned since the pandemic. Healthier workplaces have lower absence rates. Paid leave reduces absence.

Absenteeism is a habitual pattern correlated with emotional labor and personal reasoning, but there are resolutions to finding ways to alleviate the cause. Kelley, et al. (2016) says stress accounts for twelve percent of absenteeism in the workplace a year, which is a matter in which the company needs to stay in communication with the employee and work towards a solution. A great example of finding progress in absence management is forming an employee assistantship program (EAP), which is "a strategy to help workers deal with issues outside of work that employees bring to the workplace" (Quinley, 2003). This not only involves stress, but other mental health factors that employees deem worthy of attention. 

Planned absences from work include scheduled time off, retirement, and sabbaticals. These absences cause little to no disruption to work spaces because of the time given to work around the absence.

Unplanned absence from work is defined as leave that is not planned or predictable. It includes sick time off, injured time off, special circumstances, and absence without permission. Unplanned absences indicate an important factor of the health of the workplace, including employee satisfaction and commitment.

Nearly every workplace that has a bully in charge will have elevated staff turnover and absenteeism.

According to Thomas, there tends to be a higher level of stress with people who work or interact with a narcissist, which in turn increases absenteeism and staff turnover. Boddy finds the same dynamic where there is a corporate psychopath in the organization.

While occasional school absenteeism may not be problematic, excessive absenteeism has shown to have a negative impact. Students with poor attendance records are found to be at a disadvantage both academically and socially. Compared to their peers, these students are more at risk of academic under-performance and early school leaving. They are also at risk of having more restricted opportunities in terms of further education and employment, and are likely to experience social and emotional problems in adulthood. Missing school can be a habit-forming behavior and can be challenging to deal with despite growing awareness of the causes of absenteeism.

Research evidence suggests that early interventions are six times more likely to be successful than those after students' non-attendance has reached the persistent stage. Equally, there is normally one initial reason, referred to as "the trigger point", for the students' non-attendance. By the time students' absences have reached the persistent stage, there are at least several more reasons used to justify the action.

There are positive and negative reinforcements regarding student absenteeism. A positive reinforcement meaning that the student will receive either more attention from their parent or guardian, or receive tangible benefits from not going to school. A negative reinforcement meaning that the student is avoiding school. Dube and Orpinas conducted a study by surveying 99 upper-elementary and middle schools, targeting students with attendance problems. Three major profiles were identified from these students. Dube and Orpinas found that 17.2 percent missed school to avoid fear, anxiety problems, or escape from social or evaluative situations; 60.6 percent missed school to gain parental attention or tangible benefits; and 22.2 percent had no profile. All three groups significantly differed in mean scores for behavioral difficulties. Children who fit within multiple profiles had the highest level of behavioral problems, and children in the no-profile group had the lowest. Children with multiple profiles had higher mean scores on frequency of victimization and total number of traumatic or stressful events than did those in the other groups.

Although there are many theories to treating absenteeism, there is no universal treatment. There is however, a step by step process identified by Evie Bald, to manage absenteeism. This process includes identifying chronic absenteeism, identifying the reasoning behind the absences, work with families to address issues, and offer positive reinforcements if necessary.


Cleobury Mortimer

Cleobury Mortimer (, ) is a market town and civil parish in south-east Shropshire, England, which had a population of 3,036 at the 2011 census. It was granted a market charter by King Henry III in 1226.

The name is believed to derive from the contraction of the Old English meaning a steep place and "bury" meaning fortified settlement. Mortimer comes from Ranulph de Mortimer of Normandy to whom the land was granted after the Norman conquest. He founded the Mortimer dynasty of marcher lords who held power in the Welsh Marches throughout the Middle Ages and were closely involved with power struggles with successive English monarchs and other powerful Lords. Cleobury has a significant entry in the Domesday Book, and the vicinity was the location of at least two castles. Cleobury Castle, which was situated near St Mary's Church, was destroyed in 1155 and only earthworks remain today. Toot Castle was situated on the other side of the River Rea from the town.

The central section of the town was laid out in burgage plots, the lines of which are still evident. With the decline of the marcher lords, and peace along the Welsh border, Cleobury's importance declined during the Middle Ages, leaving it as an undistinguished market town, albeit with a dependent hinterland. In the 16th century, exploitation of local iron ores became important, and when Elizabeth I granted the town to Robert Dudley, Earl of Leicester, his familiarity with modern ironworking technology led to the establishment of an important iron industry, with at least two furnaces (in which iron ore was converted to pig iron) and two water-powered forges (in which pig iron was converted to wrought iron). For a while, Cleobury's iron industry was an important part of the general industrialisation in Shropshire (sometimes claimed as the seat of the Industrial Revolution), and iron from Cleobury's forges was valued as a high-quality material. However, poor transport connections led to the decline of Cleobury's iron industry in the early 19th century, and soon the town reverted to being an agricultural hub, although a large water-powered paper mill survived on the River Rea until a catastrophic fire towards the end of the century. By 1900, the town was an important civic centre, with a railway station, union workhouse, magistrates' court, police station, agricultural college, infants' school and primary school. Since the start of the twentieth century, Cleobury lost many of these facilities, although its population has grown. It thus exemplifies a common pattern for rural settlements, where centralisation and the rise of road transport have seen a decline in the local provision of services, despite a rising population.

Two literary figures have strong connections with Cleobury: William Langland and Simon Evans. Langland, a contemporary of Geoffrey Chaucer, is believed to have been born in the vicinity in the 14th century, and is commemorated in the very fine and intricate (Victorian) East Window of St Mary's Church, as well as in a local road name. Simon Evans is a 20th-century writer, who fought throughout the First World War, and suffered from being gassed. He had been a postman on Merseyside before the war, and after the war sought a rural postal round, to soothe both nerves and body. Cleobury suited him well; here he blossomed, took a correspondence course in English, and became a successful writer and radio broadcaster in the 1930s. Heath Cranton published five of his books, and he married 'Auntie Doris' (Aldridge), a radio performer, but his new life was cut short in 1940, when the effects of the gassing finally caught up with him. His legacy is visible in the naming of a local street, a plaque on the old Post Office, and a dedicated local walk—'The Simon Evans Way'—which the CM Footpath Association has created in recent years.

The River Rea runs to the east of the town, whilst through the town itself is the Pudding (or Burrell) Brook, which flows from west to east before meeting the Rea. The land gradually rises from 110 metres above sea level near to the river, to 150 metres in the west of the town. The Clee Hills, the highest hills in Shropshire, are nearby and the Wyre Forest lies between the town and Bewdley. The border with Worcestershire is a mile to the south.

The A4117 Kidderminster to Ludlow road runs through the centre of the town and crosses the River Rea at New Bridge. The B4363 runs between Cleobury Mortimer (its junction with the A4117 being immediately east of New Bridge) and Bridgnorth. The county town, Shrewsbury, is some distant by road, making Cleobury the most distant town from Shrewsbury in the county.

Cleobury was formerly served by two now-defunct railways: the Tenbury & Bewdley Railway and the Cleobury Mortimer and Ditton Priors Light Railway. The opening of the latter in 1908 elevated Cleobury Mortimer station (which was located some distance from the town, in the Wyre Forest) to the status of a 'Junction'. A separate station called Cleobury Town existed nearer the town, but only on the Ditton Priors line. Today the nearest railway stations are on the heritage Severn Valley Railway, with the nearest mainline stations at Ludlow and Kidderminster. There is a regular bus service (Diamond Bus 292) that runs between Ludlow and Kidderminster via Cleobury. This was at one time part of a much longer service which operated between Hereford and Birmingham but was divided into separate routes several years ago.

The civil parish of Cleobury Mortimer has no notable settlements, other than the town itself, though it covers a large rural area including part of the Wyre Forest. In 2017, the parish council officially gave notice to Shropshire Council that it would thereafter be styled Cleobury Mortimer Town Council, although it does not elect a mayor.

To the north lie the settlements of Neenton and Neen Savage, and to the south-west lies the small village of Neen Sollars. "Neen" was the name of the River Rea in the past. Further to the north lies Cleobury North, a small village with the same etymological root.

An electoral ward of the same name exists. This ward stretches mainly to the north and at the 2011 census had a population of 7,226.

There are a number of landmarks in the town, the most famous of which is the 12th-century St Mary's Church in the town centre, renowned for its crooked spire, the combined result of the warping of its oak timbers, and damp-induced rot where the timber spire sits on the masonry tower. Across the road from the churchyard is The Wells, fed from a local spring and for centuries serving as a public water supply. In 2010, for reasons as yet unexplained, the inflow to The Wells ceased for a while, and has only been intermittent since then. To the west of the church is the recently refurbished Market Hall, which now houses a number of facilities including the Tourist Information Centre.

There are six public houses in the town of Cleobury, with a further one (the Blount Arms) on the A4117 road in the direction of Kidderminster. The town also has a secondary school, Lacon Childe, a primary school, a library, a post office and a fire station; until 2014 it also had a police station.

The town featured in a series of reports by Declan Curry in "BBC Breakfast" in June 2006. As part of the series, Curry interviewed a number of local residents and business owners to learn more about the rural economy.

Hobsons brewery was established in 1993 and moved to its present site at New House Farm, on Tenbury Road approximately 500 metres south-west of the town centre, in 1995. The brewery brews and delivers its beer to public houses within a 50-mile radius, as well as bottle-conditioned ale to shops throughout the UK. Its regular mild, best bitter and strong bitter (Old Henry) ales have won taste awards, and the mild was chosen to be a guest beer in the House of Commons bar in 2008. Hobsons produce a bottle-only mild ale, named in honour of Simon Evans, called Postman's Knock. In 2009, the brewery installed a small wind turbine, which generates around a third of the electricity required by the brewery, and the company use other environmentally sustainable technologies. The King's Arms in the town became the brewery tap in 2007 and was the first pub to receive a delivery of Hobsons beer in 1993. Hobsons also produce two special beers for the local heritage railway, the Severn Valley Railway.

Local news and television programmes are provided by BBC West Midlands and ITV Central. Television signals are received from either the Sutton Coldfield or The WrekinTV transmitters.

Local radio stations are BBC Radio Shropshire, Heart West Midlands, Smooth West Midlands, Free Radio Black Country & Shropshire, Sunshine Radio, and Greatest Hits Radio Black Country & Shropshire.

The town is served by the local newspaper, Shropshire Star.




Bulletproof (1996 film)

Bulletproof is a 1996 American buddy cop action comedy film directed by Ernest Dickerson and starring Damon Wayans and Adam Sandler.

Released theatrically in the United States by Universal Pictures on September 6, 1996, "Bulletproof" was panned by critics and grossed $22.6 million worldwide.

Archie Moses is a small-time thief in Los Angeles who smuggles drugs for drug lord Frank Colton, who launders his drug money through a car dealership. Moses is unaware that his best friend, Rock Keats, is actually LAPD undercover cop Jack Carter, who befriended him to infiltrate Colton's gang.

Carter has Moses include him in Colton's next drug shipment, secretly planning to arrest Colton and take in Moses, whom he has come to care about, unharmed. Carter's undercover status is revealed before he can enact his plan, however, and a hurt Moses pulls a gun on him. During the raid on Colton's warehouse, an out of control crane hits Moses in the back, causing him to accidentally shoot Carter in the head. He then flees the state, and is subsequently found and arrested.

Carter miraculously survives and makes a full recovery with the aid of his physical therapist, Dr. Traci Flynn, with whom he falls in love. Moses is brought into custody, and he agrees to testify against Colton, but the trial is set to take place at the other side of the country. Carter's superior officer, Capt. Jensen, orders him to personally transfer Moses to the courtroom.

Carter harbors resentment against Moses, and tensions escalate once the simple transfer goes awry. Colton learns through bribed federal agents and LAPD officers of Moses' attempt to testify against him. As they flee from Colton's men, Carter and Moses slowly mend their friendship, and are successful in returning to Carter's precinct. However, Colton apparently holds Flynn hostage, and blackmails Carter into turning Moses over to save Flynn.

Carter and Moses pretend to comply with Colton, and shoot their way through Colton's guards. It is later revealed that Flynn is on Colton's payroll, and is responsible for leaking Carter's and Moses' whereabouts to him. Moses takes a bullet in the shoulder to save Carter's life, giving him time enough to arrest Flynn, then shoots Colton dead. Moses gives the incriminating documents on Colton to Carter, who allows him to escape. He heads to Mexico to become a bullfighter, with Carter and Moses' mother later accompanying him.


Reflecting on the film years later, director Ernest Dickerson spoke to DVD Talk of his regretful experiences making the film:

A soundtrack containing mostly hip hop and R&B music was released on September 3, 1996, by MCA Records. It reached No. 85 on the "Billboard" 200 and #23 on the Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums.

In addition, Varese Sarabande released an album of Elmer Bernstein's score.

"Bulletproof" grossed $6 million its opening weekend, placing it at No. 1 at the box office. By the end of its theatrical run, it pulled in $21.6 million in North America and $1 million internationally for a worldwide total of $22.6 million.

On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 8% based on 38 reviews and an average rating of 3.7/10. The website's critical consensus reads, "In addition to its ability to deflect gunfire, "Bulletproof" proves sadly impervious to humor, logic, or worthwhile viewing." On Metacritic, the film received a score of 30 based on 16 reviews, indicating "generally unfavorable reviews".

Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "B" on an A+ to F scale.

A direct to video sequel "Bulletproof 2" was released on January 7, 2020, directed by Don Michael Paul and stars Faizon Love and Kirk Fox as Jack Carter and Archie Moses replacing both Wayans and Sandler.



Capleton

Clifton George Bailey III (born 13 April 1967), better known by his stage name Capleton, is a Jamaican reggae and dancehall musician. He is also referred to as King Shango, King David, The Fireman and The Prophet. His record label is called David House Productions. He is known for his Rastafari views expressed in his songs.

Bailey was born in Islington in St. Mary in 1967. As a youth, he was given the surname of a popular St. Mary lawyer and friend of the family, Capleton, as a nickname by his relatives and friends.
Capleton rejects the name given to him at birth. He now prefers "King Shango", given its roots in the Yoruba language.

As a teenager, he sneaked out of his home to catch local dancehall acts, eventually leaving St. Mary for Kingston at the age of 18 to work on his career as a dancehall deejay.

In 1989, he got his first big international exposure. Stewart Brown, owner of a Toronto-based sound called African Star, gave the untested artist his first break, flying him to Canada for a stage show alongside Ninjaman and Flourgon.

When Capleton first arrived on the scene in the late 1980s, slackness and gun talk were the dominant lyrics in the dancehalls. The pre-Rasta Capleton had a string of hit songs from "Bumbo Red" to "Number One on the Look Good Chart" and "No Lotion Man".

He recorded the song that began to establish his significant place in Dancehall, "Alms House" in 1992. The tune became a big hit in the dancehall, followed up immediately by "Music is a Mission" and the massive hit "Tour". By 1993, he was voicing tunes which became increasingly conscious, such as "Prophet" and "Cold Blooded Murderer".

Tunes such as "Tour" and "Wings of the Morning" earned him a deal with Russell Simmons' Def Jam Recordings, which culminated in the "Prophecy" and "I-Testament" albums of the mid-1990s.
Grammy Nominated in 2003 Album "Still Blazin" VP Records Executive Produce by Errol "GenErral" Adams / Joel Chin

In 1999, Capleton headlined Reggae Sumfest's dancehall night, to much fanfare. The performance, which led to a subsequent headliner placement the following year, is credited with "re-bussing", or creating a comeback for, his career.
The 1999–2000 period elicited a string of hits, many of which can be found on the album "More Fire".

Grammy Nominated in 2003 Album "Still Blazin" VP Records Executive Produce by Errol "GenErral" Adams / Joel Chin

By 2004, some argued the quality of Capleton's music had been downgraded by over-proliferation on numerous riddims, while Capleton himself argued his continued recording over both dancehall and roots reggae riddims created balance in his musical output. Nonetheless, he scored hit singles over one of the most popular riddims of 2004, "That Day Will Come" over the Hard Times riddim.

After a hiatus from the label, Capleton returned to VP Records in 2010 with the release of "I-Ternal Fire".

After headlining a U.S. tour which included Romain Virgo, Munga Honorable, and Kulcha Knox in the fall of 2010, Capleton embarked upon a tour of the African continent for late 2010 and early 2011. Stops included Gambia, Senegal, South Africa and multiple dates in Zimbabwe. In December 2012 the music Unite Cape Town International Reggae Festival saw Capleton, reggae and dancehall artists like Black Dillinger, Blak Kalamawi .

Capleton's annual 'A St Mary Mi Come From' live show has raised funds for several charities since it was first staged in 2000, including local schools and hospitals.

Capleton makes reference to Bobo Ashanti, one of the various mansions of the Rastafari movement. Yet he frequently mentions there is no separation between the mansions of Rastafari as he sees it. He stated in an interview on TraceTV that he is a vegan, not consuming meat or dairy in any form, but he also rejects anything made from soya. He also touches on the subject of his lyrics regarding fire, saying they are metaphoric references of purification, not violence or murder.

Capleton has faced criticism for anti-gay lyrics in some of his songs though homosexuality remains illegal in his native Jamaica. His manager has argued that some of the controversial lyrics have been mistranslated and do not actually refer to gays. Capleton himself has admitted that through his Rastafari faith he believes that a homosexual lifestyle is not right, but has insisted that terms such as "burn" and "fire" are not to be understood in the literal sense "to go out and burn and kill people", but as a metaphor for "purification" and cleansing.

However, Capleton has continued to sing songs that some see as anti-gay, causing the cancellation of a concert in Switzerland in 2008 and a United States tour in 2010.



The Apple (Star Trek: The Original Series)

"The Apple" is the fifth episode of the of the American science fiction television series "". Written by Max Ehrlich and directed by Joseph Pevney, it was first broadcast on October 13, 1967.

In the episode, the crew of the "Enterprise" visits a planet whose inhabitants live only to serve a machine.

The USS "Enterprise" arrives at Gamma Trianguli VI, a planet appearing to be a tropical paradise with very rich natural resources. Captain Kirk leads a landing party including Chief Medical Officer Dr. McCoy, Ensign Chekov, First Officer Spock, Yeoman Martha Landon, and four security personnel. They quickly find the "paradise" is extremely hostile, losing three of the security team to a plant that shoots poisonous thorns, a bizarre lightning storm, and an explosive rock. Transporting back to the ship is impossible, as an energy field is drawing power from the "Enterprise", rendering the transporters inoperable.

Kirk orders the team towards a primitive village, carefully avoiding hazards. Along the way, they capture a native of the planet who has been tracking them. The frightened man, Akuta (Keith Andes), says he is the chief of the "Feeders of Vaal". Small antennae on his head allow him to communicate with "Vaal", acting as the entity's eyes and ears. During this conversation, Chief Engineer Scott reports that the "Enterprise" is slowly being pulled towards the planet by a tractor beam. Kirk, suspecting a connection with Vaal, asks Akuta to take them to it. 

Akuta leads them to a rock formation with a dragon-like head figure in front. Spock's analysis shows the entrance is protected by a force field, but appears to lead to an underground complex. Akuta says that Vaal may wish to speak with them later, but in the meantime, offers the hospitality of his village.

The "Enterprise" crew find the villagers to be young and healthy, like Akuta, but somewhat unsophisticated. The villagers say Vaal prohibits "touching", as "replacements" (children) are not needed. After a while the villagers are observed "feeding" Vaal with the explosive mineral, apparently its fuel, and the landing party conclude that Vaal is a machine which maintains the planet's Eden-like conditions, making the inhabitants virtually immortal and rendering most work unnecessary. Spock and McCoy argue over the desirability of this system, but Kirk reminds them they need to free the "Enterprise".

In the evening, Chekov and Landon go to a secluded area to kiss, and a young native couple observe and copy their behavior. Vaal is instantly aware, and through Akuta, orders the natives to kill the strangers in the morning. During their attack the last security man is killed, but the rest of the crew subdue the villagers and place them in a hut. Landon in particular distinguishes herself in the fight, using impressive hand-to-hand combat skills to disable two villagers. 

Scott reports that an attempt using all available power to free the ship has failed. Kirk orders his crew to prevent the villagers from feeding Vaal, and instructs Scott to fire the ship's phasers on the rock formation, hoping to drain Vaal's remaining power. Vaal is overloaded and the "Enterprise" is freed from the tractor beam. 

Kirk tells a distraught Akuta that his people will now be able to experience normal life. Aboard the ship, Spock suggests that their actions were the equivalent of the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge - driving the villagers from their Garden of Eden. Kirk wryly rejoins that maybe another member of the crew looks more like Satan than Kirk does.

The episode guest stars a young David Soul (of Starsky & Hutch fame) as one of the Feeders of Vaal.

The episode makes the only "TOS" in-series reference to the saucer section being able to separate from the rest of the "Enterprise" when Kirk is discussing options for Scotty to save the ship.

Zack Handlen of the A.V. Club gave the episode a "B−" criticizing Kirk's interference in the planet's culture.

In 2009, GameRadar+ noted this episode for death of crewman Hendorff (actor Mal Friedman) by a deadly plant during the away mission to the planet's surface.

In 2017, "Den of Geek" ranked "The Apple" the ninth worst episode of the original "Star Trek" television series.


Haman

Haman ( ; also known as Haman the Agagite) is the main antagonist in the Book of Esther, who according to the Hebrew Bible was an official in the court of the Persian empire under King Ahasuerus, commonly identified as Xerxes I (died 465 BCE) but traditionally equated with Artaxerxes I or Artaxerxes II. As his epithet "Agagite" indicates, Haman was a descendant of Agag, the king of the Amalekites. Some commentators interpret this descent to be symbolic, due to his similar personality.

In the narrative of the Book of Esther, Haman was a proud and ambitious man who demanded that everyone bow down to him as a sign of respect. However, a Jewish man named Mordecai refused to bow down to him, which enraged Haman. Seeking revenge, Haman convinced the king to issue a decree that all Jews in the Persian empire be killed. Haman's plot was foiled by Queen Esther, who was also Jewish and had concealed her identity from the King. Esther revealed Haman's plan to Ahasuerus and pleaded with him to spare her people. The King was outraged at Haman's treachery and ordered that he be executed instead.

The name has been equated with the Persian name "Omanes" (, ) recorded by Greek historians. Several etymologies have been proposed for it: it has been associated with the Persian word , meaning "illustrious" (naming dictionaries typically list it as meaning "magnificent"); with the sacred drink Haoma; or with the Persian name Vohuman, meaning "good thoughts". The 19th-century Bible critic Jensen associated it with the Elamite god Humban, a view dismissed by later scholars. Ahriman, a Zoroastrian spirit of destruction, has also been proposed as an etymon. Hoschander suggests that Haman is a priestly title and not a proper name.

As described in the Book of Esther, Haman was the son of Hammedatha the Agagite. After Haman was appointed the principal minister of the king Ahasuerus, all of the king's servants were required to bow down to Haman, but Mordecai refused to. Angered by this, and knowing of Mordecai's Jewish nationality, Haman convinced Ahasuerus to allow him to have all of the Jews in the Persian empire killed.

The plot was foiled by Queen Esther, the king's recent wife, who was herself a Jew. Esther invited Haman and the king to two banquets. In the second banquet, she informed the king that Haman was plotting to kill her (and the other Jews). This enraged the king, who was further angered when (after leaving the room briefly and returning) he discovered Haman had fallen on Esther's couch, intending to beg mercy from Esther, but which the king interpreted as a sexual advance.

On the king's orders, Haman was hanged from the 50-cubit-high gallows that had originally been built by Haman himself, on the advice of his wife Zeresh, in order to hang Mordecai. The bodies of Haman's ten sons were also hanged, after they died in battle against the Jews. The Jews also killed about 75,000 of their enemies in self-defense.

The apparent purpose of this unusually high gallows can be understood from the geography of Shushan: Haman's house (where the pole was located) was likely in the city of Susa (a flat area), while the royal citadel and palace were located on a mound about 15 meters higher than the city. Such a tall pole would have allowed Haman to observe Mordecai's corpse while dining in the royal palace, had his plans worked as intended.

According to Ḥanan b. Rava, his mother was ʾĂmatlaʾy, a descendant of ʿÔrebtî (also ʿÔrǝbtāʾ "she-raven"), apparently patriarch of a major Nehardean house.

TgEsth1 and TgEsth3 call him "Haman the son of Hamedatha, descended from Agag the son of Amaleq." The Targum Sheni gives Haman's lineage as follows: "Haman the son of Hammedatha the Agagite, son of Khada, son of Kuza, son of Alipilot, son of Dios, son of Diosos, son of Peros, son of Ma'dan, son of Bala'qan, son of Antimiros, son of Hadrus, son of Shegar, son of Negar, son of Parmashta, son of Vaizatha, son of Agag, son of Sumqar, son of Amalek, son of a concubine of Eliphaz the son of Esau". There are apparently several generations omitted between Agag, who was executed by Samuel the prophet in the time of King Saul, and Amalek, who lived several hundred years earlier. According to the Midrash Abba Gorion, Haman was also called Memucan, because he was "destined for punishment".

In Rabbinic tradition, Haman is considered to be an archetype of evil and persecutor of the Jews. Having attempted to exterminate the Jews of Persia, and rendering himself thereby their worst enemy, Haman naturally became the center of many Talmudic legends. Being at one time extremely poor, he sold himself as a slave to Mordecai. He was a barber at Kefar Karzum for the space of twenty-two years. Haman had an idolatrous image embroidered on his garments, so that those who bowed to him at command of the king bowed also to the image.

Haman was also an astrologer, and when he was about to fix the time for the genocide of the Jews he first cast lots to ascertain which was the most auspicious day of the week for that purpose. Each day, however, proved to be under some influence favorable to the Jews. He then sought to fix the month, but found that the same was true of each month; thus, Nisan was favorable to the Jews because of the Passover sacrifice; Iyyar, because of the small Passover. But when he arrived at Adar he found that its zodiacal sign was Pisces, and he said, "Now I shall be able to swallow them as fish which swallow one another" (Esther Rabbah 7; Targum Sheni 3).

Haman had 365 counselors, but the advice of none was so good as that of his wife, Zeresh. She induced Haman to build a gallows for Mordecai, assuring him that this was the only way in which he would be able to prevail over his enemy, for hitherto the just had always been rescued from every other kind of death. As God foresaw that Haman himself would be hanged on the gallows, he asked which tree would volunteer to serve as the instrument of death. Each tree, declaring that it was used for some holy purpose, objected to being soiled by the unclean body of Haman. Only the thorn-tree could find no excuse, and therefore offered itself for a gallows (Esther Rabbah 9; Midrash Abba Gorion 7 (ed. Buber, Wilna, 1886); in Targum Sheni this is narrated somewhat differently).

According to the Targum Sheni, he killed the prophet Daniel, who managed to live to Ahasuerus's reign (Targum Sheini on Esther, 4, 11).

In the Qur'an (Islam's primary scripture), Haman () is a person mentioned and associated with pharaoh of the Exodus. McAuliffe's Encyclopaedia of the Qurʾān among other sources relates "Haman" to be the Arabized form of "Ha-Amana" in Egyptian. Muhammad Asad contend that Haman is Ha-Amen as shortcut of the first few letters of title of High Priest of Amun hm.ntr in his book "The Message of The Qur'an".
However, some scholars disagree with the theory of the Quranic Haman being an Egyptian title, instead of a name and the biblical figure himself.

Haman appears six times throughout the Qur'an four times with Pharaoh and twice by himself, where God (Allah) sent Moses to invite Pharaoh, Haman, and their people to monotheism, and to seek protection of the Israelites whom Haman and Pharaoh were tormenting. Referring to Moses as a sorcerer and a liar, the Pharaoh rejected Moses' call to worship the God of Moses and refused to free the Israelite children. The Pharaoh commissioned Haman to build a tall tower using burnt bricks so that the Pharaoh could ascend and see the God of Moses. The Pharaoh, Haman, and their army in chariots pursuing Israel's fleeing children drowned in the Red Sea as the parted water closed on them. The Pharaoh's submission to God at the moment of death and total destruction was rejected, but his corpse was saved as a lesson for posterity and he was mummified.
Josephus mentions Haman in his "Antiquities of the Jews". Josephus's account of the story draws from the Septuagint translation of the Book of Esther and from other Greek and Jewish sources, some no longer extant.

The LXX calls Haman a "Macedonian" by Xerxes (see Esther 16:10). Scholars have had two different explanations for this naming:


The Septuagint translates the "hang" () of Esther 7:9–10 as "crucify" or "impale" (), using the same verb later used in the New Testament's "Gospel of Matthew". The fifty-cubit apparatus used in the execution is described ambiguously using a word () which could mean a tree, a club, a stave, a gibbet, a gallows, the vertical component of a cross for crucifixion, or anything made of wood, an ambiguity already present in the original ().

As in the Septuagint, Haman's execution is ambiguous, suggestive of both hanging and crucifixion. The fifty-cubit object, described as "xylon" in the Septuagint (), is similarly ambiguously referred to as "wood" (). The Vulgate translation of Esther 7:10 furthermore refers to a , used elsewhere to describe the cross-piece in crucifixion, when describing the fate of Haman: . In the corner of the Sistine Chapel ceiling is a depiction in fresco of the execution of Haman by Michelangelo; Haman is shown crucified in a manner similar to typical Catholic depictions of the crucifixion of Jesus, though the legs are parted and the apparatus resembles a natural tree shorter than fifty cubits high.

Translations of the "Book of Esther"'s description of Haman's execution have variously treated the subject. Wycliffe's Bible referred both to a "tre" (tree) and a "iebat" (gibbet), while Coverdale's preferred "galowe" (gallows). The Geneva Bible used "tree" but the King James Version established "gallows" and "hang" as the most common rendering; the Douay–Rheims Bible later used "gibbet". Young's Literal Translation used "tree" and "hang". The New International Version, Common English Bible, and New Living Translation all use "impale" for and "pole" for .

Jacob Hoschander has argued that the name of Haman and that of his father Hamedatha are mentioned by Strabo as "Omanus" and "Anadatus," worshipped with Anahita in the city of Zela. Hoschander suggests that Haman may, if the connection is correct, be a priestly title and not a proper name. Strabo's names are unattested in Persian texts as gods; however the Talmud and Josephus interpret the description of courtiers bowing to Haman in Esther 3:2 as worship. (Other scholars assume "Omanus" refers to Vohu Mana.)

The Jewish holiday of Purim commemorates the story of the Jews' deliverance and Haman's defeat. On that day, the Book of Esther is publicly read and much noise and tumult is raised at every mention of Haman's name. Various noisemakers ("graggers") are used to express disdain for Haman by "blotting out" his name during the recitation of Megillah. Pastry known as (Yiddish for 'Haman's pockets'; known in Hebrew as , , 'Haman's ears') is traditionally eaten on this day.

Since the 1890s, several academics have “agreed in seeing [The Book of] Esther as a historicized myth or ritual” and generally concluded that Purim has its origin in a Babylonian, Persian, or Palestinian myth or festival (though which one is a subject of discussion).

Haman at the moment of his execution appears at the beginning of Canto 17 of "Purgatorio" in Dante's "Divina Commedia". The image occurs in the form of a spontaneous vision given to the character of Dante-as-pilgrim, the purpose of which is to envision Haman's accusers, Ahaseurus, Esther and Mordecai, as emblems of righteous anger. In this divinely inspired hallucination, the fictional Dante sees Haman as ""un crucifisso"", a man who undergoes crucifixion. 

Margaret Mitchell's novel, "Gone With the Wind" (1936) references Haman in the scene in which Rhett Butler, in jail, faces the prospect of hanging.

The Agatha Christie novel, "The Mysterious Affair at Styles" references Haman in a scene where Poirot, investigating a murder, says he will "hang him as high as Haman".

Haman is characterised as evil vizier to a sultan in the "Aliyah-Din" segment of the 1994 made-for-television film "Scooby-Doo! in Arabian Nights". 

He is featured as the primary antagonist in the 1999 "South Park" episode "Jewbilee", in which he is portrayed as attempting to re-enter the mortal world in order to rule once more over the Jews. 

The character was depicted in the American feature film "One Night with the King" (2006), played by James Callis. 

American children's television animations in which the biblical story of Haman is told include the "Queen Esther" episode of the series "" (1985-1992), where he is voiced by Werner Klemperer, and the computer-generated series "VeggieTales" (2000), in which he is portrayed by "Mr. Lunt" during the episode "Esther, the Girl who Became Queen".


Isabel Hilton

Isabel Nancy Hilton OBE (born 25 November 1947) is a Scottish journalist and broadcaster, based in London.

Hilton attended school in Alford, Aberdeenshire, Bradford Girls' Grammar School (Yorkshire) and Walnut Hills High School (Cincinnati, Ohio). She graduated from Edinburgh University, where she studied Chinese to post-graduate level, subsequently studying at Beijing Languages Institute and Fudan University, Shanghai. in 1976, she briefly served as secretary of the Scotland-China Association, based at her University, and was placed on MI5's "black" list, which prevented her from accepting a job offer with the BBC in 1976.

Over a long career in national and international print, online and broadcast media, Isabel Hilton has covered global politics, conflict, development, human rights, climate change and environmental degradation. In recent years her work has focussed on the impacts of a rising China with particular emphasis on climate change and China's global environmental footprint.

In addition to her writing career, she has made several radio and television documentaries and presented both BBC's Radio 4 current affairs programme "The World Tonight "and Radio 3's arts and cultural strand, "Night Waves". Hilton joined Scottish Television as a presenter in 1976, moving later that year to the "Daily Express" as feature writer after being blacklisted by MI5 from a job at the BBC. She left the "Daily Express" five months later to join the "Sunday Times" where she subsequently held posts as feature writer, news reporter, "Insight" reporter and Latin America editor. 
She covered the Falklands War from Buenos Aires in 1982 and continued to cover Latin America until the "Sunday Times" became embroiled in the dispute over its move to Wapping. She left the "Sunday Times" to join the founding team at "The Independent" as Latin America Editor. In 1989 she became Europe Editor, covering the fall of communism in Europe, then Chief Feature Writer.
In 1994 she left "The Independent" to work on a book, whilst also taking up a new role as presenter of "The World Tonight" (1995–98) on BBC Radio 4, and from 1999 as presenter of "Nightwaves" on BBC Radio 3. She contributed a regular column to "The Guardian" 1997–2003) and from 2000 to 2003 was also a staff writer on the New Yorker magazine, reporting from Latin America, South Asia and Europe. From March 2005 to July 2007, she was editor and then editor-in-chief of openDemocracy.net. In 2006 Hilton founded Chinadialogue, a fully bilingual not-for-profit newsroom dedicated to covering climate change with a particular focus on China. 
This was followed in 2010 by the Third Pole and later by "www.dialogochino.net" and "www.chinadialogueocean.net." Hilton served as editor and CEO of the organisation, publishing reports from China, Latin America, east, south and Southeast Asia and the United States in a total of eleven languages. In 2021 she stepped back from her role as CEO to become Senior Adviser to the organisation, finally stepping down from that role in 2023. 
In January 2023 Hilton became a contributing editor at "Prospect Magazine."
Hilton's written work has also appeared in "The New York Times", the "Los Angeles Times", the "New Statesman", "The Economist", "Granta", the "Mail on Sunday", the "Observer", the "Financial Times", "El Pais", "Le Monde", "La Stampa", "Lettres Internationale", "International Affairs", "The World Today", "The New European", "Index on Censorship", "Vogue" (British and American), "The Daily Telegraph", "The Sunday Telegraph", the "Times Literary Supplement", "Foreign Policy" "The Literary Review", the "London Review of Books", "China File", "Foreign Policy" and many others.

Her television and radio documentaries include: 
• "Petra And the General", (BBC 1994)
• "Kingdom Of the Lost Boy" (BBC 1996)
• "City On the Edge" (BBC 1998)

• "Condemned To Live" (BBC 1999)

• "Correspondent: the arrest of General Pinochet"
• "The Caravan of Death" (BBC 2001)

She also reported several shorter films for BBC 2's "Correspondent" series. 
Hilton's radio documentaries include "The Bitter Pill", "The Gesar Epic", "Flowers in the Backyard," "The Chinese Media," "The Return of Faith," "The End of Empire," "The Uses of History in China," "The Shadow of the Emperor".

In 2007, Hilton delivered the "Ben Pimlott Memorial Lecture" at Somerset House, London; in 2019, she delivered the annual James Cameron memorial lecture at City, University of London on the subject: "Journalism with Chinese characteristics: reflections on media in the new era." In 2022 she delivered the "Sue Lloyd-Roberts Memorial Lecture".

Hilton is married to Neal Ascherson, with whom she has a son and a daughter. She was appointed Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) in the 2009 Birthday Honours. She holds an Honorary Doctorate from Bradford University and an Honorary Doctorate of the university from Stirling University.
Hilton is an active participant in a number of track 2 dialogues and meetings, including "Konigswinter", the "Club of Three", the "UK Canada Symposium" and the "British American Project". She has spoken at the World Economic Forum (China) and the Munich Security Forum and served as speaker of the jury for the Berlin Based "Lettres Ulysses Award for Literary Reportage" from 2001 – 2006, as a judge on "Amnesty International’s Media Awards", the "Kurt Schock Awards" and the "James Cameron Awards". She chaired the jury of the "George Orwell Prize for Journalism 2022".

She is a regular discussion host at festivals and events, including "How the Light Gets In" and "Web Summit" (Lisbon,) and as a commentator on "Monocle Radio", "BBC" and other outlets, as a featured speaker in "London Climate Week" (2021), the "FT Festival", the "Edinburgh Book Festival" and many others.
Past positions include: 
• contributing editor. "Granta "
• Fellow, the Asia Society, New York
• Board member "Accountability 21", 
• member of the advisory board of the "Oxford Research Group" 
• member of the GE stakeholder panel,
• founding trustee of "Free Word" 
• advisory board member and fellow of the "British American Project." 
• advisory board member "OSF Global Fellowship Program".
• International co-chair, special project, "Promoting social media and Public Participation in China's Green Development", "China Council on International Cooperation on Environment and Development" (2013)

She has also served as a member of the editorial board of "International Affairs", the advisory board of the "Latin America Bureau," the advisory board of the European Movement, the advisory board of the "Association of Speakers of Chinese as a Second Language," and the editorial advisory board of the "Bureau of Investigative Journalism,"

Hilton chairs the board of the "Centre for Investigative Journalism". She co-chairs the board of "The Bureau of Investigative Journalism" and is a non-executive director of E3G, the climate think tank.

• " The Falklands War " 1982 ISBN 9780722182826 (co-author)

" The Fourth Reich: Klaus Barbie and the Neo-fascist Connection" 1984 co-author, ISBN 0340344431

" The Best of Granta Travel ", (Penguin Books / Granta 1982 ) contributing author, ISBN 0140140417

"The Best American Travel Writing ", contributing author

"Betrayed ", contributing author,

"The Rise of China "(Smith Institute and Westminster University) contributing author,

"The Thinking Fan’s Guide to the World Cup", (Harper Perennial 2006) (contributing author) ISBN 978-0061132261

"Eating Mud Crabs in Kandahar ", (University of California Press 2011) contributing author ISBN 978-0520268678

"Fifty Shades of Feminism", (Virago,2013) (contributing author) ISBN 9781844089451

"China and the Environment: The Green Revolution", (Zed Books, 2013) (contributing author)

"Mare Plasticum - The Plastic Sea: Combatting Plastic Pollution Through Science and Art" (Springer Press 2020) (contributing author) ISBN 3030389448

"China's 19th Party Congress" (World Scientific Press 2019) (contributing author) ISBN 1786345919

, openDemocracy 17 July 2007. Retrieved on 13 April 2008.</ref> .


Haman (Islam)

Haman () is a person mentioned in the Qur'an where he appears as court official of the Firaun of Exodus, and associated with him in his court at the time of the Islamic prophet (Musa), Moses in Christianity and Judaism.

The name Haman, however, also appears in the biblical Book of Esther where Haman is a counselor of Ahasuerus, king of Persia and an enemy of the Jews. The relationship between the Biblical and Quranic Haman has been a topic of debate.There is no evidence of such stories in Egyptian history. Some Islamic scholars borrowed plot elements of the Book of Esther when they elaborated on the Quranic narrative of the Exodus.

The name Haman appears six times throughout the Qur'an, Quran 29:39,40:24, 28:8, 28:38. four times with Pharaoh and twice by himself, where God sends Moses to invite Pharaoh, Haman and their people to monotheism, and to seek protection of the Israelites Haman and Pharaoh were tormenting. 

Referring to Moses as a sorcerer and a liar the Pharaoh rejected Moses' call to worship the God of Moses and refused to set the children of Israel free. The Pharaoh commissioned Haman to build a tall tower using fire-cast bricks so that the Pharaoh could climb far up and see the God of Moses. The Pharaoh, Haman, and their army in chariots pursuing the fleeing children of Israel drowned in the Red Sea as the parted water closed up on them. The Pharaoh's submission to God at the moment of death and total destruction was rejected but his dead body was saved as a lesson for posterity.

Some have proposed that the name "Haman", like "Pharaoh" in the Qur'an and Old Testament is not a proper name, but a title. The description of Haman in the Qur'an serving in both a priestly religious role and that of one who's in charge of building projects answerable to the Pharaoh himself draws parallels with the High Priest of Amun. 

McAuliffe's Encyclopaedia of the Qurʾān among other sources relates "Haman" to be the Arabized form of "Ha-Amana," a title which roughly translates to "incarnate of (the God) Amun" or "King of Amun" and was utilized by the high priest.

Chicago XIV

Chicago XIV is the twelfth studio album by American rock band Chicago, released on July 21, 1980. Recorded at a time of waning interest in the band, "Chicago XIV" remains one of Chicago's poorest-selling albums, failing to reach Gold certification by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA), and was deemed a commercial flop. It is also notable for being their last studio album with Columbia Records, and the last one to feature percussionist Laudir de Oliveira.

After the commercial and critical disappointment of "Chicago 13", and the departure of guitarist Donnie Dacus, Chicago decided that a new strategy was in order. Chris Pinnick played guitar on the sessions and would later become an official member. The band also tried a new producer, this time Tom Dowd, who had worked with Aretha Franklin, Cream, and Eric Clapton. With Dowd taking the reins, and with Chicago abandoning the dance club sound that permeated their previous album, the band recorded a lean, more streamlined record which would, predictably, be called "Chicago XIV". Possibly designed as a response to the under-produced, new wave efforts on the radio at the time, the album was the band's least orchestrated effort to date.

Designed by John Berg, art director of Columbia/CBS Records, the album cover front features an album-cover-size black thumbprint on a white background, with the Chicago logo embedded in the whorls. The album cover back also features an album-cover-size black fingerprint or thumbprint on white background, but without the embedded Chicago logo. The inside dust cover is white with black printing that lists album credits, and also has at the edge four life-size black fingerprints from a right hand on the credits side of the liner, and a corresponding life-size black thumbprint at the edge of the back of the liner. This small thumbprint also has the Chicago logo embedded in the whorls. Berg was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Album Package for this album. The cover was included in a 2012-2013 exhibit of Berg's album covers at Guild Hall of East Hampton. The cover artwork is in the permanent collection of The Museum of Modern Art in New York City.

With four solo writing credits and one cowriting credit among the ten songs on the album, Peter Cetera took on a greater songwriting role in the band than in the past. His compositions included a mix of ballads, pop and rock songs. Robert Lamm turned in the rockers "Manipulation" and "I'd Rather Be Rich" (a song from 1975); James Pankow delivered the uptempo – if downbeat – "The American Dream"; and Lamm and Danny Seraphine co-wrote "Thunder and Lightning". "Birthday Boy" marked the final collaboration between Seraphine and his songwriting partner Hawk Wolinski. Like "Chicago 13" before it, "Chicago XIV" failed to improve Chicago's fortunes. To the record-buying public, Chicago's image was out of touch in 1980, and once the new album was released, it became clear that any attempt to win new fans would be in vain.

Columbia Records was increasingly disappointed with the poor sales performance of the band. "Chicago XIV" went unnoticed upon release and bombed, reaching only number seventy-one on the Billboard 200 chart in the US, and disappeared quickly. Again, there were no singles hits, with "Thunder and Lightning" stalling below the top fifty and "Song For You" failing to chart. Chicago also saw a poor attendance in many venues during the supporting tour. Realizing that the relationship had soured considerably, Columbia Records terminated their contract with Chicago with a buyout of approximately $2 million. In 1982, Robert Lamm recalled, 

As a settlement to ending the arrangement early, Columbia released the band's second greatest-hits album and jettisoned them from the label. The money from the settlement was used to record "Chicago 16" independently, while the band shopped for a new label (eventually they signed with Warner). Realizing that the Latin/Jazz percussion style evident in the latter half of the previous decade no longer fit with their "more pop-oriented sound", while beginning work on "Chicago 16," the album "Chicago XIV" signaled the end of percussionist Laudir de Oliveira's tenure with the band after nine years. Peter Cetera, meanwhile, concentrated on his first self-titled solo album during the hiatus.

In 2003, "Chicago XIV" was remastered and reissued by Rhino Records, with three outtakes from the sessions, "Doin' Business" (which first appeared on the 1991 4-Disc anthology "Group Portrait"), "Live It Up", and "Soldier of Fortune" as bonus tracks.

Track titles, track order, and writers for tracks one through ten from 1980 vinyl LP liner.




West Morava

West Morava (, ) is a river in Central Serbia, a 184-km long headstream of the Great Morava, which it forms with the South Morava. It was known as Brongus in antiquity.

The West Morava originates in the Tašti field, east of the town of Požega, from the Golijska Moravica and Đetinja headstreams. Đetinja receives from the left its main tributary, the Skrapež. Less than a kilometer after the confluence, it meets the Golijska Moravica flowing from the south, forming the West Morava. Given the proximity of the confluences of Đetinja, Skrapež and Golijska Moravica, some sources consider all three rivers to be direct headstreams of the West Morava River. Following the direction of the course, the Đetinja is a natural headstream of the West Morava. But since Golijska Moravica is 23 km longer, the latter is considered as the main headstream. Measured from the source of the Golijska Moravica, the West Morava is 282 km long; the length of the West Morava proper is 184 km.

Unlike the South and Great Morava's meridian (south-to-north) flow, the West Morava runs in an opposed, latitudinal (west-to-east) direction, dividing the region of Šumadija of the central Serbia from the southern parts of the country.

Due to the West Morava's direction, it flows between many mountains, regions and sub-regions:


The West Morava river valley, Zapadno Pomoravlje, is economically the most developed of all three Morava river valleys. With the valley of the Ibar, the West Morava has a huge potential in electricity production (the Ovčar (6 MW) and Međuvršje (7 MW) hydroelectric power plants). Water is also used for the irrigation and for the same purpose the artificial lake Parmenac is created on the river, thus helping the already fertile region (grains, orchards). Also, out of all three Morava rivers, the West Morava's valley is the most forested one.

The watershed of the West Morava is rich in ores, (the Ibar section most of all), and includes the mining of hard coal, magnesite, chromium, etc. As a result, the industry is very developed with a string of heavily industrialized towns: Užice, Požega, Čačak, Kraljevo, Trstenik and Kruševac. The traffic is also important for the economy as the whole of the river valley is a natural route for both the roads and the railways connecting eastern, central and western Serbia.

Altogether, the West Morava receives 85 tributaries. The river used to be longer (319 km), but due to the regulation of the flow, it is shorter now.

The West Morava has an average discharge of 120 m³/s, but it is characterized by extreme fluctuations, which results in severe floods.

The West Morava drains an area of 15,754 km (41.2% of the entire Great Morava watershed), belongs to the Black Sea drainage basin and it is not navigable. When melioration program began in 1966, it was projected that it will become navigable from Kruševac to Čačak.

In the central section of the flow, the special nature reserve Osredak was established in February 2020, and placed under the state protection.




Waverley, New South Wales

Waverley is a suburb in the Eastern suburbs of Sydney, in the state of New South Wales, Australia. Waverley is located seven kilometres east of the Sydney central business district, in the local government area of Waverley Council.

Waverley Council takes its name from the suburb but its administrative centre is located in the adjacent suburb of Bondi Junction, which is also a major commercial centre. Waverley is the highest point of altitude in Sydney's Eastern Suburbs.

Waverley takes its name from a home built near Old South Head Road in 1827 by Barnett Levey (or Levy) (1798–1837). It was named Waverley House, after the title of his favourite book, "Waverley", by author Sir Walter Scott. Waverley Municipality was proclaimed in June 1859. The house was a distinctive landmark and gave its name to the surrounding suburb.

Waverley Cemetery (South Head General Cemetery) was established in 1877 and is one of Australia's most notable cemeteries due to its cliff-side location. The cemetery features the graves of several notable Australians including poet Henry Kendall and aviator Lawrence Hargrave.

Edina, a late Victorian mansion built on a grand scale in Birrell Street by Ebenezer Vickery for himself and his family, was completed around 1884. Vickery was a leading merchant and a prominent patron of the Methodist Church. Other buildings in the group include Banksia, Witchagil and the Nellie Vickery Memorial Chapel. Banksia and Witchagil are two-storey villas that Vickery built for his sons.

This distinguished group of Victorian buildings is now used as the War Memorial Hospital. Edina, Banksia and Witchagil are on the (now defunct) Register of the National Estate. Other heritage items in Waverley include the two weatherboard cottages in Judges Lane, off Bronte Road. A building in Waverley once collapsed into a large hole that swallowed ten houses and an entire street.

Waverley has a number of heritage-listed sites, including:

In the 2016 Census, there were 4,346 people in Waverley. 54.1% of people were born in Australia. The most common countries of birth were England 7.9% and New Zealand 2.7%. 69.6% of people only spoke English at home. The most common responses for religion were No Religion 32.0% and Catholic 24.7%.

Waverley is mostly residential with a scattering of commercial developments, centred on the road junction known as Charing Cross.

Waverley is home to a number of schools.

Waverley is represented in one of the most popular sporting competitions across Australia, the National Rugby League competition, by the local team the Sydney Roosters, officially the Eastern Suburbs District Rugby League Football Club (ESDRLFC).

The following clubs are located in or represent the Waverley area:

Current and former notable residents include:


Schools and churches
Heritage-listed items in the Waverley area include the following:


Mysore Medical College &amp; Research Institute

Mysore Medical College and Research Institute (previously called Mysore Medical College, abbreviated MMC), also known as Government Medical College, Mysore is one of the oldest medical colleges in India. It is located in the heart of the city of Mysore adjacent to the city railway station. Founded in 1924 by Maharaja Krishnaraja Wadiyar IV, it is the first medical college to be established in the Karnataka region and the seventh in India. The college is affiliated to the Rajiv Gandhi University of Health Sciences, Jayanagar, Bangalore.

Maharaja Krishnaraja Wadiyar IV founded Mysore Medical College. Since there were no medical institutions in the erstwhile Kingdom of Mysore, a scheme for giving medical education was started in 1881 under which carefully selected students were given scholarship and sent to places like Madras and Bombay to undergo training and to return and work as "Hospital Assistants".

After the Madras Presidency expressed its inability to admit Mysore State students, the Government of Mysore sanctioned another scheme in April 1917 including a "Mysore Medical School", which was started at Bangalore to train the then called "Sub Assistant Surgeons". Trainees had to undergo a course for 4 years to qualify as a Licensed Medical Practitioner (LMP). In 1924 the "Mysore Medical School" was upgraded and was now called the "Mysore Medical College". The college was affiliated to the University of Mysore and the trainees were now granted medical degrees. Mysore Medical College was the first medical college in the state of Mysore and only the seventh in India at this time. At the request and insistence of Sri Krishnadevaraja Wodiyar the college was shifted from Bangalore to Mysore in 1930.

The foundation stone was laid in 1930 by Sri Krishnadevaraja Wodiyar and the main building was constructed by Boraiah Basavaiah & Sons, a famous contractor of Mysore. It was further expanded in 1940.

The Krishnarajendra Hospital (K R Hospital) was constructed at a cost of Rs. 3,65,000/- and started as a 100 bedded hospital with X-ray apparatus. It is attached to the Mysore Medical College.

The Mysore Medical School continued functioning in Bangalore for a few years and was eventually shut down two years after Bangalore Medical College came into existence in 1954.

Cheluvamba hospital, earlier known as Vanivilas Hospital, was built in 1880 with 24 beds, and was upgraded to a 200-bed hospital in 1939. It was further expanded in 1954 and the new OPD Block of OBG was built in 1997. New facilities have been continuously added onto the existing infrastructure, but the most impressive of all is the new multistoried OPD building with its ultra-modern air-conditioned ICCU which along with the medical wards on upper floors was added onto the K R Hospital complex in 1998. Other relatively new structures include a blood bank and a burns ward. It is attached to the Mysore Medical College.

The total intake is 150 for MBBS course. The seat is filled through the National Eligibility cum Entrance Test conducted by the National Testing Agency, Government of India.

It has intake of 127 seats for PG courses in which 50% is by All India Quota.



United National Independence Party

The United National Independence Party (UNIP) is a political party in Zambia. It governed the country from 1964 to 1991 under the socialist presidency of Kenneth Kaunda, and was the sole legal party in the country between 1973 and 1990. On 4 April 2021, Bishop Trevor Mwamba was elected President of UNIP.

UNIP was founded in October 1959 by Mainza Chona as a successor of the Zambian African National Congress (ZANC), banned earlier that year. UNIP was initially led Chona as the ZANC leader, Kaunda, had been imprisoned. Kaunda later assumed power as leader of UNIP after he was released from prison in 1960.

In the general elections, UNIP won 14 seats, in second position, the first being taken by United Federal Party (UFP). Although Northern Rhodesian African National Congress leader Harry Nkumbula had made a secret electoral pact with the UFP, he later opted to form a government with UNIP. After a convincing victory in the Northern Rhodesian general elections in 1964, when UNIP won 55 of the 75 seats, Kaunda became Prime Minister of Northern Rhodesia, leading the country to independence on 24 October 1964, when he became president.

In the 1968 general elections, Kaunda was re-elected president with 82% of the vote, and UNIP won 81 of the 105 elected seats in the National Assembly.

In 1973, the country became a one-party state with UNIP as the sole legal party, with an amended constitution being promulgated on 25 August 1973. The general election that year described as the final steps in achieving what was called a "one-party participatory democracy". National policy was formulated by the Central Committee of UNIP. According to the constitution, UNIP's president was selected at the party's general conference, and the second-ranking person in the Zambian hierarchy was UNIP's secretary general. The constitution also stipulated that UNIP's president was the sole candidate for president of the republic; he was confirmed in office every five years via a yes/no referendum. Voters chose between multiple UNIP candidates for the 125 parliamentary seats, with three candidates running in each constituency. Kaunda was confirmed as president with 89% of the vote. Elections were held under the same system in 1978, 1983 and 1988, with Kaunda receiving at least 80% of the vote each time.

At the end of 1990, multi-party democracy was reintroduced, and UNIP was roundly defeated in the 1991 general elections by the Movement for Multi-Party Democracy (MMD); Kaunda was 

defeated in the presidential vote by MMD candidate Frederick Chiluba, receiving just 24% of the vote, whilst in the National Assembly elections UNIP won 25 seats to the MMD's 125.

Following changes to the constitution which effectively barred Kaunda from running for president again, UNIP boycotted the 1996 elections, although two members contested National Assembly seats. The party returned to contest the 2001 elections with Kenneth Kaunda's son, Tilyenji, as its presidential candidate; he received 10% of the vote, finishing fourth out of the eleven candidates. In the National Assembly elections, the party won 13 seats.

Prior to the 2006 elections, the party joined the United Democratic Alliance alongside the other two largest opposition parties. United Party for National Development leader, Hakainde Hichilema, was the alliance's presidential candidate, finishing third. The alliance won just 26 seats in the National Assembly, down from the 74 the three parties had won in 2001.

UNIP did not contest the 2008 presidential by-election, but nominated Tilyenji Kaunda as its presidential candidate for the 2011 elections. Kaunda received less than 1% of the vote, finishing sixth in a field of ten candidates. The party also failed to win a seat in the National Assembly, receiving only 0.7% of the vote. Kaunda ran in the 2015 presidential by-election, but again received less than 1% of the vote. Tilyenji Kaunda remained the party's presidential candidate for the 2016 general elections, but he received only 0.24% of the vote, with the party again failing to win a seat in the National Assembly.

Acepromazine

Acepromazine, acetopromazine, or acetylpromazine (commonly known as ACP, Ace, or by the trade names Atravet or Acezine 2, number depending on mg/ml dose) is a phenothiazine derivative antipsychotic drug. It was used in humans during the 1950s as an antipsychotic, but is now almost exclusively used on animals as a sedative and antiemetic. A closely related analogue, chlorpromazine, is still used in humans.

The standard pharmaceutical preparation, acepromazine maleate, is used in veterinary medicine in dogs and cats. It is used widely in horses as a pre-anesthetic sedative and has been shown to reduce anesthesia related death. However, it should be used with caution (but is not absolutely contraindicated) in stallions due to the risk of paraphimosis and priapism. Its potential for cardiac effects can be profound, namely hypotension due to peripheral vasodilation, so it should be avoided or used with caution in geriatric or debilitated animals.

The clinical pharmacology of acepromazine is similar to that of other phenothiazine derived anti-psychotic agents. The primary behavioral effects are attributed to its potent antagonism of post-synaptic D receptors and, to a lesser degree, the other D-like receptors. Additional effects are related to its appreciable antagonistic effects on various other receptors, including the α-adrenergic receptors, H receptors, and muscarinic acetylcholine receptors. It is metabolized by the liver, oxidized to produce its primary metabolite, hydroxyethylpromazine sulfoxide, which is then excreted in the urine. Its action at the chemoreceptor trigger zone (in the area postrema) and the solitary nucleus (in the medulla oblongata) allow it to have an antiemetic effect.

The most common uses of acepromazine in animals are as an oral sedative before stressful events (such as thunderstorms), an injectable tranquilizer for particularly aggressive or fractious animals, and in combination with analgesics and other sedatives. It is also labeled for use in preventing motion sickness. Its effects as a CNS depressant means that fewer opiates are required to reach the same amount of sedation, and it prevents the arrhythmia and vomiting that many opiates induce.

While acepromazine is also used in cats, its absorption is erratic and can vary between individuals. It also generally induces less sedation than in dogs. It also causes spontaneous motor activity (in both cats and dogs, but more often in cats) by blocking dopamine receptors in the striatum and substantia nigra.

Literature from the 1950s raised concerns about phenothiazine-induced seizures in human patients. For this reason, caution has typically been advised when contemplating acepromazine use in epileptic canine patients, as it was widely believed to lower the seizures threshold. More current studies, however, have failed to show a positive association between use of acepromazine and seizure activity and show a possible role for acepromazine in seizure control: in a retrospective study at University of Tennessee, acepromazine was administered for tranquilization to 36 dogs with a prior history of seizures and to decrease seizure activity in 11 dogs. No seizures were seen within 16 hours of acepromazine administration in the 36 dogs that received the drug, and the seizures abated for 1.5 to 8 hours (n=6) or did not recur (n=2) in eight of 10 dogs that were actively seizing. Excitement-induced seizures were reduced for 2 months in one dog. A second retrospective study also concluded that administration of acepromazine to dogs with prior or acute seizure history did not potentiate seizures, and there was some trend toward seizure reduction. The original seizure cautions reported in the 1950s were in human patients on relatively high doses of the antipsychotic chlorpromazine while the doses of acepromazine used in the two published veterinary studies cited above are much lower.
In some boxers, acepromazine can cause vasovagal syncope (due to a decreased stimulation of the sympathetic nervous system) and hypotension (due to vasodilation), leading to collapse. This may occur only in certain families of boxers, but the unknown risk to an individual dog means that acepromazine should be used at reduced doses, or not at all, in this breed. Individual dogs of any breed can have a profound reaction characterized by hypotension, especially if there is an underlying heart problem.

In giant-breed dogs and sighthounds, the sedative effects of acepromazine may last for 12–24 hours, which is much longer than the usual 3–4 hours.

P-glycoprotein (P-gp), also known as multidrug resistant protein 1 (MDR1), is a protein found in cell membranes which is important in the metabolism and excretion of some drugs, such as acepromazine and ivermectin. This protein is encoded by the "ABCB1" gene (previously known as the "MDR1" gene). A mutation in "ABCB1" prevents P-gp from being correctly produced, so that dogs with this mutation have an increased sensitivity to drugs (such as acepromazine) which are substrates of P-gp. Dogs which are heterozygous (that is, which have one functioning "ABCB1" gene, and one non-functioning gene) are less sensitive to acepromazine than dogs which are homozygous (that is, which have two copies of the mutant gene). 75% of Collies carry the mutated "ABCB1" gene, as do 50% of Australian Shepherds. Other affected breeds include: Border Collie, English Shepherd, German Shepherd, Old English Sheepdog, and Sighthounds, shelties, long haired greyhound.

Tests for this mutation are available.

In equine surgery, premedication with acepromazine has been shown to reduce the perianaesthetic mortality rate, possibly due to its actions as a sedative and anxiolytic. It is less effective as a sedative if the horse is already excited.

Additionally, acepromazine is used as a vasodilator in the treatment of laminitis, where an oral dose equivalent to "mild sedation" is commonly used, although the dose used is highly dependent on the treating veterinarian. While it is shown to elicit vasodilation in the distal limb, evidence showing its efficacy at increasing perfusion in the laminae is lacking. It is also sometimes used to treat a horse experiencing equine exertional rhabdomyolysis.

Acepromazine should not be used in horses intended for human consumption.

Side effects are not common, but the use of acepromazine in stallions should be used with caution (but is not absolutely contraindicated) due to the risk of paraphimosis and priapism.

Acepromazine also lowers blood pressure, and should therefore be used with caution in horses that are experiencing anemia, dehydration, shock, or colic. It should not be used in horses dewormed with piperazine.

All People's Congress

The All People's Congress (APC) is one of the two major political parties in Sierra Leone, the other being its main political rival the Sierra Leone People's Party (SLPP). The APC has been the main opposition party in Sierra Leone since 4 April 2018 when Julius Maada Bio of the SLPP won the 2018 presidential elections, though it maintains a majority in parliament.

The APC party was founded in 1960 by a breakaway group from the Sierra Leone People's Party that vehemently opposed elections before independence and instead supported independence before elections. The APC governed the country from 1968 to 1992 and became the ruling party again in 2007 after the party presidential candidate Ernest Bai Koroma won the 2007 presidential election, he contested and also won the 2012 elections. The APC lost power on 4 April 2018, with its flagbearer Samura Kamara losing the presidential election to Bio.

The APC is very popular and receives large majority support in almost all of the northern districts of Sierra Leone with strong ties to the Temne and some Limba people. The APC is also popular with significant majority in the Western Area (including Freetown).

Following a heavily manipulated plebiscite in 1978, the APC became the sole legal party in the country, a status it retained until 1991. Presidents Siaka Stevens and Joseph Saidu Momoh were members of the APC. Momoh was overthrown in a military coup in 1992, and during the civil war that followed, the party was severely weakened.

In the parliamentary election held on 14 May 2002, the party won 19.8% of the popular vote and 22 out of 112 seats. Its candidate in the presidential elections, Ernest Bai Koroma, won 22.3% of the vote; he was defeated by Ahmad Tejan Kabbah of the Sierra Leone People's Party (SLPP).
For several years Koroma's leadership was challenged by some in the party, who took the issue to court; the dispute was said to be resolved in April 2007, with Koroma accepted by party dissidents as the party's leader ahead of the 2007 election. He was the party's candidate for president in the election, with the first round held in August 2007. In the first round he took first place with 44.3% of the vote, ahead of Solomon Berewa of the ruling Sierra Leone People's Party (SLPP) with 38.3%, but Koroma did not receive enough votes to win outright, and a second round was necessary. In the parliamentary election, held concurrently with the presidential first round, the APC won 59 out of 112 seats and became the largest party in Parliament.

Koroma was victorious in the second round of the 2007 presidential election, held on 8 September, winning 54.6% of the vote against 45.4% for Berewa. He was sworn in as President on 17 September.

APC has traditionally been based among the Temne and Limba people in the north.

Richard Norton-Taylor

Richard Seymour Norton-Taylor (born 6 June 1944) is a British editor, journalist, and playwright. He wrote for "The Guardian" on defence and security matters from 1975 to 2016, and was the newspaper's security editor. He now works for the investigative journalism site "Declassified UK".

He was born to Lt. Seymour Norton-Taylor, R.A., and Gweneth Joan Powell (died 9 January 1978).

Norton-Taylor was educated at The King's School in Canterbury, Kent, going on to study at Hertford College, a constituent college of the University of Oxford, and the College of Europe in Bruges.

He was the European Community and Brussels, Belgium correspondent for both "The Washington Post" and "Newsweek" between 1967 and 1975, while also contributing to "The Economist" and the "Financial Times".

Norton-Taylor joined "The Guardian" in 1975, concentrating on Whitehall, official secrecy, and behind-the-scenes decision-making. He became an expert on British and Soviet intelligence activities during the Second World War. In 1988, he made an extended appearance on the TV discussion programme "After Dark", alongside (among others) Harold Musgrove, Hilary Wainwright and George Brumwell, discussing his book "Blacklist: The Inside Story of Political Vetting", co-written with Mark Hollingsworth.

He has written several plays based on transcripts of public inquiries, including "The Colour of Justice" (1999), based on the hearing of the MacPherson Inquiry into the police conduct of the investigation into the murder of Stephen Lawrence. Another was "Justifying War: Scenes from the Hutton Inquiry" (2003), both of which premiered at the Tricycle Theatre.

Norton-Taylor left "The Guardian" in July 2016 and currently writes for "Declassified UK".

In 1986 Norton-Taylor won the Freedom of Information Campaign award. That same year he was prevented initially by a court injunction from reporting the contents of "Spycatcher" (1987), the memoirs of Peter Wright, a former MI5 agent. The government's injunction was dismissed in the High Court by Lord Justice Scott.

Norton-Taylor was one of the few journalists to cover the Scott Inquiry from start to finish. His play, "Half the Picture", based on the inquiry, received a 1994 "Time Out" Drama, Comedy and Dance award for its "brave initiative".

In 2010, with fellow "Guardian" journalist Ian Cobain, he was awarded a Human Rights Campaign of the Year Award from Liberty for their "investigation into Britain's complicity in the use of torture" by the United States against detainees at their facility at Guantanamo Bay and at black sites.

In 1967, he married Anna C Rendle, eldest daughter of Mr and Mrs J E Rendle, of Kemerton, near Tewkesbury, Gloucestershire.

Norton-Taylor is a Member of Council of the Royal United Services Institute and a trustee of the Civil Liberties Trust and the London Action Trust.

He has two children and five grandchildren.



Niedervogelgesang

Niedervogelgesang is a village in the municipality of Pirna, in Saxony, Germany. It was incorporated into Pirna in 1923. The place was mentioned for the first time in 1551. It is situated on the left bank of the river Elbe, 3 km east of Pirna town centre. Its name translates as "lower bird song."

Mansoor Hekmat

Mansoor Hekmat (, born Zhoobin Razani ; June 4, 1951 – July 4, 2002) was an Iranian Marxist, revolutionary and leader of the Worker-communist movement. He opposed the Shah and, after the 1979 Revolution, he first founded the movement of Revolutionary Marxism and in 1983 he co-founded the Communist Party of Iran which was opposed to the Islamic Republic of Iran. In 1991 he separated from this party and founded the Worker-communist Party of Iran (WPI), which he led until his death in 2002. He was the husband of fellow politician Azar Majedi.

Born in Tehran, Hekmat moved to Shiraz, where he graduated in economics at the University of Shiraz, before moving to the UK where completed his Masters at Bath University. He moved to London in 1973 to start his Phd at Birkbeck University, where he studied under the supervision of Marxist theorist Ben Fine and became a critic of what he saw as distorted versions of communism, including Russian communism, Chinese communism, the guerrilla warfare movement, social democracy, Trotskyism and nationalism among the left.

He founded the Union of Communist Militants in 1979, then took part in the Iranian Revolution of 1979 – marked by the creation of workers' councils ("shoras") – and, unlike the major part of the Iranian left-wing, refused to pay allegiance to Islamism and Supreme Leader Ruhollah Khomeini. He denounced the ""myth of a progressive national bourgeoisie"".
Because of mounting repression against political opposition groups in Iran, Hekmat sought refuge in Kurdistan in 1982. Hekmat's Union then fused with a Kurdish group of Maoist roots, Komalah – together, they formed the Communist Party of Iran (CPI) based on Revolutionary Marxism. Hekmat and a group of other CPI members left the party and, in 1991, founded the WPI. He also helped establish the Worker-Communist Party of Iraq.

He died of cancer in hospital in the UK and his headstone is at Highgate Cemetery, a few meters away from Karl Marx's grave.

Hekmat supported the "return to Marx", and theorized that the working class is to rely only on itself – arguing that it had been the only class to impose beneficial changes in the 20th century. He opposed Stalinism and never accepted that either the Soviet Union or the People's Republic of China were socialist countries. He famously said ""The basis of Socialism is the human being"". Hekmat was also a practicing vegetarian and towards the end of his life became vegan.

Hekmat believed in free, legalised abortions but encouraged criticism of the strong feminist movements of his time whom he criticized as having a lack of compassion on this matter. He believed all should be done to create a world in which women are supported socially, economically, culturally and politically to keep their children, to reduce the need for abortions.


Miller Lite

Miller Lite is a 4.2% ABV light American lager beer sold by Molson Coors (previously MillerCoors) of Chicago, Illinois. It was first produced in 1975. The company also produces Miller Genuine Draft and Miller High Life. Miller Lite competes mainly with Anheuser-Busch's Bud Light. Miller Lite is the official beer sponsor of the Green Bay Packers, Milwaukee Brewers, Milwaukee Bucks, Dallas Cowboys, Baltimore Ravens, Chicago Bears, and Bellator MMA.

Calorie-reduced light beer was first introduced to the market by New York's Rheingold Brewery as "Gablinger's Diet Beer", brewed using a process developed in 1964 by chemist Hersch Gablinger of Basel, Switzerland. The version that evolved into Miller Lite had its origins in a recipe developed in 1967 by Joseph L. Owades, PhD, a biochemist working for Rheingold. Next, the recipe was offered by Owades to Chicago's Peter Hand Brewing. That year, Peter Hand Brewing was purchased by a group of investors, renamed Meister Brau Brewing, and Lite was soon introduced as Meister Brau Lite, a companion to their flagship Meister Brau. Under the new management, Meister Brau Brewing encountered significant financial problems, and in 1972, sold several of its existing labels to Miller. The recipe was relaunched simply as "Lite" on packaging and in advertising (with "Lite Beer from Miller" being its "official" name until the late '90s) in the test markets of Springfield, Illinois; Providence, Rhode Island; Knoxville, Tennessee; and San Diego, California, in 1973, and heavily marketed using masculine pro sports players and other "macho" figures of the day in an effort to sell to the key beer-drinking male demographic. Miller Lite was introduced nationally in 1975. and became the first successful mainstream light beer in the United States.

Miller's youth-oriented, heavy-advertising approach worked where the two previous light beers had failed, and Miller's early production totals of 12.8 million barrels quickly increased to 24.2 million barrels by 1977 as Miller rose to 2nd place in the American brewing marketplace. Other brewers responded, in particular Anheuser-Busch with its heavily advertised Bud Light in 1982, which eventually overtook Lite in sales by 1994. Anheuser-Busch played on the branding style of "Lite", boasting that next to Bud Light "everything else is just a light". In 1992, light beers became the biggest domestic beer in America, and in 1998, Miller relabeled its "Lite" brand as "Miller Lite".

In 2008, Miller Brewing Company test-marketed three new recipes – an amber, a blonde ale, and a wheat – under the Miller Lite brand, marketed as Miller Lite Brewers Collection.

At the 2010 and 2014 Great American Beer Festival, Miller Lite won the gold medal for Best American Style Lager or Light Lager, besting Miller Genuine Draft. The beer ranked #1 on the list of top 100 beers by the "Cold Cans" podcast.

Miller Lite's long-running "Tastes Great!...Less Filling!" advertising campaign was ranked by "Advertising Age" magazine as the eighth best advertising campaign in history. The campaign was developed by the McCann-Erickson Worldwide advertising agency. In the prime of the campaign, television commercials typically portrayed a Lite Beer drinker noting its great taste followed by another who observed that it was less filling. This usually led to a parody of Wild West saloon fights in which every patron got involved in the dispute for no real reason, though in this case it was always a shouting match, and blows were never thrown. The commercials were closed with a voice-over from actor Eddie Barth, who read the slogan, ""Lite Beer from Miller: Everything you've always wanted in a beer. And less.""

The then-recently retired New York Jets running back Matt Snell was the first person to appear in Miller Lite's first commercial in 1973.

To attract 'Joe Sixpack' to a light beer, these commercials started to feature both elite ex-athletes such as Ray Nitschke, Ben Davidson, and Bubba Smith but also oddball cultural figures such as Mickey Spillane (accompanied by a blonde, Lee Meredith, who is better known for her role as Ulla, the secretary in "The Producers"), and comedian Rodney Dangerfield. As the series of commercials went on, it began featuring athletes and celebrities of all sorts. Some commercials from this era include:


As the popularity of the ads and the number of athletes and celebrities that appeared in them grew, Miller produced occasional "alumni" ads featuring all of the stars, generally in some sort of competition between the 'Less Fillings' and the 'Taste Greats'. The ads usually ended with Rodney Dangerfield somehow being the goat of the losing team. In one of the last spots to feature Dangerfield, the Miller Lite alumni are competing in a bowling match. It is the last frame of a tie game, and Ben Davidson grumbles to Dangerfield, "All we need is "one" pin, Rodney." Dangerfield rolls the ball down the lane, only to have it bounce horizontally off the head pin and into the gutter, knocking down zero pins.

As part of this campaign, Miller Brewing ran a series of television commercials in the winter of 1993–1994 showing several fictitious "extreme sports" such as "Wiener Dog Drag Racing" (which featured two wiener dogs racing each other at a drag racing strip), "Sumo High Dive" (which depicted a Japanese sumo wrestler diving off a platform) and "The Miss Perfect Face-Off" (which featured beauty pageant contestants playing ice hockey). The tag line that followed was, "If you can combine great taste with less filling, you can combine anything." and the question "Can your beer do this?"

In 1995-1996, Miller Lite ran the "Life Is Good" campaign, which showed Miller Lite drinkers' aspirational transition to more fun via a Miller Lite bottle tap, like "Beach Rewind", where three men on a beach admired three beautiful women walking by, and could rewind, and enjoy, the scene repeatedly. The campaign was developed by Leo Burnett Company, and received the American Marketing Association EFFIE award for outstanding advertising effectiveness. The campaign included celebrities such as Larry Bird, Keith Jackson, and Richard Karn.

Beginning January 12, 1997, a series of surrealistic Miller Lite ads, purportedly made by a man named "Dick", began to air. They were hallmarked as such either at the beginning or the end of the commercial. The campaign was developed by Minneapolis-based ad agency Fallon. The series of "Dick" commercials was directed by Gerald Casale of the new wave band Devo. Such commercials include one where a middle-aged man sees the message "twist to open" on a Miller Lite bottle cap, and he proceeds to do the Twist.

The ad campaign changed back to using high-profile celebrities who were either on opposite ends of the spectrum or had bragging rights to exchange with the other. Notable pairings included the following:


In 2003, "Catfight", another high-profile commercial in the long-running "Great Taste...Less Filling" campaign, was denounced by critics as depicting women as sexual objects. The commercial featured two beautiful young women, a blonde (Tanya Ballinger) and a brunette (Kitana Baker), discussing the classic "Great Taste/Less Filling" debate, except they engaged in a catfight, hence the ad's title. The fight moving from a fountain to a mud pit, with the girls stripping each other of their clothing in the process. An uncensored version of the commercial ended in the muddy beauties, stripped down to their underwear, sharing a passionate kiss. The girls received much publicity from the commercial, and later starred in a few related commercials, videos and events.

In 2006, Miller Lite had an advertising campaign called Man Laws featuring celebrities that include actor Burt Reynolds, professional wrestler Triple H, comedian Eddie Griffin, and former American football player Jerome Bettis. The celebrities and other actors were in a "Men of the Square Table", a group meeting where they discuss different situations that should be included in the "Man Laws". The ads were developed by the ad agency Crispin Porter + Bogusky/Miami, and were directed by comedy film director Peter Farrelly.

In June 2010, commercials premiered featuring actresses Lindsey McKeon and Nadine Heimann as bartenders.

In December 2013, as part of a product placement marketing campaign with the film "", Miller reintroduced the 1974 navy-blue blackletter font "Lite" packaging on its cans for a limited time (the original 1972 cans used a light-blue script logo). However, the vintage packaging was such a success that by September 2014, the company decided to switch back to the vintage packaging full-time, including on bottles and tap handles, mirroring the unexpected success that PepsiCo had in 2009 with its Pepsi Throwback & Mountain Dew Throwback lines in tapping into the retro-themed packaging market. The unexpected sales increase, combined with wanting to differentiate the packaging from Bud Light, were factors in the decision, with some consumers even stating that Miller actually improved on the taste when nothing changed in the beer itself.

Miller Brewing Company began their NASCAR sponsorship in 1983 with driver Bobby Allison, advertising the Miller High Life brand and later in 1990 with driver Rusty Wallace, advertising the Miller Genuine Draft brand. In 1997, the company began advertising the Miller Lite brand on Wallace's #2 Penske Racing car. The car later earned the nickname "Blue Deuce", due to its number and blue paint scheme. Wallace retired following the 2005 season, and Kurt Busch was named as his replacement. Busch drove the "Blue Deuce" from 2006 to 2010. The car was driven by Brad Keselowski, who won the 2012 Sprint Cup Series championship. Miller Brewing has since dropped the sponsorship from the #2 car, with the last sponsorship occurring during the 2020 Coca-Cola 600.

Other promotion in motorsport included the sponsoring of Don Prudhomme's Larry Dixon-driven NHRA top fuel dragster from 1997 to 2007. Prior to that, Dixon was sponsored by Miller Genuine Draft. Additionally, Miller Brewing sponsored the Unlimited hydroplane of R.B. "Bob" Taylor in 1984 with the U-7 "Lite All-Star", driven by Tom D'Eath. The following year, Miller switched teams and brands with the "Miller American" Unlimited hydroplane owned by Fran Muncey and Jim Lucero—which resulted in the 1985 National Championship, and APBA Gold Cup wins in 1985, 1986, and 1987, driven by Chip Hanauer.

For the first time in a video game, it was featured in NASCAR '15: Victory Edition and NASCAR Heat Evolution as a sponsor available to users verified to be over 21 years of age.


John Plohman

John Stuart Hans Plohman (born May 11, 1948) is a former politician from Manitoba, Canada. He was a member of the Legislative Assembly of Manitoba from 1981 to 1995, and a cabinet minister in the NDP government of Premier Howard Pawley from 1982 to 1988.

The son of Hans W. Plohman and Anne Werstiuk, he was educated at the University of Manitoba, University of Winnipeg, and Red River Community College. He worked as a teacher before entering public life. In 1980, he was elected a municipal councillor in the town of Dauphin.

Plohman was elected to the Manitoba legislature in the provincial election of 1981 as a New Democrat, defeating incumbent Progressive Conservative Jim Galbraith by 636 votes in the central-northern riding of Dauphin. He entered cabinet on August 20, 1982, serving as Minister of Government Services with responsibility for the Manitoba Telephone Act. Following a cabinet shuffle on November 4, 1983, he became Minister of Highways and Transportation. On January 30, 1985, he was also named Minister of Government Services.

Plohman was re-elected by an increased margin in the 1986 provincial election. He relinquished the Government Services portfolio on February 4, 1987, and on September 21, 1987 he left the Highways and Transportation portfolio to accept the position of Minister of Natural Resources.

The Manitoba NDP were defeated in parliament in early 1988, when disgruntled backbench Member of the Legislative Assembly (MLA) Jim Walding voted against his government's budget. Despite this Plohman was re-elected in the following election, defeating Progressive Conservative Russell Secord by 548 votes. The NDP were reduced to 12 seats (out of 57) and third-party status following this election; Plohman formally resigned his cabinet portfolio on May 9 when the new government was sworn into office.

The NDP recovered to twenty seats in the provincial election of 1990, and Plohman was re-elected with an increased majority. He did not seek re-election in 1995 and returned to the teaching profession from which he retired in 2003.

In 2002, Plohman was appointed to a provincial advisory board recommending ways to stimulate economic growth at the Port of Churchill, in northern Manitoba. In 2004 he was appointed to the Board of Directors of the Churchill Gateway Development Corporation.

In 2005, Plohman was appointed as the first Chairman of the Board of the newly formed Manitoba Agriculture Services Corporation (MASC). In this capacity Plohman provided leadership in the amalgamation of the former Manitoba Agriculture Credit Corporation (MACC) and the Manitoba Crop Insurance Corporation (MCIC) into the dynamic MASC serving the lending and insurance needs of rural Manitobans. In 2014 Plohman was appointed to the Government of Manitoba's Crown Corporations Council as a Director from which he resigned on May 25, 2016.

John Plohman married Patricia Ann Yanke in 1971 and they have three children, Rychelle Anne Plohman Lytle, Dr. Jodi Lynn Plohman Jones and Robert James Plohman CA. They also have nine grandchildren.

Vorwerk

Vorwerk may refer to:


BP Koirala

Bishweshwar Prasad Koirala (; 8 September 1914 – 21 July 1982), better known as B. P. Koirala (), was a Nepali revolutionary, political leader, and writer. He was the Prime Minister of Nepal from 1959 to 1960. He led the Nepali Congress, a social democratic political party. He was the grandfather of Bollywood actress Manisha Koirala and the older brother of former prime minister Girija Prasad Koirala and the younger brother of former prime minister Matrika Prasad Koirala.

Koirala was the first democratically elected and 22nd Prime Minister of Nepal. He held the office for 18 months before being deposed and imprisoned at the instruction of King Mahendra. The rest of his life was spent largely in prison or exile and in steadily deteriorating health.

Widely regarded as one of the greatest political personalities in Nepal, Koirala was a staunch supporter of democracy. He asserted that guarantees of individual liberty and civil and political rights alone were not sufficient in a poor country like Nepal, and that democratic socialism was the solution to Nepal's underdevelopment.

The second son of Krishna Prasad Koirala, a follower of Mahatma Gandhi, Bishweshwar Prasad Koirala was raised in Banaras. Until the age of 14, he attended a school established by his father. Afterwards he joined the Harishchandra School in the city. He began writing when he was in the ninth grade.

The British Raj charged him and his brother, Matrika Prasad Koirala, with having contacts with terrorists in 1930. They were arrested and set free after three months. Because of this, Bishweshwar began to study at the Scottish Church College in Calcutta as per his father's wishes. Towards the end of 1930, he left college and returned to Banaras. In 1932, he completed his intermediate level of studies. His father again insisted that his son join Scottish Church College in Calcutta. So for the second time, he joined the college, but left it soon afterwards. In 1934, he completed his bachelor's degree in Economics and Politics from Banaras Hindu University. He also earned a degree in law from the University of Calcutta in 1937, and practised for several years in Darjeeling.

While still a student, he became involved in the Indian nationalist movement. In 1934, he joined the Indian National Congress. During World War II, he was interned by the British in Dhanbad for two years (1942–1944).

Following his release, with Indian independence imminent, he set about trying to bring change to Nepal. In 1947 he founded in India the socialist Nepali National Congress, which in 1950 became the Nepali Congress Party. On 9 March 1947, Koirala crossed over to Nepal to help his brother Girija Prasad Koirala instigate the Biratnagar jute mill strike. He was arrested along with Girija Prasad Koirala and four other National Congress leaders and taken with his fellow agitators to Kathmandu via a 21 days long, slow walk across the hills. The prisoners' march attracted much attention and helped to radicalise the peasants whose villages lay en route. The Koirala along with other detainees were kept in a Kathmandu bungalow but were soon released after a 27-day hunger strike, popular protests, and at the request of Mahatma Gandhi in August 1947

Koirala went back to India, and began looking for arms to storm Kathmandu. Finally, Koirala led the Revolution of 1951, which overthrew Nepal's 104-year-old Rana regime. The last Rana prime minister was dismissed in October 1951 when the Rana-Congress coalition cabinet (in which Koirala served for nine months as the Home minister) broke apart. Koirala then concentrated on developing the Nepali political structure. King Mahendra responded with a new constitution enabling free parliamentary elections to take place in 1959. Only a fragmented parliament was expected, but Koirala's Nepali Congress scored a landslide, taking more than two-thirds of the seats in the lower house. After several weeks of significant hesitation, Mahendra asked Koirala to form a government, which took office in May 1959.

Koirala led his country's delegation to the United Nations and made carefully poised visits to China and India, then increasingly at odds over territorial disputes. Yet, he was in trouble at home almost from the beginning. His land reform measures, especially the revision of the tenancy laws so easily passed by parliament, deeply offended the landed aristocracy which had long dominated the army. King Mahendra, on 15 December 1960, suspended the constitution, dissolved parliament, dismissed the cabinet, imposed direct rule, and for good measure imprisoned Koirala and his closest government colleagues. Many of them were released after few months, but Koirala, though he was suffering from throat cancer, was kept imprisoned without trial until 1968.

In 1968, the then Prime Minister Surya Bahadur Thapa, played a significant role in releasing Koirala from prison, but he was the main actor for also making sure that Koirala stays out of the country in self-exile for the rest of his life. Koirala was in self-exile in Banaras, India until December 1976. After his return from almost a decade of self exile in Banaras, he was kept under house arrest in his Chabahil residence. During that time, King Birendra asked the then Prime Minister Dr Tulsi Giri, a tough political rival of Koirala to recommend him by the joint meeting of the Council of Ministers and Back to the Village National Campaign Central Committee, whether Koirala should be freed for medical treatment in the USA or not. Accordingly, the joint meeting recommended King Birendra to release Koirala and provide him with necessary expenses to undertake the medical treatment in the USA. The passport and necessary visa were arranged by the government of Nepal for Koirala and his wife Sushila Koirala, a doctor and an assistance. The then Royal Nepalese Embassy in the Washington DC, was instructed to provide all support to Koirala family for the medical treatment.

King Birendra, educated in England and the United States, succeeded his father in 1972 when the political climate was believed to be gradually improving. Koirala, however, was arrested immediately upon his return from exile in 1976 and charged with the capital offence of attempting armed revolution. Finally, in March 1978, he was cleared of all treason and sedition charges. Then, in 1981, he was cleared to travel to the United States for medical treatment. The Prime Minister Surya Bahadur Thapa convinced the king to allow Koirala to proceed to the US for treatment as per recommendation from the royal physician Dr. M. R. Pandey. The government of Nepal bore a portion of the cost of his medical treatment in the US, while the rest was arranged by his nephew Shail Updhaya, Dr. Shukdev Shah, family and friends.

After returning from a further medical visit to the United States, he had a series of audiences with King Birendra, as he tried for a "national reconciliation". During the student demonstrations in 1979, he was under house arrest. However, he welcomed King Birendra's call for a national referendum on the question of the political system for Nepal. The referendum results were announced to be in favour of retaining the political system led by the B. P. Koirala was the first leader to welcome the result of the national referendum and accepted the people verdict and claimed that the referendum was fair and free. However, owing to differences in the electoral process to seek membership of class organization as mandatory, Koirala demanded a boycott of the 1981 elections.

Despite obviously failing health and political strength, Koirala could still draw a great popular support. He addressed one of Nepal's largest public meetings in recent years in Kathmandu's Ratna Park in January 1982. He died on 21 July 1982, in Kathmandu. An estimated half a million people attended his funeral.

While Koirala is considered one of the most charismatic political leader of Nepal, he was also one of the most well-read and thoughtful writers of Nepalese literature. He wrote short stories and novels, and some poems. Koirala began writing short stories in Hindi.

His first stories were published in Banaras in "Hansa", a Hindi literary magazine edited by Prem Chand (India's Tolstoy). His first Nepali short story "Chandrabadan" was published in "Sharada", a Nepali literary magazine in 1935. Koirala was very good at depicting the character and mind of women. Four other stories of Koirala were included in "Katha Kusum" (an anthology of Nepali stories), published in 1938 in Darjeeling. As a social realist, with good psychological insight as he was first writer to write stories and novels based on human psychology in history of Nepalese literature, Koirala had established himself as one of the most important Nepali short story writers by 1938. "Doshi Chashma", Koirala's anthology of sixteen short stories, was published in 1949. He was one of the greatest writer to contribute to the Nepali literature.

Koirala was very busy in the 1950s as he was often found amidst the political situations of Nepal. He was, however, able to write an incomplete novel "Hitlar ra Yahudi" ("Hitler and the Jews") in the form of travelogue. The 1960s were very productive for Koirala in terms of his literary output. He wrote many novels and short stories in jail during 1960–68. They include: "Teen Ghumti" ("Three Turns"), 1968; "Narendra Dai" ("Brother Narendra"), 1969; "Sumnima" ("A story of the first Kirata woman"), 1969; "Modiain" ("The Grocer's Wife"), 1980; "Shweta Bhairavi" ("The White Goddess of Terror"), 1983; "Babu Ama ra chora" ("Father, mother and sons"), 1989; and an incomplete autobiography "Mero Katha" ("My Story"), 1983, and many more yet to be published.

Koirala also has dozens of political essays including the following: "Rajatantra ra Lokatantra" ("Monarchy and Democracy"), 1960; "Thichieka Janata Jagisake" ("The Oppressed People Rise"), 1969; "Rastriyata Nepalko Sandarbhama" ("Nationalism in the Context of Nepal"), 1970; "Kranti: Ek Anivaryata" ("Revolution: An Absolute Necessity"), 1970; "Panchayati Vyavastha Prajatantrik Chaina" ("The Panchayat System is not Democratic"), 1978; "Prajatantra ra Samajvad" ("Democracy and Socialism"), 1979; and "Rastriya Ekata ko Nimti Ahwan" ("A Call for National Reconciliation"), 1980.

Koirala's writings (both political and literary) were banned until recently. Nepalese youths spent several years of imprisonment just on the charges of possessing Koirala's writings. Another problem is that his rare and important writings have been scattered all over. Old newspapers and magazines (including the underground publications) have to be researched. Libraries, museums, and archives in Kathmandu, Banaras, Calcutta, New Delhi, London, Paris, Berkeley, Stanford, and many other places have to be visited to collect the materials on Koirala. As a result, one can hope to produce volumes of his political writings and literary works.

Koirala was the focus of Nepalese politics during the 1950s, 1960s, and the 1970s. Even today, long after his death, people of Nepal feel that the restoration of multi-party democracy is a tribute to him. Koirala was also one of the most important literary figures of Nepal. In politics Koirala was a social democrat; in literature he was an existentialist especially in his novel "Tin Ghumti" ("Three Turns"). He said that he wrote his literary works to satisfy his anarchist impulses, impulses which revolted against the traditional order of things. But as a social democrat he was in search of a political order that was agreeable to every citizen of Nepal.

As a politician, Koirala struggled throughout his life for the establishment of a multi-party democracy in his country. Traditional forces, still strong to resist such effort, made it very hard for "B. P." to accomplish his political mission. As a social democrat, Koirala differed with communists; as he often said man cannot live by bread alone. He also differed with the capitalists as he thought that unbridled consumerism was immoral, and that the appalling exploitation of the world's resources was short-sighted and unrealistic. He believed that only socialism could guarantee political freedom and equal economic opportunities to the people. He said, "socialism is the wave of the future."

Koirala had studied economics, logic, literature, and law. He was a voracious reader of English, German, French, Russian, Hindi, Bengali and Nepali literature. His educational background and artistic abilities were combined in his own works to present a view of life in an artistic, logical and compelling manner. He would thus shake the conscience of Nepali readers by questioning their unreflective acceptance of the traditional value systems.

Koirala's short stories were first published in the 1930s in Hindi and Nepali literary magazines. Koirala first came to notice in Nepali literature because often his characters seemed to have been treated with an understanding of Freudian psychoanalysis. Even when a short story or novel of Koirala was not Freudian in its approach, it was still noteworthy to Nepali readers because he presented an unconventional approach to life.

"Modiaain" ("The Grocer's wife") is probably his shortest novel. In "Modiaain" Koirala looks at the Mahabharata war from the point of view of a young woman who loses her husband to the war. This woman was not alone. There were hundreds of thousands of young women who were widowed by the war. Thus, Koirala presents a passionate plea against the philosophy of the Bhagavad Gita, which assumes that the world is but an illusion and thus makes life and death a meaningless phenomena and that the observance of one's own duty is the ultimate priority. Koirala was against war, and by looking at the Vedanta philosophy and the issue of war from a war widow's point of view, he once again shakes the conscience of the Nepali readers who generally tend to accept the philosophy of Vedanta especially its idea of karma (fate). Characteristically, Koirala presents one more instance in which he analyses the mind of a woman, as he did in most of his short stories and novels.

The following institutions have been set up in his memory:


Also, various programs are organized in Nepal as well as outside Nepal to remember his selfless contributions to Nepal.



Greatest Hits, Volume II (Chicago album)

Greatest Hits, Volume II is the second greatest hits album by American rock band Chicago, released on November 23, 1981 by Columbia Records.

Following the poor reception of 1980's "Chicago XIV", Columbia Records dropped Chicago from its roster and cancelled a lucrative contract that had recently been signed. While the band had begun its association with David Foster and was in the process of building a new identity, Columbia had contractual obligations for a new release. Therefore, the label wanted a sequel to the band's first, and highly successful, hits package which had been 1975's "". This sequel, Volume II, featured bare-bones album artwork consisting of a collage of photos from around the city of Chicago. The album lacked liner notes, and was the only Chicago album not to have its own rendition of the band's distinctive logo; a small picture of the logo from the band's second album appears in the center of the collage.

Released in November 1981, "Greatest Hits, Volume II" primarily sampled material from "Chicago VIII" through 1978's "Hot Streets," after which the hits stopped coming, though it also stretches back to pick up overlooked hits from the era first covered by the original compilation album. Appearing just before Chicago's unexpected career revival with "Chicago 16," reached #171 in the US. Curiously, though "Dialogue Part I & II" is part of the track listing, Part I of the song is left off, leaving only the Part II outro.

Like its predecessor, "Greatest Hits, Volume II" has since been superseded by 2002's "". Unlike the first volume, it is out of print.



"Greatest Hits, Volume II" (Columbia 37682) reached #171 in the US during a chart stay of 5 weeks. It did not chart in the UK.


SHI Stadium

SHI Stadium is the football stadium at Rutgers University in Piscataway, New Jersey. Rutgers Scarlet Knights football, Rutgers Scarlet Knights men's lacrosse, and women's lacrosse use the venue for home games. It is located on the Busch Campus at Rutgers, and overlooks the Raritan River to the South. The stadium was opened as Rutgers Stadium on September 3, 1994, when the Rutgers Scarlet Knights hosted the Kent State Golden Flashes. It currently seats 52,454 spectators after a 2009 expansion.

S H I Stadium underwent significant reconstruction from 2008 to 2009 to increase its capacity to 52,454. The stadium features a 5,000-seat upper deck on each side of the playing field, as well as 968 loge and club seats on the mezzanine level of the East side of the stadium. A two-story press box sits on the mezzanine level of the West side of the stadium. Electronic ribbon scoreboards spanning the length of the field along the bottom of both upper decks were installed prior to the 2008 season, which complement the video scoreboard in the South end zone. Also located in the South end zone is the Brown Football Recruiting Pavilion and Welcome Center, part of the 2008–2009 expansion project.

The stadium also features light stanchions that allow for night games, a cannon for firing if Rutgers scores, concessions, and restrooms. Until 2004, the field maintained a grass surface, but has since been replaced with FieldTurf.

The first intercollegiate football game, in which Rutgers College beat Princeton (then the "College of New Jersey") 6–4 on November 6, 1869, was played at "College Field", which is now the location of the College Avenue Gymnasium and its parking lot. From 1891 to 1938, the Rutgers football team played at "Neilson Field" on the College Avenue Campus in New Brunswick.

With the aid of grants from the Works Progress Administration, and after three years of construction, the original Rutgers Stadium was completed in 1938. The first game in the new stadium was against Hampden-Sydney in front of an estimated crowd of about 10,000 persons. Rutgers was victorious in the contest, defeating Hampden-Sydney 32–0. The stadium was dedicated on November 5, 1938 in a game against Princeton. Rutgers won the game, 20-18. It was the first time Rutgers had defeated Princeton since the first intercollegiate football game in 1869.

On September 27, 1969, Rutgers and Princeton met for The Centennial Game at old Rutgers Stadium, which was played in front of 31,000 fans. Rutgers won 29-0, its 10th win in 60 tries against the Tigers.

The current stadium was built on the site of the original old Rutgers Stadium. During the construction of the current stadium, the Rutgers Scarlet Knights football team played the 1993 season at Giants Stadium in East Rutherford, a facility operated by the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority (NJSEA). The NJSEA financed the construction of the stadium via the issuance of bonds. The Scarlet Knights had previously played several games at Giants Stadium, including the first college football game hosted at that venue: a 47-0 victory over Columbia University on October 23, 1976.

The new Rutgers Stadium originally was constructed to accommodate 41,500 fans at its maximum capacity and was officially opened on September 3, 1994, in a game against Kent State University. Light stanchions were integrated into the design so night games could be played. A two-story press box that fits 200 reporters was also constructed and is still in use today. A free-standing scoreboard was built near the south end zone, which did not originally contain any seating areas. The original design of the stadium replicated the shape of a horseshoe, with the "open" end located near the south end zone.

Heralded by many newspapers, sports writers, and Rutgers fans as the "most important game in Rutgers history", on November 9, 2006, a then record crowd of 44,111 saw the Scarlet Knights upset the Louisville Cardinals at Rutgers Stadium, 28-25. The Scarlet Knights were ranked #15 and the Louisville Cardinals #3 in the nation in the Associated Press poll at the time. The game drew ESPN's third-largest TV audience for a college football game up to that point in time. The official attendance exceeded the normal maximum capacity of the stadium due to the temporary addition of bleachers in the South end zone of the stadium. The bleachers were used to seat additional students.

In January 2008, the Board of Governors of Rutgers University announced a $102 million stadium expansion project in order to increase the stadium's seating capacity to nearly 56,000. However, the scale of the project was slightly reduced due to a poor economy and financial difficulties, resulting in a new maximum capacity of precisely 52,454.

The first phase of the project, which included the addition 968 club seats and related infrastructure to the East mezzanine level of the stadium, was completed on time and within budget for the 2008 football season. The second phase included the addition of approximately 11,500 seats to the previously "open" South end zone, as well as supplementary restrooms and concession stands to the southern end of the stadium. The second phase of the project also involved the addition of a large scoreboard in the South end zone, which is 38' tall by 112' wide, for a total surface area of 4,256 sq ft. The old scoreboard (since demolished) was 22' tall by 30' wide, for a total surface area of . The sound system was also enhanced as a part of the second phase of the expansion.

In addition to adding seats, concession stands, and bathrooms to the south end zone, the stadium expansion project called for a new entrance off River Road. The facade of the entrance is adorned with brownstone.

On July 14, 2009, the Rutgers Board of Governors unanimously approved a $5 million donation specifically appropriated for a recruiting lounge in the newly expanded end zone. The lounge had been included in the original expansion design, but was later deferred after the Board of Governors revised the expansion financing plan. The donation was provided by two Rutgers alumni. The lounge was named after one of the donors, Greg Brown, who is the President and Co-CEO of Motorola. The second donor requested anonymity. Construction on the lounge commenced in August 2009, and was completed in December of that same year.

The facility seats approximately 300 people and serves as a multi-purpose center for the university. The pavilion hosts and accommodates recruits around the year and also holds fundraising events for potential donors. The center is also used during tours for prospective students.

The $102 million price tag of the expansion project was to originally be financed via private fundraising ($30 million) and the issuance of bonds ($72 million). The private fundraising effort, however, fell significantly short of the original goal.

This situation prompted the Board of Governors of Rutgers University to approve a new financing plan for the stadium expansion in which the entire amount of $102 million was to be borrowed. Specifically, the university issued $85 million in bonds, and borrowed the remaining $17 million by way of low-interest commercial paper. In addition, a few aspects of the stadium expansion project were scaled back, including a reduction in the number of new seats (the original plan called for 14,000 seats, but only 11,500 were actually added). Also included in the original expansion plan was the construction of new locker rooms in the South end zone. The construction of these locker rooms was deferred to a later date.

For decades, "Rutgers Stadium" had been the name of the school's football facility. However, in June 2010, Rutgers University put up for sale the naming rights to the stadium in order to bring in much needed revenue. Rutgers hired Brooklyn Sports & Entertainment and IMG College to act as agents in making a deal, who had previously negotiated deals on the now-Brooklyn Nets' home arenas in New Jersey and New York. On June 22, 2011, it was announced that High Point Solutions, based in Sparta, had purchased the rights, and that the stadium would be known as High Point Solutions Stadium. In May 2018, High Point Solutions announced they were rebranding the company to just be HighPoint.com. As a result, the name of the stadium was changed to HighPoint.com Stadium. On July 19, 2019, Rutgers signed a new naming rights agreement with Somerset-based IT firm SHI International Corp. The stadium was then renamed SHI Stadium.

The stadium attendance records were repeatedly broken throughout the 2006 and 2007 football seasons as the football program experienced a drastic resurgence. On October 18, 2007, a record 44,267 spectators attended a game in which the Scarlet Knights played against the then #2 ranked South Florida Bulls. The Scarlet Knights would go on to win that game, and the attendance on that night would be the highest prior to the 2008–2009 stadium expansion.

The new attendance record was set in the 2022 match-up against Penn State. 55,676 spectators watched Rutgers lose 55-10 in a lopsided affair at the hands of the 11th ranked Nittany Lions. The top five games in terms of attendance at Rutgers Stadium are listed below:
Rutgers men's Lacrosse hold the attendance record in SHI Stadium outside of football. They set their attendance record on April 16, 2023 with a number of 5,823 people in attendance in an 11-8 loss to Maryland.

In addition to football, SHI Stadium has been the home of Rutgers' men's and women's lacrosse teams since 2014.

The stadium has also hosted NCAA tournament soccer and lacrosse games, including the NCAA Division I Men's Lacrosse Championship games in 1998, 2001, and 2002. It is also worth noting that, prior to 1994, the original Rutgers Stadium hosted the NCAA Division I Men's Lacrosse Championship games in 1974, 1978, 1983, 1987, and 1990.

On September 25, 2005, Rutgers Stadium was the site of a lecture delivered by the Dalai Lama.

The stadium was a host venue for the 1995 U.S. Cup soccer tournament and hosted Colombia vs. Nigeria on June 17, 1995 and the United States vs. Colombia on June 25, 1995.

As of the 2019-20 school year, SHI Stadium is one of two venues that host championship games in the NJSIAA state football playoffs (MetLife Stadium is the other). The stadium hosts all South region group championship games as well as any North region games that are played in December, as well as games for parochial group champions depending on geography. SHI Stadium hosts games on Friday nights, Saturday afternoons, and Sunday afternoons during the two championship weekends.

Every year in October, Rutgers Stadium hosts USBands Marching Band New Jersey State Championships.

Since 2011, University Commencement has been held in SHI Stadium each May. On May 15, 2016, President Barack Obama addressed the class of 2016 and received an honorary degree of laws. Over 50,000 guests and graduates attended this historic day to celebrate the 250th Anniversary Commencement.


Rottwerndorf

Rottwerndorf is a village in the municipality of Pirna, in Saxony, Germany. It was incorporated into Pirna in 1923. The place was mentioned for the first time in 1337. It is situated on the river Gottleuba, south of Pirna town centre. 
The village was characterized by quarryman and agriculture.

There is a Renaissance-era castle from the 16th century in the village.

Anti-Imperialist National Democratic Front

The Anti-Imperialist National Democratic Front (AINDF) is a banned popular front organization in South Korea.

The AINDF is guided by "Juche", the official state ideology of North Korea, and aims to carry out a popular revolution in South Korea, achieve independence by removing the United States Forces Korea, and hasten the reunification of the country. The AINDF is identical in organization to the Democratic Front for the Reunification of Korea, the "de jure" popular front of North Korea, and has missions in the North Korean capital of Pyongyang (the only ostensibly South Korean organization to) and another in Japan.

The AINDF is banned in South Korea under the National Security Law as a spy group for the Workers' Party of Korea, the ruling party of North Korea, but operates clandestinely within the country and is regarded as a legitimate organization by North Korea.

The Anti-Imperialist National Democratic Front was officially founded on 25 August 1969 by Kim Jong-tae (, ), who published a magazine named "Chongmaek" (, ), and Choi Yong-do as the Revolutionary Party for Reunification (, ), with a history dating back to the 1964 formation of a preparatory committee. The group was established during the period of the Third Republic of Korea, an anti-communist military dictatorship under President Park Chung Hee, and both founders were executed along with other leaders of the organization; other members were sentenced to long prison terms. Kim Jong-tae's wife and two children were never seen again.

On 27 July 1985, it renamed itself to the National Democratic Front of South Korea (), and renamed its propaganda broadcasting station (that had a main station in Haeju) from "Revolutionary Party for Reunification" (, ) to "Voice of National Salvation" (, ). It adopted its current name on 23 March 2005.



Upton, Merseyside

Upton is a village in the northern part of the Wirral Peninsula, England, and is situated within of Birkenhead, of the Dee Estuary, a similar distance from the River Mersey, and from Liverpool Bay. The village is a ward of the Metropolitan Borough of Wirral in the metropolitan county of Merseyside. Upton was in the traditional county of Cheshire. At the 2011 census, the population was 16,130.

Upton was originally settled as an Anglo-Saxon farming community, and remained as a farming community until the village's rapid urbanisation and expansion from the mid-19th century. This was brought about by the development of Liverpool as a major port, with rail and road links across the Mersey estuary. The village now has a strong service economy which is based primarily around healthcare and retail, with a variety of places nearby, and within the village, to pursue sport and leisure activities.

The name Upton is from the Old English "upp", meaning up, high or a hill, and "tūn", meaning a farmstead or settlement. Upton therefore could be explained as meaning Hill Farm. This is still recognisable today, as Upton is on a low hill. As the name Upton is relatively common, it was sometimes known historically as Upton in Wyrhale (in 1307) or Upton by Birkenhead.

The name Overchurch may translate as "shore church", from the Old English "ofer" meaning a shore and "cirice", a church. This implies that, during the Anglo-Saxon era, the shoreline of the Irish Sea was much closer to the centre of the village.

Upton was originally settled as a farming community, during the Anglo-Saxon period. In Norman times, Upton was listed in the Domesday Book of 1086 as "Optone" and was written as being in the possession of William Malbank.
The manor passed to the Orrebies under the family of Praers, and then through the Arderne family, and by marriage to Baldwin of Bold in 1310. His descendants owned the manor for six generations, before it was sold in 1614. Subsequent owners have included the Earls of Derby. Notably, as a likely consequence of the 8th Earl of Derby who lived at nearby Bidston Hall. From Elizabethan times, the manor was associated with Upton Hall, which passed hands along with the manor. Upton Hall was sold by the Webster family to the Society of the Faithful Companions of Jesus (FCJ) who turned it into a school (currently Upton Hall School FCJ).

Upton was the primary economic centre of northern Wirral until the industrial development of Birkenhead during the mid-19th century. Five important local roads converged on the village, and its main thoroughfare was the place of a weekly market, recorded as being held from 1662. 
Fairs were also held in the village at Michaelmas and Easter.

When the original parish church at Overchurch was pulled down in 1813, a runestone, attributed to the 7th or 8th centuries, was discovered in the ruins. It has been interpreted as a memorial to Æthelmund, perhaps a local leader or missionary. The stone is now kept at the Grosvenor Museum in Chester.
"..though now only a small village, Upton was formerly considered the metropolis of the lower mediety of Wirral, and had two annual fairs of considerable importance, and also a weekly market that was discontinued in 1620, the village having been recently almost entirely rebuilt, contains several good houses, among which may be particularly mentioned Upton Hall ..."

—said of Upton in the "History of the Hundred of Wirral" by William Williams Mortimer, 1847.
A major contributor to the village was William Inman, owner of the Inman Line, who donated money for the construction of St. Mary's Church. Inman resided at Upton Manor, within the grounds of Upton Park. Both Upton Manor and St. Mary's Church were designed by John Cunningham.

Few buildings remain in Upton from before the mid-19th Century. Two notable examples are the Stone House at the top of the village, on Ford Road, and the Old Smithy on Rake Lane. These buildings are both built of local red sandstone, hewn into large blocks. They are both of similar material and style to many old buildings which are found throughout Cheshire and Lancashire farming communities. Neither of these buildings is designated as a listed building.

Just prior to World War II, the War Department requisitioned a large amount of land to the northern side of Arrowe Farm, next to the Police station. This was used for military weapons storage. The camp was known as 64 Anti-Aircraft Ordnance Depot. The site had three reinforced bunkers for storage of ordnance, in the area which is now occupied by the Sainsbury's building. The site eventually came into the use of the Territorial Army and part of the area is currently in use by army and air force cadets.

During this period, RAF West Kirby was also situated just under west the centre of the village, along Saughall Massie Road, and backed on to Larton.

Upton was a township in the ancient parish of Overchurch in the Wirral Hundred, which became a civil parish in 1866. 
Between 1894 and 1933 Upton was administered as part of Wirral Rural District. 
The civil parish was disbanded on 1 April 1933 and absorbed into the county boroughs of Birkenhead and Wallasey.

On 1 April 1974, local government reorganisation in England and Wales resulted in most of the Wirral Peninsula, including Upton, transferring from the county of Cheshire to the newly created county of Merseyside.

Upton lies at the geographic centre of the northern part of the Wirral Peninsula, from the Irish Sea at Leasowe Lighthouse, north-east of the Dee Estuary and a similar distance south-west of the River Mersey. Upton sits on a low-lying hill, in a wide and shallow glacial U-shaped valley, formed during the Quaternary Ice Age, between Bidston Hill and Thurstaston Hill. The underlying bedrock is Triassic bunter sandstone of the Helsby Sandstone Formation and the Sidmouth Mudstone Formation. This is overlain with boulder clay from the Quaternary Ice Age, similar to the nearby Dee Cliffs, and clay soil. The bedrock is not usually visible, as it is on the nearby Bidston Hill.

The highest point in Upton is above sea level, just off the junction with the A551 and the B5139, at Moreton Road, in the centre of the village. A further prominence of above sea level is at Upton Manor, from the centre of the village. Most of the populated area is more than above sea level, and most of the ground is on a gentle hillside. Consequently, Upton has avoided the significant flooding which can happen in the nearby low-lying Fender valley. Due to its inland location and elevation Upton is not prone to coastal flooding, which can happen at West Kirby, Hoylake, Meols and New Brighton.

Upton is bounded by Arrowe Brook, at Upton Meadow, and the River Fender which is alongside the M53 motorway. Both are tributaries of the Birket, which discharges into West Float and then into the River Mersey.

Upton Meadow Millennium Wood is an ancient, semi-natural woodland, a community forest and a county wildlife site which has informal public access. The area has of footpaths and a bridleway along the western boundary. The area is one of the last remaining unbuilt, natural areas in Upton. Parts of the site were planted in 1997 and the site was leased to the Woodland Trust on a 99-year lease, from Wirral Borough Council, in the same year. The woodland contains a mixture of species such as oak, ash, hazel, birch, blackthorn and hawthorn. Additional plantations by the local council, in 1980, have also included maple, grey alder, grey willow and guelder rose. Other plants include holly, English elm and sycamore. The area has a pond which contains a good population of invertebrates and some amphibians, with a significant colony of common toad. The meadow is and the habitat is rare, within the local area.

Upton has a temperate maritime climate (Köppen: Cfb), similar to much of the rest of the United Kingdom. Being close to the sea and sheltered from the prevailing south-westerly wind by Snowdonia, the area has relatively warm summers. The winters are generally mild and wet, mornings with light frost are common, and there are few days of snow. The nearest official weather station, as the crow flies, is at Hall Road in Crosby, which is about away.


The population was 141 in 1801, 227 in 1851, 622 in 1889 and 788 in 1901. 
At the 2001 census, the population was recorded as 15,731 (7,268 males, 8,463 females).
At the 2011 census, the population had increased to 16,130 (7,529 males, 8,601 females).

"(Source: 2011 census)"

In 2011 there were 31.7 persons per hectare and 7,127 occupied households in Upton.

17.2% of people aged 16 or older have five or more grade A-C GCSEs or equivalent. This figure is higher than England as a whole. Whilst 29.2% have no formal qualifications, which is a figure that is also higher than England as a whole.

Of the adult population, aged between 16 and 74 years of age, 34.7% of people are economically inactive, whilst 5.4% are economically active, but unemployed. This gives a combined non-employment rate of 40.1% of the adult population. 59.9% of adults are, therefore, occupied with work, training or education, in one form or another. 95.3% of the population is White British, with the remainder being of other ethnicities.

With regards to religion, are that 73.4% of people are Christian, 18.7% of people have no religion and 6.7% of people did not state their religion, with the remaining 1.2% of people have other religions.

The village is part of the Metropolitan Borough of Wirral, in the metropolitan county of Merseyside. It is also within the parliamentary constituency of Wirral West. The current member of parliament is Margaret Greenwood, a Labour MP who is the fourth representative for the constituency. The previous incumbent of the post, the third representative for the constituency, was Esther McVey, a Conservative politician who was MP from 2010 until 2015. The second representative, Stephen Hesford, who was a Labour MP and had a constituency office in the village. He was MP from 1997 until 2010. In 1983, the first representative of the newly formed constituency was David Hunt, a Conservative MP, who was elected at a by-election for the former Wirral constituency, from 1976. Earlier MPs have included Selwyn Lloyd, a former Foreign Secretary, Chancellor of the Exchequer and Speaker of the House of Commons, as well as William Lever, the founder of Lever Brothers.

The area is also a local government ward of the Metropolitan Borough of Wirral. Upton is represented on Wirral Metropolitan Borough Council by three councillors. These are Jean Robinson, Tony Smith and Stuart Whittingham, who are all Labour councillors. The most recent local elections took place on 2 May 2019.

The major employment sectors, in Upton, are healthcare and retail. The major employer is the Wirral University Teaching Hospital NHS Foundation Trust at Arrowe Park Hospital. Other significant employers include J Sainsbury PLC, Homebase, Argos, McDonald's and the Royal Mail.

The village had a branch of one of the United Kingdom's major banks, Barclays Bank, in a building formerly occupied by Martins Bank. The Post Office also operates banking services. Other banks and building societies have operated in the village include NatWest, the Midland Bank (which was latterly HSBC), the Abbey National, Birmingham Midshires, Lloyds Bank and TSB.

The village has newsagents, food retailers including a branch of Domino's Pizza, three restaurants, which provide Mediterranean, Kerala and Balti cuisine, a cafe and an award-winning fish and chip shop. The village has two bookmakers, branches of Ladbrokes and William Hill. The British Red Cross and Age UK charity shops, and Sayers bakery all have premises within the village. The village also has, amongst other businesses, hairdressers, a sweet shop, a butcher, a photographer, an estate agent, a travel agent, a fitness centre, a tattooist, a florist and a launderette.

A building, constructed following demolition of the old "Horse and Jockey" pub, has been used by branches of the Co-op supermarket and the Ethel Austin clothing retailer. Lipton's used to have a supermarket in the village, in the building which is now used as the fitness centre. Spar has also operated a supermarket in the village, firstly following Lipton's in the same building, and then at the bottom of Arrowe Park Road. Clarks has previously had a shoe shop, in the building currently used by Ladbrokes.

A former major employer was the Champion spark plug factory on Arrowebrook Road. The factory was opened in 1968. At its peak, the business employed over 1,000 people in Upton. The factory was closed in 2006 with production transferred to Italy. After the business withdrew from the area, the buildings were allowed to remain and the site is now operated as the Wirral Business Park and, informally, as the Champion's Business Park. The site is now primarily intended for the use of small businesses which need a significant degree of indoor space. Vacant space, at the business park, has been utilised quite rapidly, since the closure of the Champion's business. Businesses, at the site, now include a furniture retailer, a recording studio and rehearsal room, a hydroponics store and a self-storage facility amongst others.

Upton Retail Park is a small retail park which was developed in the early 1990s. The development was built on of Upton Meadow, adjacent to Arrowe Park Road and Upton Bypass. There was local protest to the new development on a green space. The original businesses to open on the site were J Sainsbury PLC and Homebase, which still operate. McDonald's opened shortly after the retail park was opened to the public, and Argos opened around 2010.

Other small shopping areas are located on Royden Road and along Manor Drive, the latter having a branch of The Co-operative Food.

Arrowe Park Hospital is barely a mile from the centre of the village, and includes an Accident and Emergency department. Upton is served by Upton Group Practice, a dentist and two opticians. Pharmacies in the village include Boots Pharmacy and Numark, as well as further pharmacies at Upton Group Practice and Arrowe Park Hospital. Upton is also served by several residential, care and nursing homes, one of which is situated at Upton Manor and another on Ford Road, as well as a recently built care home on Salacre Lane.

Upton has its own Police station, which is a branch of Merseyside Police, and a Fire station which is a branch of Merseyside Fire and Rescue Service, as well as an ambulance station, operated by the North West Ambulance Service, at the nearby Arrowe Park Hospital. The village has a Jobcentre Plus, as well as a postal sorting office. There is also a driving test centre on Arrowe Park Road and two MOT test centres, one of which is on Manor Drive and the other being on Arrowe Park Road, next to the fire station. There are two petrol stations in the village, these being operated by Shell, which is a 24-hour business, as well as Sainsbury's. Both of these are situated next to Upton Bypass at Arrowe Park Road. Meanwhile, the Arrowebrook telephone exchange is situated on Church Road and serves approximately 25,000 residential premises and 686 non-residential premises. The exchange is operated by BT. This provides ADSL and SDSL services, among others.

The village once had several toll houses, only one of which now remains. The toll houses were used by passing travellers, during the 19th century, to pay for use of the turnpike. These were situated at the junction of Saughall Massie Lane and Old Greasby Road, at the top of Moreton Road, and the Arrowe Park Road junction with Arrowe Brook Road. This final toll house is the only surviving example.

Upton has a number of schools. These include Overchurch Primary School and St. Joseph's Primary School, which are both on Moreton Road, and Hayfield School on Manor Drive. These all cater for children between the ages of four and eleven. Overchurch Primary School is separated into two parts. These are Overchurch Infants' School, which is for children between the ages of 4 and 8 years, and Overchurch Junior School, which is for children from 9 to 11 years old. Upton Hall School FCJ, a grammar school for girls, is situated near to the centre of the village, with entrances on Moreton Road and Saughall Massie Lane. The original school in Upton was situated on Rake Lane, before moving to the building which is now part of St. Mary's church hall, and then onto Overchurch Primary School. The original school building still stands in Rake Lane and was used as a church hall for teenagers, prior to the opening of "The Bank". Other former schools include St. Benedict's High School which has now been closed and demolished, as well as Kingsley Nursery School, which suffered a similar fate. Upton is also home to Wirral's only bilingual day nursery, Habla which caters for children aged 6 months to 5 years.

St. Mary's Church is Upton's Church of England parish church. This is a large church, which was consecrated on 28 April 1868.
The church had its own office and meeting room, situated in Holmleigh, which was next door to the church hall, on Church Road. Holmleigh was originally built by William Inman, for his estate bailiff, in 1869. The building was given to the church, in 1884, by another owner and became the vicarage in 1911. A new vicarage was built in 1928, further down Church Road, and the building was sold. However, the church repurchased Holmleigh in 1985, when the building acquired its present use. St. Mary's Church replaced Holmleigh and the church hall, with modern housing. This led to some opposition to the proposal.

St. Joseph's Church, the local Roman Catholic parish church, was opened on 31 August 1954. Upton's United Reformed Church was opened on 11 May 1900, with the final service held on 26 July 2015.

The original Norman church was a steepled church, of decorative design, and was situated opposite Upton Manor on Moreton Road. The earliest reference to the church is in 1347. The steeple was damaged by a storm in 1709 and, by 1813, the church was in such poor condition that it was petitioned to be demolished. The church is understood to have been built on the site of at least one previous Saxon church.

The 1837 tithe map of the area indicates a half-circle of standing stones, around a wooded hollow which was situated next to the church, at a diameter of . Although much detail is lost to history, this has raised the possibility that the site was once a stone circle and, therefore, a pre-Christian, Neolithic religious site.

Greenbank Church was built in 1813 and was situated closer to the centre of the village, next to Greasby Road. This church reused material from the former Norman church, though was of much simpler design. This church was used until the construction of St. Mary's and was later demolished. During which time, the Overchurch runic stone was discovered.

The priory was originally known as The Parsonage. This building was situated on Ford Road, was constructed before 1850, and was used as the vicarage until 1911. The building was quite large, with seven bedrooms. The building no longer stands, having been demolished in the 1950s. However, the wall and the walled-in gateway still remain, on Ford Road.

Victory Hall, a community hall rebuilt in 1963, was originally sited in a large Victorian villa, which had been purchased by public subscription. Upton Library was opened in 1936 and built in the Art Deco style of architecture. The village's war memorial is located within its grounds.

The Village Youth Project, known as "The Bank", is a youth club set up in 1999. This provides a range of activities for the youth of Upton. The club runs various events for the community, including a popular annual fair, situated at Overchurch Primary School each summer. The club also organises many residential visits to various parts of the United Kingdom.

Overchurch Upton Scout Group was formed in 1924, and is situated on Salacre Lane. The site of the scout hut was acquired after the 3rd World Scout Jamboree, held less than a mile away, in Arrowe Park, in 1929.

The village has two public houses and a new micropub, which are close to the centre. These are the Bow-Legged Beagle, which open in December 2018, "Eagle and Crown", built around 1840, and the "Horse and Jockey". Built around 1850, the "Horse and Jockey" used to be situated opposite the "Eagle and Crown" and was owned by William Inman until 1875. The old "Horse and Jockey" building was demolished in the 1960s, before moving to new premises nearby. Meanwhile, the "Overchurch Hotel" and the "Stirrup" are situated away from the centre of the village.

Upton also used to have a beer house known as "The Traveller's Rest". This beer house closed in 1903, although the building remains.

Upton has a number of parks and commons, the largest of which is Arrowe Park, which is less than a mile from the centre of the village. This park is also home to Arrowe Park Hospital and was the location of the 3rd World Scout Jamboree, in 1929. The park is used, weekly, by amateur football teams playing against the Arrowe Park Blades FC and for the Wirral Radio Control Flying Society.

Upton Park is the second largest park in the area. This park is situated near to Upton Manor and next to the M53 motorway, on the border with Moreton. The park used to have a racecourse and was part of the property of Upton Manor. This park has an annual firework display, which is free, on Guy Fawkes Night.

Warwick Park is a small suburban park with an area of and which is situated in Overchurch. This park has its own group of friends. The park was originally known as Warwick Hay. 
Overchurch Park is situated nearby to Warwick Park, and includes the site of the old Norman Church and graveyard, which have been scheduled as monuments by English Heritage.

Upton Meadow is a public common with a semi-natural woodland and of footpaths. This area is bordered by Arrowe Brook and separates Upton from Greasby. Meanwhile, Salacre Common is also a public common, but somewhat smaller. Salacre common was originally the front garden of a large house and is the closest green space to the centre of the village.

The village is represented in sport by Upton Cricket Club, which was established in 1901 by William Hannay, following a lease of land from Lord Leverhulme. The cricket club originally had its own tennis and football clubs. However, the tennis club had folded, on this site, by 1968.

Upton Victory Hall Lawn Tennis & Badminton Club was established in 1919, and was situated behind a large house on the corner of Salacre Lane, known as "The Elms". The Elms building was sold in 1963, and Victory Hall was built behind the house, before the house was demolished. The tennis club has four grass courts and four AstroTurf courts. The clubhouse is a separate building from Victory Hall, and has its own bar, function room and an entrance on Rake Lane. The sports club also provides facilities for croquet and bowls.

In football, Upton FC was founded in 1994, and has teams for both boys and girls of all abilities and ages from six onwards.

Upton Park is an area of recreational open space and woodland. The park was part of William Inman's Upton Manor estate and had included a racecourse between 1922 and 1924. Part of the Upton Park site is now the Moreton Spur road, connected to the M53 motorway.

Upton today is most notable for its central location between Birkenhead and West Kirby. The consequence of this is that road transport through Upton is uncharacteristically efficient for the rural suburban area of Wirral. Upton is situated at the junction of roads from Birkenhead, Moreton (the A551), Greasby (the B5139), Saughall Massie and Arrowe Park (the A551). The road network was further enhanced with the building of a bypass (the A5027) in the early 1980s. The M53 motorway, at Junction 2, is situated less than a mile from the centre of the village and connects directly to the bypass.

The first bus to run from Upton village was a horse-drawn bus, in 1891. This bus operated to Claughton Village. Whilst the first motorised Birkenhead Corporation bus worked on 14 July 1920. Until deregulation of the bus services, in 1986, Upton was served by both the forerunner to Merseytravel, the Merseyside Passenger Transport Executive (MPTE) and the separate operator, Crosville.

Present-day services are run primarily by Arriva, and are coordinated by Merseytravel.
The village has bus stops along all four of the main roads entering the village. Merseytravel's daily "Saveaway" "Area B" and "All Zones" tickets are valid to use from any bus stop in Upton, on the basis of being for the passenger of relevant age, in-date and for use after 9:30am.

Upton is not part of the major electrified Merseyrail Wirral line from Birkenhead to West Kirby, which instead passes around the more densely populated coast Upton railway station exists as part of the Borderlands line between Bidston and Wrexham and is operated by Transport for Wales, with a diesel service. However, the station is within the Merseytravel area. Journeys can be made from the station with a daily "Saveaway" ticket. This is a reasonably priced ticket, and allows unlimited travel within the Merseytravel area, for one day, as far afield as Chester, Southport, Ormskirk and Newton-le-Willows, as well as Birkenhead and Liverpool. Though, due to its location, the station is more of service to the Noctorum community, rather than Upton. This is not considered a problem however, as the locality is well served by regular bus services.

National Cycle Route 56 passes along the eastern side of the village. This route goes from Chester to Liverpool via Leasowe and Seacombe and includes part of the Wirral Way, along its course.

The most notable person that lived in Upton was William Inman, who was the owner of the Inman Line of ships which operated from Liverpool to New York. 
Whilst the most notable person to have an association with Upton is Dixie Dean, the professional footballer who holds the league record for the most goals scored in one season. Dixie Dean worked in Upton as a delivery boy. 
Athlete Andrew Baddeley, who is an English middle distance runner who competed in the 2008 Beijing Olympics and the 2012 London Olympics, was born in Upton. 
Danny Harrison, an English footballer who previously played for both Tranmere Rovers and Chester, has also lived in Upton. 
BBC journalist Sally Nugent was educated at Upton Hall School and is a sports presenter on "BBC Breakfast".
Berlie Doherty is an English writer who was also educated at Upton Hall School. 
A former teacher from the same school, Angela Topping, is also an English writer.
Opera singer Joan Carlyle was born in Upton. 
Chris Shaw is an English synthpop musician from Upton. 
In religion, notable Anglican priests, who have both been incumbent at St. Mary's Church, are Cecil Druitt and George Aickin.




List of 1867 Canadian incumbents




See: 1st Canadian parliament, then 2nd Canadian parliament






Nicaraguan Socialist Party

The Nicaraguan Socialist Party ("Partido Socialista Nicaragüense") is a political party in Nicaragua. Founded in July 1944 by Dr. Mario Flores Ortiz. PSN operated as the official communist party in the country. At the time of its foundation, PSN supported the regime of Anastasio Somoza García. PSN considered that Somoza (nominally a liberal) was an anti-fascist ally.

In the mid-1960s the U.S. State Department estimated the party membership to be approximately 250. After the surge of the FSLN (which had its origins in PSN), PSN was gradually side-lined.

In 1967 a group of radicals who opted for armed struggle were expelled. They formed the Socialist Workers Party.

In 1974 PSN joined UDEL.

From 1976 onwards there was a PSN breakaway group, called the Nicaraguan Socialist Party (de los Sánchez).

Towards the end of the Somoza regime, PSN constructed the "Organización Militar del Pueblo" (Military Organization of the People). OMP carried out a few attacks against the regime.

In 1990 PSN joined hands with right-wing forces in the National Opposition Union to topple the Sandinista government. PSN still exists, but is no longer a communist party per se.

PSN publishes "El Popular".

For the 2006 Nicaraguan general election, it joined with the Sandinista Renovation Movement.

Plantigrade

In terrestrial animals, plantigrade locomotion means walking with the toes and metatarsals flat on the ground. It is one of three forms of locomotion adopted by terrestrial mammals. The other options are digitigrade, walking on the toes with the heel and wrist permanently raised, and unguligrade, walking on the nail or nails of the toes (the hoof) with the heel/wrist and the digits permanently raised. The leg of a plantigrade mammal includes the bones of the upper leg (femur/humerus) and lower leg (tibia and fibula/radius and ulna). The leg of a digitigrade mammal also includes the metatarsals/metacarpals, the bones that in a human compose the arch of the foot and the palm of the hand. The leg of an unguligrade mammal also includes the phalanges, the finger and toe bones.
Among extinct animals, most early mammals such as pantodonts were plantigrade. A plantigrade foot is the primitive condition for mammals; digitigrade and unguligrade locomotion evolved later. Among archosaurs, the pterosaurs were partially plantigrade and walked on the whole of the hind foot and the fingers of the hand-wing.

Plantigrade mammal species include (but are not limited to):

The primary advantages of a plantigrade foot are stability and weight-bearing ability; plantigrade feet have the largest surface area. The primary disadvantage of a plantigrade foot is speed. With more bones and joints in the foot, the leg is both shorter and heavier at the far end, which makes it difficult to move rapidly.

In humans and other great apes, another possible advantage of a plantigrade foot is that it may enhance fighting performance by providing a more powerful stance for striking and grappling.

Plantigrade foot occurs normally in humans in static postures of standing and sitting. It should also occur normally in gait (walking). Hypertonicity, spasticity, clonus, limited range of motion, abnormal flexion neural pattern, and a plantar flexor (calf) muscle contracture, as well as some forms of footwear such as high heeled shoes may contribute to an individual only standing and/or walking on their toes. It would be evident by the observable heel rise.

Yasmin Alibhai-Brown

Yasmin Alibhai-Brown ("née" Damji; born 10 December 1949) is a British journalist and author. A columnist for the "i " newspaper and the "Evening Standard", she is a commentator on immigration, diversity, and multiculturalism issues.

She is a founding member of British Muslims for Secular Democracy. She is also a patron of the SI Leeds Literary Prize.

Yasmin Damji was born in 1949 into the Indian community in Kampala, Uganda. Her family belonged to the Nizari Ismaili branch of the Shia Islamic faith, and she regards herself as a Shia Muslim. Her mother was born in East Africa and her father moved there from British India in the 1920s.

After graduating in English literature from Makerere University in 1972, Alibhai-Brown left Uganda for Britain, along with her niece, Farah Damji, shortly before the expulsion of Ugandan Asians by Idi Amin, and completed a Master of Philosophy degree in literature at Linacre College, University of Oxford, in 1975. After working as a teacher, particularly with immigrants and refugees, she moved into journalism in her mid-thirties. 

She is married to Colin Brown, former chairman of the Consumer Services Panel of the Financial Services Authority. The couple have a daughter, and Alibhai-Brown has a son from a previous marriage. Alibhai-Brown describes herself as "a leftie liberal, anti-racist, feminist, Muslim. part-Pakistani...person".

A journalist on the "New Statesman" magazine in the early 1980s, Alibhai-Brown contributes a weekly column to "The Independent". She has also written for "The Guardian", "The Observer", "The New York Times", "Time" magazine, "Newsweek", and the "Daily Mail", and has appeared on the current affairs TV shows "Dateline London" and "The Wright Stuff". Alibhai-Brown has won awards for her journalism, including Media Personality of the Year in 2000 (awarded by the Ethnic Multicultural Media Academy (EMMA)), the George Orwell Prize for Political Journalism in 2002, and the EMMA Award for Journalism in 2004.

Alibhai-Brown was a research fellow at the Institute for Public Policy Research (IPPR), a think tank associated with New Labour, from 1996 to 2001. She ended her connection with the Labour Party over the 2003 war in Iraq and other issues, and supported the Liberal Democrats in the 2005 and 2010 general elections. She is senior research associate at the Foreign Policy Centre, an honorary fellow at Liverpool John Moores University, and honorary visiting professor at Cardiff and Lincoln Universities.

In the New Year Honours 2001, Alibhai-Brown was appointed a Member of the Order of the British Empire (MBE) "for services to journalism". In 2003, Benjamin Zephaniah's public refusal of an OBE inspired her to return the award. She wrote that her decision had been made partly in a growing spirit of republicanism and partly in protest at the Labour government, particularly its conduct of the war in Iraq, and she has since criticised the British honours system as "beyond repair".

In May 2011, Alibhai-Brown wrote in "The Independent" that Muslims and others should stop focusing solely on the wrongdoings of Israel, saying that "We Muslims need to accept our burdens too." She also said that, "It is no longer morally justifiable for activists to target only Israel and either ignore or find excuses for corrupt, murderous Arab despots. That kind of selectivity discredits pro-Palestinian campaigners and dishonours the principles of equality and human rights." Brown previously condemned ethnic minority campaigners against racism failing to mention white victims of racially motivated crimes, suggesting they were guilty of double standards. Highlighting cases such as the murder of Ross Parker, Alibhai-Brown wrote: "Our values are worthless unless all victims of these senseless deaths matter equally", adding "to treat some victims as more worthy of condemnation than others is unforgivable and a betrayal of anti-racism itself".

In May 2012, Alibhai-Brown received an anonymous three-page letter alleging that while the sender was a schoolgirl in the 1970s she (the anonymous sender) had been sexually abused by veteran BBC presenter Stuart Hall. After Alibhai-Brown passed the letter to police, an investigation was initiated, culminating in Hall being arrested and charged with multiple counts of sexual assault. On 16 April 2013, Hall pleaded guilty to sexually assaulting 13 girls, aged from nine to 17, during the period 1967–86. The police credited Alibhai-Brown's actions as instrumental in triggering an investigation into Hall's past.

In 2016, Alibhai-Brown won the Columnist of the Year Broadsheet at the British Press Awards. She was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society of Literature in 2022.

Alibhai-Brown has attracted criticism for her views. Michael Wharton has accused her of an excessive pursuit of political correctness: "At 3.6 degrees on the Alibhai-Brown scale, it sets off a shrill scream that will not stop until you’ve pulled yourself together with a well-chosen anti-racist slogan."

Stephen Pollard accused her of racism and called her opinions "utterly vile" in "The Jewish Chronicle" in June 2008. In October 2009, Luciana Berger, MP and then director of Labour Friends of Israel, criticised Alibhai-Brown for writing in her column: "All three parties were lavishly entertained by the over-influential Friends of Israel." Berger said that Alibhai-Brown had not attended the LFI event or provided any evidence to sustain her comment. Berger insisted the hospitality ("house wine or orange juice and chips. Crisps and peanuts if you got to a bowl in time") was not lavish.



MV Bloemfontein Castle

The MV "Bloemfontein Castle" was a passenger liner. She was launched at Harland & Wolff's yard at Belfast on 25 August 1949 by Mrs Leif Egeland, wife of the High Commissioner for the Union of South Africa in London. She was completed on 25 March 1950. Built for Union-Castle Line's Intermediate service to South and East Africa, she was their first one-class ship. She took her name after the town of Bloemfontein, capital of the Orange Free State.
The "Bloemfontein Castle" was given the familiar Union-Castle profile of well-raked rounded stem, cruiser stern, a low streamlined funnel and a single mast abaft the bridge, giving a well-balanced appearance. There were two hatches forward and three aft, served by six 10-ton and four 5-ton capacity derricks. Cargo 'tweendeck spaces were insulated for the carriage of fruit, with certain compartments for chilled and frozen produce.
The "Bloemfontein Castle" was the first intermediate liner to be built since the war had ended, and the institution of a single class-tourist was an innovation for Union-Castle. She was built to cater for an expected emigrant boom and to alleviate the still considerable pressure at the time for accommodation at lower range fares. The main public rooms were on the promenade deck, a large lounge forward being extended the whole width of the ship so there were no passageways either side. Aft of this was a combined library and writing room, connected by a long gallery to a commodious smoking room. On the upper deck a dining room for 386 also extended the width of the ship. Accommodation for 739 passengers was spread through seven decks.

Some 250 of Union-Castle's staff were invited for the shakedown cruise made from London in March, 1950. She left London on her maiden voyage on 6 April 1950 – sailing the London – Rotterdam – Las Palmas – Ascension – St. Helena – Walvis Bay – Cape Town – Port Elizabeth – East London – Durban – Lourenço Marques – Beira route that she alone served. She sometimes called at Southampton homewards during the busy fruit season.

On 8 January 1953, "Bloemfontein Castle" rescued 234 passengers and crew from the Holland Afrika liner which was sinking after hitting a submerged object off Mozambique. Captain J. A. Fergurson and his senior officers later received commemorative gifts from the Holland Afrika Line.

When the expected flow of European emigrants to South Africa did not materialize, "Bloemfontein Castle" was sold to the Greek Chandris Lines in 1959, after a short life of only nine years with Union-Castle.

Renamed "Patris" and refitted in just three weeks for Chandris' service between Europe and Australia, the ship was the first large liner in the Chandris fleet. After Darwin was almost destroyed by Cyclone Tracy on Christmas Day in 1974, the Patris anchored in Darwin Harbour for nine months to provide emergency accommodation for those left homeless. 
In December 1975 Patris was refitted as car ferry for the Adriatic service. She was operated under the Chandris brand from 1976 until 1979, connecting Venice and Ancona to Patras.
In 1979 Chandris sold "Patris" to Karageorgis Lines, who first renamed her "Mediterranean Island" then "Mediterranean Star" in 1981. She was used as a ferry until sold to Pakistani breakers in 1987.


Great Western Turnpike

The Great Western Turnpike was a series of east–west toll roads that crossed part of New York in the United States. The toll roads that carried this name were:

The First and Third Turnpikes were rebuilt as part of US 20 in the 1920s, bypassing the older NY 5, which passed through several cities.


Iraqi Democrats Against Occupation

Iraqi Democrats Against Occupation (formerly Iraqi Democrats Against War and Sanctions) is an Iraqi political organisation founded to oppose United States-sponsored economic sanctions. It has now turned its focus to the current occupation of Iraq, calling for the immediate withdrawal of all foreign troops and the institution of a democratic government.


Mark Thompson (footballer)

Mark "Bomber" Thompson (born 19 November 1963) is a retired Australian rules footballer and former senior coach. He played 202 games for the Essendon Football Club from 1983 to 1996, captaining the side from 1992 until 1995.

After retiring, he was an assistant coach at Essendon and then at North Melbourne before becoming the senior coach of the Geelong Football Club from 2000 to 2010 and coaching them to two premierships. In November 2010, Thompson returned to as a senior assistant coach and was then appointed the senior coach for the 2014 season. He left the club at the end of 2014.

On 2 May 2018, he was charged with seven counts of drug trafficking and possession. He was released on $20,000 bail to appear in court at a later date. He was later cleared of trafficking but convicted of possession.

Thompson played for Essendon Football Club from 1983 until 1996, playing a total number of 202 games and kicked a total of 50 goals. Thompson played most of his football in the backline, gaining a reputation as a fierce competitor. He won the club award for "Most Determined Player" in 1984 and 1986, "Most Improved Player" and "Best Clubman" in 1985, and best-and-fairest awards in 1987 and 1990. He also finished in the top five in the best-and-fairest on four other occasions. Thompson played in the 1984 and 1985 premiership sides and captained the 1993 premiership team. In 2002, Thompson's contribution to the club was recognised when he was voted the 20th best Essendon player of all time in the "Champions of Essendon" list.

After Thompson retired as a player, Thompson became an assistant coach at Essendon Football Club under senior coach Kevin Sheedy for the 1997 season and 1998 season. 

In 1999, Thompson joined the North Melbourne Football Club as an assistant coach under senior coach Denis Pagan in what became a premiership year for the Kangaroos in the 1999 season, when North Melbourne defeated Carlton in the 1999 Grand Final to win the premiership.

Thompson was appointed as Geelong Football Club senior coach at the end of the 1999 season, for the 2000 season when he replaced Gary Ayres, who quit as Geelong Football Club senior coach. Thompson as Geelong Football Club senior coach was given an extended time to rebuild the club's playing list. Geelong under Thompson finished 5th in the 2000 season in his first season as senior coach but was eliminated by 8th placed Hawthorn in the first week of the finals in the first finals match ever held at the Docklands Stadium. The club under Thompson performed poorly for the next three seasons from 2001 until 2003, missing the top 8 and not making the finals. Thompson's position looked in danger, but in the 2004 season, Geelong under Thompson was a big improver, finishing fourth and making the Preliminary Finals, losing to eventual runners-up Brisbane Lions. Due to his success in reinvigorating the club, Thompson's contract was extended until 2007. The following year in the 2005 season, the club under Thompson finished sixth and was beaten in the Semi-Finals by 3 points against the eventual premiers Sydney Swans after leading for the majority of the match. 

In the 2006 season, however the club under Thompson eventually missed the finals after winning the NAB Cup and winning their first two matches in convincing style, leading them into flag favouritism. It was also a season where Thompson had used the 2005 semi-final loss to the Swans as motivation. Following a Round 22 61-point demolition at the hands of lower-placed Hawthorn, Thompson's job was under immense pressure.

After a very public review of the club, it was decided that Thompson should keep his job as senior coach. After a shaky start to the 2007 season that led many supporters to believe that nothing had changed from the 2006 season, Thompson led Geelong to a massive 15 match winning streak (the biggest in a single season in club history) and a 106-point win against the Kangaroos in the Qualifying Final which is the 5th biggest finals winning margin in AFL/VFL history.

The 2007 season then culminated in one of the biggest, if not the best highlight of Thompson's career, in both a coaching and footballer's role. Thompson coached Geelong to win the AFL premiership in the 2007 AFL Grand Final by more than 100 points, which was the highest winning margin in Grand Final history, against Port Adelaide Football Club at the MCG on 29 September. It was the club's first premiership since 1963, the year of Thompson's birth. 

After the Essendon Football Club decided not to give Thompson's former mentor, Kevin Sheedy, a renewal of contract, there was speculation that Mark Thompson would take up the senior coaching role at Essendon for the 2008 season. However, with trade week quickly approaching, the club instead appointed Matthew Knights to the position.

After Geelong's record-breaking win in the grand final, Geelong under Thompson were red hot favourite to repeat their 2007 success in the 2008 season and their form during the year did nothing to change that. The Cats went 21–1 to claim the McClelland Trophy four games ahead of their nearest challenger, Hawthorn. After relatively easy wins against St Kilda and the Western Bulldogs in the finals, Geelong under Thompson were into their second straight grand final, this time against Hawthorn, and were again hot favourites. In an upset, though, Hawthorn beat Geelong under Thompson by 26 points in front of 100,012 fans in the 2008 AFL Grand Final. 

During an end-of-season holiday to New York that year, Thompson ran into Melbourne Storm coach Craig Bellamy whilst inside a hotel. They were said to have drowned their sorrows following their respective Grand Final losses (Bellamy's Melbourne Storm lost the 2008 NRL Grand Final to Manly).

In the 2009 season, following a heartbreaking loss to Hawthorn in the 2008 Grand Final Premiership decider, Geelong under Thompson compiled an 18–4 record during the minor round and disposed of the Western Bulldogs and then Collingwood during the finals series. On 26 September 2009 in the 2009 AFL Grand Final, Geelong under Thompson faced a St Kilda side determined to break its 43-year Premiership drought. In front of 99,251 fans on a rain-soaked MCG deck, the Cats under Thompson clawed their way back after trailing at every break to win the AFL premiership by 12 points. This would be Geelong's second flag under Thompson in three years cementing their place as one of the great teams of the modern era. Thompson as always was magnanimous in victory and accepted the AFL Premiership trophy alongside Geelong legend Bob Davis. 

After Geelong under Thompson were eliminated from the preliminary finals to Collingwood, at the conclusion of the 2010 season, on 4 October 2010, Thompson announced his retirement and resignation as Geelong Football Club senior coach effective immediately, his reason being that he was "tired of coaching" after a decade at the helm. Thompson was replaced by Chris Scott as Geelong Football club senior coach.

On 10 November 2010, Thompson signed a lucrative contract to return to Essendon as the senior assistant coach under senior coach James Hird, putting an end to weeks of speculation following his resignation from Geelong. According to football writer and commentator Caroline Wilson's sources, his contract was said to be worth $650,000 per year. He was appointed the senior coach for the 2014 season while James Hird served his suspension, and left the club after Hird returned as senior coach at the end of that year.

Following months of rumours and investigations, on 13 August 2013, Thompson, along with the Essendon Football Club, senior coach James Hird, football manager Danny Corcoran and club doctor Bruce Reid, were charged by the AFL with bringing the game into disrepute in relation to the supplements program at the club in 2011 and 2012. The club was given 14 days to consider the charges and faced an AFL Commission hearing on 26 August 2013. On 27 August 2013, Thompson was fined $30,000 for his role in the supplements saga.

On 2 May 2018, he was charged with seven counts of drug trafficking and possession. He was released on $20,000 bail to appear in court at a later date. He was later cleared of trafficking but convicted of possession.

! scope="row" style="text-align:center" | 1983
! scope="row" style="text-align:center" | 1986
! scope="row" style="text-align:center" | 1987
! scope="row" style="text-align:center" | 1988
! scope="row" style="text-align:center" | 1989
! scope="row" style="text-align:center" | 1990
! scope="row" style="text-align:center" | 1991
! scope="row" style="text-align:center" | 1992
! scope="row" style="text-align:center" | 1994
! scope="row" style="text-align:center" | 1995
! scope="row" style="text-align:center" | 1996
! colspan=3| Career
! 202
! 50
! 38
! 2464
! 1536
! 4000
! 783
! 167
! 0.2
! 0.2
! 12.2
! 7.6
! 19.8
! 3.9
! 1.2

! scope="row" style="text-align:center; font-weight:normal" | 2000
! scope="row" style="text-align:center; font-weight:normal" | 2001
! scope="row" style="text-align:center; font-weight:normal" | 2002
! scope="row" style="text-align:center; font-weight:normal" | 2003
! scope="row" style="text-align:center; font-weight:normal" | 2004
! scope="row" style="text-align:center; font-weight:normal" | 2005
! scope="row" style="text-align:center; font-weight:normal" | 2006
! scope="row" style="text-align:center; font-weight:normal" | 2008
! scope="row" style="text-align:center; font-weight:normal" | 2010
! scope="row" style="text-align:center; font-weight:normal" | 2014
! colspan=2| Career totals
! 283
! 173
! 106
! 4
! 61.8%
! colspan=2|

Team

Individual

Team

Individual:


ATLIS II

The Thomson-CSF ATLIS II (Automatic Tracking and Laser Integration System) is a French laser/electro-optical targeting pod for fighter bomber and attack aircraft.

ATLIS was developed starting in 1976, entering service in 1980. It was developed for the French Armée de l'Air, initially carried by SEPECAT Jaguar and Mirage 2000 aircraft.

ATLIS incorporates a laser designator boresighted with a television camera. The pilot or weapon systems officer uses the crosshairs to mark a target, which can then be attacked with laser-guided bombs or other guided weapons from the designating aircraft or other, friendly forces. Because it is designed for use by single-seat aircraft, it has a novel automatic lock-on feature, which keeps the laser focused on the target without further operator intervention (using an inertial guidance system, it can generally keep the laser on target even if the beam is temporarily interrupted by clouds).

ATLIS II is used by the SEPECAT Jaguar, Mirage F1, Mirage 2000, Mirage 2000N, and some Pakistani F-16s. It is compatible with various U.S. and French laser-guided bombs, with the French Aerospatiale AS-30L missile, and even with some Russian bombs and guided weapons.

In 1985, Pakistan Air Force selected ATLIS-II for its F-16 aircraft, making it the first non-European operator of this system. ATLIS-II pod is carried on the 5L intake station on the F-16. Over the years precision targeting using ATLIS has been a distinct phenomenon over-viewed regularly in PAF’ s operational exercises. In the recent PAF operations in Global War on Terrorism, ATLIS-II was extensively used for precision targeting.

The pod is limited in being primarily a daylight/clear-weather system. It was briefly replaced by the more capable Thomson-CSF PDLCT ("Pod de Designation Laser a Camera Thermique" / Laser Designation Pod with Infrared Camera") and then the Thales Damocles, which has a FLIR.


Lunt

Lunt is a small village in the civil parish of Sefton, in the borough of Sefton in Merseyside, England, close to Sefton Village and to the west of Maghull and is in the L29 postcode.

The name derives from either the Old Norse word "Lundr" or the Old Swedish word "lunder", both meaning "grove" or "copse". This was likely a reference to the remnants of a large ancient forest that existed in the area at the time the settlement was founded. The town was first documented in 1251 in the Chartulary of Cockersand Abbey, where it was referred to as "de Lund". However, earlier settlement have been discovered through recent archaeological excavations at Lunt Meadows which were commissioned and funded by the Environment Agency, supported by National Museums Liverpool ahead of the transformation of farmland in the Alt valley, Sefton into a wetland reserve and flood alleviation scheme. These excavations found settlement buildings dating back to the mesolithic period (5800 BC) when the inhabitants were still living as hunter-gatherers

From 1997 until 2010 the village of Lunt was part of the Knowsley North and Sefton East constituency represented by George Howarth, a Labour Party MP. As a result of boundary revisions for the 2010 general election the Knowsley North and Sefton East constituency was abolished with Sefton East, including Lunt, being merged with the northern parts of the former Crosby constituency, which was also abolished, to form the new Sefton Central constituency which is represented by the Labour Party MP Bill Esterson.

For elections to Sefton Council the village of Lunt is within the Park electoral ward and is represented by three councillors. 

Lunt was formerly a township in the parish of Sefton, in 1866 Lunt became a civil parish, on 1 April 1932 the parish was abolished and merged with Sefton. In 1931 the parish had a population of 87.



Jerry Storie

Jerry Thomas Storie (born March 23, 1950) is a politician in Manitoba, Canada. He was a member of the Legislative Assembly of Manitoba from 1981 to 1995, and a cabinet minister in the New Democratic Party government of Howard Pawley from 1982 to 1988.

He was born in Winnipeg, Manitoba, the son of Clifford Earl Storie and Iris Eloise Young, and was educated at Brandon University and the University of Manitoba. In 1970, Storie married Betty Louise Embury. (She died in March 2007.) They moved to Flin Flon in 1975 and he worked as a teacher and sociologist for the Flin Flon School Division before entering public life.

Storie was first elected to the Manitoba legislature in the 1981 general election, defeating Progressive Conservative Bob McNeil by over 1400 votes in the northern riding of Flin Flon. He entered the cabinet on August 20, 1982, having been appointed Minister of Housing, with responsibility for the Landlord and Tenant Act, the Residential Rent Corporation Act, the Housing and Renewal Corporation Act and the Infirm Persons' Housing Act.

Following a cabinet shuffle on November 4, 1983, Storie was named Minister of Northern Affairs with responsibility for the Communities Economic Development Fund Act, the Manitoba Natural Resources Act, and Manitoba Forestry Resources Ltd. He was relieved of the Northern Affairs portfolio and the first two responsibilities on January 30, 1985, and named Minister of Business Development and Tourism, with responsibility for Manitoba Data Services (he also retained the Forestry responsibility).

Storie was re-elected by a substantial majority in the 1986 provincial election. On April 17, 1986, he was promoted to Minister of Education, and on September 21, 1987 was again shifted to the Ministry of Energy and Mines, with responsibility for Manitoba Hydro and the Natural Resources Development Act. On November 23, 1987, he was also given responsibility for the Natural Gas Supply Act. Throughout his second term in office, he retained responsibility for Forestry.

The NDP government of Howard Pawley was defeated in 1988, when disgruntled backbencher Jim Walding voted against his government's budget. The party was reduced to only twelve seats (out of fifty-seven) in the election which followed, although Storie was re-elected in his riding without any serious difficulties. He was again re-elected in the 1990 provincial election, in which the NDP recovered to twenty seats. He retired from the legislature on July 20, 1994. He returned to the field of education as Area 4 Superintendent for the Frontier School Division in Cranberry Portage, Manitoba throughout the late 1990s.

In 2001, Storie negotiated on behalf of Manitoba's provincial government in a dispute with the Canadian federal government over hydro resources. He later became Superintendent of the Turtle Mountain school division in Manitoba. Storie was appointed the Dean of Education at Brandon University in 2005.

David Vetter

David Phillip Vetter (September 21, 1971 – February 22, 1984) was an American boy who was a prominent person with severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID), a hereditary disease which dramatically weakens the immune system. Individuals born with SCID are abnormally susceptible to infections, and exposure to typically innocuous pathogens can be fatal. Vetter was referred to as "David, the bubble boy" by the media, as a reference to the complex containment system used as part of the management of his SCID. Vetter's surname was not revealed to the general public until 10 years after his death in order to preserve his family's privacy.

In his first years of life, he lived mostly at Texas Children's Hospital in Houston, Texas. As he grew older, he lived increasingly at home with his parents and older sister Katherine in Dobbin, Texas. He died in 1984, at the age of 12.

Vetter's parents were Carol Ann Vetter and David Joseph Vetter Jr. Their first son, David Joseph Vetter III, was also born with SCID and died at seven months old. Physicians advised the Vetters that any future male children they might conceive would have a 50% chance of inheriting the disease. At the time, the only management available for children born with SCID was isolation in a sterile environment until a successful bone-marrow transplant could be performed. The Vetters, who had a daughter, decided to proceed with another pregnancy. Their third child, David Phillip Vetter, was born on September 21, 1971.

A special sterilized cocoon bed was prepared for Vetter at his birth. Immediately after being removed from his mother's uterus, Vetter entered the plastic germ-free environment that would be his home for most of his life. Vetter was baptized a Roman Catholic with sterilized holy water once he had entered the bubble. Initial plans to proceed with a bone-marrow transplant came to a halt after it was determined that the prospective donor, Vetter's sister Katherine, was not a match.

Water, air, food, diapers, and clothes were sterilized before they could enter the sterile chamber. Items were placed in a chamber filled with ethylene oxide gas for four hours at 60 degrees Celsius (140º F), then aerated for a period of one to seven days before being placed in the sterile chamber.

After he was placed in the sterile chamber, Vetter was touched only through special plastic gloves attached to the walls of the chamber, which was kept inflated by air compressors that were so loud that communication with David was difficult. His parents and medical team, which included Dr. John Montgomery, sought to provide him as normal a life as possible, including a formal education, and a television and playroom inside the sterile chamber. About three years after Vetter's birth, the treatment team built an additional sterile chamber in his parents' home in Conroe, Texas, and a transport chamber so that Vetter could spend periods of two to three weeks at home, with his sister and friends for company. A friend arranged for a special showing of "Return of the Jedi" at a local theater so that Vetter could attend the movie in his transport chamber.

When Vetter was four years old, he discovered that he could poke holes in his bubble using a butterfly syringe that was left inside the chamber by mistake. At this point, the treatment team explained to him what germs were and how they affected his condition. As he grew older, he became aware of the world outside his chamber and expressed an interest in participating in what he could see outside the windows of the hospital and via television.

In 1977, researchers from NASA used their experience with the fabrication of space suits to develop a special suit that would allow Vetter to get out of his bubble and walk in the outside world. The suit was connected to his bubble via an eight-foot (2.5 m) long cloth tube and although cumbersome, it allowed him to venture outside without serious risk of contamination. Vetter was initially resistant to the suit, and although he later became more comfortable wearing it, he used it only seven times. He outgrew the suit and never used the replacement one provided for him by NASA.

Approximately $1.3 million was spent on Vetter's care, but scientific study failed to produce a true cure and no donor match was identified. Vetter later received a bone marrow transplant from his sister Katherine. While his body did not reject the transplant, he became ill with infectious mononucleosis after a few months. He died on February 22, 1984, from Burkitt lymphoma at age 12. The autopsy revealed that Katherine's bone marrow contained traces of a dormant virus, Epstein–Barr, which was undetectable in the pre-transplant screening.

He was buried at Conroe Memorial Park, Conroe, Montgomery County, Texas, on February 25, 1984, next to his older brother, David Joseph Vetter III.

A Conroe ISD elementary school which opened in 1990 in The Woodlands in unincorporated Montgomery County, Texas, was named David Elementary after Vetter.

"The Boy in the Plastic Bubble" is a 1976 TV movie drama inspired by Vetter and Ted DeVita starring John Travolta. The 1986 Paul Simon song "The Boy in the Bubble" was inspired by Vetter's story. "Bubble Boy" is a 2001 comedy film inspired by the life of David Vetter.

Vetter's parents later divorced. His father became the mayor of Shenandoah, Texas. His mother married Kent Demaret, a magazine reporter who had written about her son. Vetter's psychologist, Mary Murphy, wrote a book about Vetter's case that was to be published in 1995; however, its initial publication was blocked by his parents and Baylor College of Medicine. The book was published in 2019 under the title "Bursting the Bubble: The Tortured Life and Untimely Death of David Vetter".



Great Altcar

Great Altcar is a village and civil parish in West Lancashire, England, close to Formby on the West Lancashire Coastal Plain. The population as taken at the 2011 census was 213. The name Altcar is Norse meaning "marsh by the Alt". The church of St Michael and All Angels is a timber framed structure dating from 1879.

The area is now intensively farmed. An area called The Moss is situated to the north, and is characterized by drainage dykes.

Altcar hosted hare coursing's Waterloo Cup from 1836 to 2005, originally with the patronage of William Philip Molyneux, 2nd Earl of Sefton. Altcar Training Camp, established in 1860, is actually in Hightown.

Great Altcar is on the B5195 road. It was served by Altcar and Hillhouse railway station on the Cheshire Lines Committee Southport & Cheshire Lines Extension Railway Southport Extension until July 1952.



USS Roncador

USS "Roncador" (SS/AGSS/IXSS-301), a , was a ship of the United States Navy named for the roncador.

The "Roncador" was laid down on April 21, 1943 by the Cramp Shipbuilding Company at Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, launched on May 14, 1944, sponsored by Mrs. Thomas B. Klakring, and commissioned on March 27, 1945.

Following commissioning, the "Roncador" conducted shakedown exercises into late May 1945; on May 26, 1945, she arrived at Port Everglades, Florida. Based there for two months, she assisted in the development of antisubmarine warfare techniques. On July 29, 1945 she got underway for Panama and, from August 3 through the end of World War II in mid-August 1945, conducted advanced training exercises off the Panama Canal Zone.

In late August 1945, she proceeded to Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, then in mid-September 1945 headed for the Pacific She arrived at Pearl Harbor, Hawaii, on October 3, 1945 and remained in Hawaiian waters into 1946. On January 3, 1946, she got underway for San Francisco, California, and inactivation.

The "Roncador" was decommissionedon June 1, 1946 and through the 1950s remained in the inactive fleet. In February 1960, she was taken out of reserve fleet and assigned to United States Naval Reserve training duty in the 11th Naval District in a non-commissioned status. Reclassified as an auxiliary submarine and accordingly redesignated AGSS-301 on December 1, 1962, she continued training duty, at Naval Station Long Beach on Terminal Island in Los Angeles, California, until December 1, 1971, at which time she was stricken from the Naval Vessel Register, reclassified as a "miscellaneous unclassified submarine," and redesignated IXSS-301.

Plans were made for "Roncadaor" to be used as a museum ship at Ports O' Call Village in San Pedro, California, but they fell through. Instead she was sold for scrapping on January 2, 1973. Instead of being scrapped, however, she was placed on display for a brief period of time circa February 1976 at King Harbor in Redondo Beach, California.

She was resold in September 1976 to Nicolai Joffe of Beverly Hills, California, and subsequently portrayed the fictional submarine USS "Sea Tiger" — painted pink for the role — in the ABC situation comedy "Operation Petticoat", which aired in the United States from September 1977 to October 1978. The Naval Vessel Register on October 1, 1982 listed her as having been sold again for scrapping.

The "Roncador"′s conning tower was preserved and was displayed for several years at the National Museum of the United States Navy at the Washington Navy Yard in Washington, D.C. It then was moved to Naval Base Point Loma in San Diego, California, where it now resides as the centerpiece of the Submarine Memorial at Ballast Point.

Granity

Granity is a small town on the West Coast of New Zealand's South Island, north-east of Westport on State Highway 67. Karamea is further north.

The town is on a narrow strip of land between the Tasman Sea to the west and steep, mountains to the immediate east. Long known as a coal-mining town, the population declined as the industry waned. The population was in Several neighbouring towns, such as Denniston, have become virtually ghost towns. In 1911 Granity's population was 589, 641 in 1921 and 547 in 1956. Granity had a railway station on the Westport-Ngākawau Line from 28 Feb 1892 until 16 May 1982, though closed to passengers from 14 October 1946. In 1902 it had a staff of 5.

The name "Granity" was given to the town by gold prospectors, in reference to the large quantity of granite in the area.

Granity is described by Statistics New Zealand as a rural settlement and covers . It had an estimated population of as of with a population density of people per km. It is part of the larger Buller Coalfields statistical area.
Granity had a population of 168 at the 2018 New Zealand census, a decrease of 33 people (−16.4%) since the 2013 census, and a decrease of 21 people (−11.1%) since the 2006 census. There were 90 households, comprising 93 males and 75 females, giving a sex ratio of 1.24 males per female. The median age was 55.7 years (compared with 37.4 years nationally), with 24 people (14.3%) aged under 15 years, 12 (7.1%) aged 15 to 29, 90 (53.6%) aged 30 to 64, and 42 (25.0%) aged 65 or older.

Ethnicities were 94.6% European/Pākehā, 12.5% Māori, 1.8% Pasifika, and 1.8% other ethnicities. People may identify with more than one ethnicity.

Although some people chose not to answer the census's question about religious affiliation, 66.1% had no religion, 17.9% were Christian and 1.8% had other religions.

Of those at least 15 years old, 12 (8.3%) people had a bachelor's or higher degree, and 45 (31.2%) people had no formal qualifications. The median income was $18,800, compared with $31,800 nationally. 9 people (6.2%) earned over $70,000 compared to 17.2% nationally. The employment status of those at least 15 was that 45 (31.2%) people were employed full-time, 15 (10.4%) were part-time, and 6 (4.2%) were unemployed.

Buller Coalfields statistical area, which also includes Hector and Ngakawau and Waimangaroa, covers . It had an estimated population of as of with a population density of people per km.
Buller Coalfields had a population of 909 at the 2018 New Zealand census, a decrease of 78 people (−7.9%) since the 2013 census, and a decrease of 30 people (−3.2%) since the 2006 census. There were 447 households, comprising 480 males and 429 females, giving a sex ratio of 1.12 males per female. The median age was 54.0 years (compared with 37.4 years nationally), with 135 people (14.9%) aged under 15 years, 84 (9.2%) aged 15 to 29, 486 (53.5%) aged 30 to 64, and 204 (22.4%) aged 65 or older.

Ethnicities were 90.1% European/Pākehā, 11.9% Māori, 1.3% Pasifika, 1.7% Asian, and 3.6% other ethnicities. People may identify with more than one ethnicity.

The percentage of people born overseas was 11.9, compared with 27.1% nationally.

Although some people chose not to answer the census's question about religious affiliation, 60.4% had no religion, 24.8% were Christian, 0.3% had Māori religious beliefs, 0.3% were Buddhist and 1.7% had other religions.

Of those at least 15 years old, 78 (10.1%) people had a bachelor's or higher degree, and 231 (29.8%) people had no formal qualifications. The median income was $19,600, compared with $31,800 nationally. 57 people (7.4%) earned over $70,000 compared to 17.2% nationally. The employment status of those at least 15 was that 264 (34.1%) people were employed full-time, 93 (12.0%) were part-time, and 39 (5.0%) were unemployed.

The Granity Creek Sawmill was established in 1846 and was a significant employer in the area. The town was also the location of the engineering division of the Westport Coal Company, and the railway station was used for loading and dispatching coal from the nearby Millerton mine.

Granity School opened in 1879 in Ngakawau and was later re-located to a site between Ngakawau and Granity. In 1901 it had a roll of 100 pupils. The school is a co-educational full primary school (years 1–8), with a roll of as of The natural erosion of the beach, at a rate of per year, is threatening the school buildings, and a stopbank has resulted in the school grounds protruding further out onto the beach than adjoining properties.

The very rare and critically endangered cobble skink is only known to occur on a short stretch of pebbled coast at Granity.

Notable people from Granity include:



DKW RT 125

The RT 125 was a German two-stroke motorcycle made by DKW in Zschopau in the 1930s, IFA and MZ in the 1950s and early 1960s, and DKW in Ingolstadt in the 1950s and 1960s. "RT" stands for , .

In the 1930s DKW pioneered the Schnürle two-stroke loop scavenging process to dispense with the use of a deflector piston and improve efficiency of the combustion chamber. DKW also developed a highly efficient arrangement of transfer ports. These two features were included in the RT 125 to great commercial advantage. Competitor companies such as Adler and TWN copied the adoption of flat-topped pistons and strove to develop equally efficient transfer port arrangements without infringing DKW's patent.

Copies of the RT 125 were built by at least eight different entities in at least six countries.

After World War II the Soviet Union took plans, tooling and even several dozen personnel as war reparations to MMZ in Moscow (later transferred to MMVZ and SMZ) and to a factory in Kovrov, and produced copies of the RT 125 as the M1A Moskva and K-125 respectively. WFM of Poland made a modified version of the RT 125 (under SHL 125 and Sokół 125 brands), developed into 125/175 cc family motorcycles, produced until 1985.

RT 125 plans were also taken to the United Kingdom where they became the basis of the BSA Bantam, and to the USA where they formed the basis of the Harley-Davidson "Hummer" (Hummer is really just a few specific years, but generally people call the Harley lightweights Hummers).

After the Second World War, DKW's factories in Zschopau were in the Soviet occupation zone. As such, they were under the control of the Soviet Union until they were handed over to the government of East Germany. The factory continued production of the RT 125 under the MZ ("Motorradwerk Zschopau") brand into the 1950s.

Meanwhile, DKW had reorganized itself in Ingolstadt, where it began production of the RT 125W (for "West") in 1949. Variants of the RT 125W, usually with larger engines, were in production throughout the 1950s.
In the 1950s, after reestablishing themselves as manufacturers of musical instruments, Nippon Gakki decided to use the manufacturing equipment left over from wartime production to make motorcycles. Since the copyright on the RT 125 had been voided by the Allies, the company reverse engineered it as the basis for their first motorcycle. Nippon Gakki formed the Yamaha Motor Company in 1955 to build their copy of the RT 125 as the Yamaha YA-1, which was in production from 1955 to 1958. The YA-1 inherited design characteristics of RT 125 and, due to its thin body and chestnut brown tank, was affectionately nicknamed the .

Wright R-2600 Twin Cyclone

The Wright R-2600 Cyclone 14 (also called Twin Cyclone) is an American radial engine developed by Curtiss-Wright and widely used in aircraft in the 1930s and 1940s.

In 1935, Curtiss-Wright began work on a more powerful version of their successful R-1820 Cyclone 9. The result was the R-2600 Twin Cyclone, with 14 cylinders arranged in two rows. The R-2600-3 was originally intended for the C-46 Commando (being fitted to the prototype CW-20A). It was also the original engine choice for the F6F Hellcat; a running change (one which would not stop production) for the CW-20A, and one in late April 1942 for the second XF6F-1, led to the adoption of the Pratt & Whitney R-2800 Double Wasp in the R-2600's place for both designs.

The Twin Cyclone went on to power several important American World War II aircraft, including the A-20 Havoc, B-25 Mitchell, TBF Avenger, SB2C Helldiver, and the PBM Mariner.

Over 50,000 R-2600s were built at plants in Paterson, New Jersey, and Cincinnati, Ohio.




Hugh Brannum

Hugh Brannum (January 5, 1910 – April 19, 1987) was an American vocalist, arranger, composer, and actor known for his role as Mr. Green Jeans on the children's television show "Captain Kangaroo". During his days with Fred Waring and his Pennsylvanians, Brannum used his childhood nickname "Lumpy".

Brannum was born in Sandwich, Illinois, in 1910 to a Methodist minister. He attended Maine Township High School in suburban Chicago, where he played sousaphone in the school's marching band, later learning the bass violin.

Brannum went to college at University of Redlands, where he became interested in jazz; after graduation in 1931, he played bass in various bands.

During World War II, Brannum enlisted in the US Marine Corps and joined a Marine band led by Bob Crosby. After the war, he joined the Four Squires, and later moved to Fred Waring and His Pennsylvanians; Waring's group had a regular radio show on NBC, where Brannum met fellow Marine Bob Keeshan, who was working at the network, and who later hired Brannum for "Captain Kangaroo".

Before his time on "Captain Kangaroo", Brannum hosted a local children's TV series called "Uncle Lumpy's Cabin", seen weekday afternoons at 5 on WJZ-TV, (now WABC-TV) in New York City during the 1951 season.

Mr. Green Jeans earned his moniker from his distinctive apparel, a pair of farmer's overalls (later, jeans and a denim jacket) in his signature green (although, since the show was broadcast in black-and-white until 1967, this was lost on viewers during its first years). He was a talented and inquisitive handyman who provided assistance at the Treasure House. He frequently visited the Captain with the latest addition to his menagerie of zoo animals.

Aside from Mr. Green Jeans, Brannum played a number of characters on "Captain Kangaroo" from 1955 to 1984, including the Professor, Greeno the Clown, the New Old Folk Singer, and Mr. Bainter the Painter. His role as Mr. Green Jeans was partly based on stories about a farm kid named "Little Orley" that he told with the Fred Waring orchestra, on the radio and on 78-rpm records under the pseudonym "Uncle Lumpy". According to Bob Keeshan, Mr. Green Jeans was an extension of Brannum's real personality. During one episode of "Captain Kangaroo", a lion cub bit Brannum's finger and drew blood. Brannum stuck his bleeding hand into his pocket and never broke character for the remainder of the episode.

Brannum died of cancer in East Stroudsburg, Pennsylvania, in 1987.


Soloist and/or composer and/or arranger, as Hugh (Lumpy) Brannum, on the following Fred Waring recordings:


Little Altcar

Little Altcar is a village and civil parish in the Metropolitan Borough of Sefton on Merseyside, within the boundaries of the historic county of Lancashire and on the West Lancashire Coastal Plain of England. The village forms part of the built-up area of Formby. It had a population of 892 in the 2001 Census, increasing to 910 at the 2011 Census.

The name Altcar is Norse meaning 'marsh by the River Alt'.

Little Altcar has two tiers of local government, at parish and metropolitan borough level: Little Altcar Parish Council, and Sefton Council. Sefton is also a constituent part of the Liverpool City Region Combined Authority.

The civil parish now called Little Altcar was created in 1974 as a result of the Local Government Act 1972, which split the former parish of Altcar between Lancashire and the new metropolitan county of Merseyside. The parts in each county became new parishes, with the parish in Lancashire taking the name Great Altcar. The parish in Merseyside was initially called simply "Altcar", changing to "Altcar-in-Merseyside" in 1977, before changing again to "Little Altcar" on 19 November 1987.

For elections to Sefton Council the village of Little Altcar is part of Ravenmeols electoral ward which has seven councillors, the recent election in May 2015 has resulted in an influx of Formby Residents Action Group representatives becoming the majority party.

From 1950 until 2010 Little Altcar was within the boundaries of the Crosby constituency, whose MP from 1997 until 2010 was Claire Curtis-Thomas, a member of the Labour Party, prior to her election the Crosby seat was generally considered to be a safe Conservative Party stronghold with Tory MP's elected at every election barring the 1981 Crosby by-election where Shirley Williams of the Social Democratic Party was elected to represent the constituency. As a result of boundary revisions for the 2010 general election the Crosby constituency was abolished with its northern parts, including Little Altcar, being merged with the Eastern parts of Sefton that were formerly part of the Knowsley North and Sefton East constituency, to form the new constituency of Sefton Central, which is currently represented by the Labour Party MP Bill Esterson.



Ralph Modjeski

Ralph Modjeski (born Rudolf Modrzejewski; January 27, 1861 – June 26, 1940) was a Polish-American civil engineer who achieved prominence as "America's greatest bridge builder."

He pioneered the use of suspension bridges and oversaw the design and construction of nearly forty bridges that spanned the great rivers of North America, as well as the development of new rail lines. In addition, he trained succeeding generations of American bridge designers and builders, including Joseph B. Strauss, chief engineer of San Francisco's Golden Gate Bridge (which was completed six months after Modjeski's San Francisco–Oakland Bay Bridge).

Modjeski was born in Bochnia, in Galicia, on January 27, 1861, to Gustav Sinnmayer Modrzejewski and actress Helena Opid Modrzejewska (best known outside Poland as Helena Modjeska). In 1865, his mother left Sinnmayer, and in 1868, she married "Count" Karol Bożenta Chłapowski. In July 1876, they emigrated to America, where, as a matter of convenience, the boy's mother changed her name to Helena Modjeska and her son's name to Ralph Modjeski.

He was a classmate of Ignacy Jan Paderewski in Poland and was a formidable pianist in his own right.

The son returned to Europe to study at "l'Ecole des Ponts et Chaussées" (the School of Bridges and Roads) in Paris, France. It was in 1883, while studying at Paris, that he obtained American citizenship; however, he always maintained contact with Poland, wrote much in Polish, and emphasized his Polish origins.

In 1885, he graduated from the School of Bridges and Roads at the top of his class. That same year, he married Felicie Benda; the couple had three children. They divorced in 1931 after a sixteen-year-long separation. That same year, the now seventy-year-old Modjeski married Virginia Mary Giblyn. 
After completing his academic training, Modjeski returned to America to begin his career, working first under the "father of American bridge-building," George S. Morison. In 1893, Modjeski opened his own design office in Chicago. Joined in 1924 by Frank M. Masters, the firm still exists as Modjeski & Masters.

Modjeski's first project as chief engineer was the railroad bridge across the Mississippi River at Rock Island, Illinois. During his career, he served as chief or consulting engineer on dozens of bridges across the United States.

He took over the mis-designed Quebec Bridge after the 1907 disaster that killed seventy-five workers, and succeeded in creating the longest truss span in the world (though a construction accident killed another thirteen workers). It is still the longest cantilever bridge in the world.

Modjeski was the recipient of numerous awards and honorary degrees. He received a doctorate in engineering from Illinois State University in 1911, the Franklin Medal in 1923, a doctorate "honoris causa" from the Lwów Polytechnic in 1929, and the prestigious John Fritz Medal in 1930. He was elected to the United States National Academy of Sciences in 1925 and the American Philosophical Society in 1926. In Modjeski's obituary, Frank Masters considered him "one of the world's leading bridge engineers." A PHMC Historical Marker was dedicated in 2007 in commemoration.

He died June 26, 1940, in Los Angeles, California, nearly 80 years old.




Al Qa'qaa high explosives controversy

The Al Qa'qaa high explosives controversy concerns the possible removal of about 377 tonnes of high explosives (HMX and RDX) from the Al Qa'qaa facility by the Iraqi insurgency, after the 2003 invasion of Iraq. Although Pentagon spokesman Lawrence Di Rita said that the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) has not come forward with documentation that explains how it arrived at the figure of 377 tons of missing explosives. The IAEA so far only has verified in its paperwork that 219 tons of explosive materials were at Al Qaqaa and surrounding facilities.

The explosives, considered dangerous by the IAEA, were certified by UN weapons inspectors to be inside facilities whose doors were fastened with chains and the United Nations' seal, at the Al Qa'qaa industrial complex in Iraq in 2003. By October 2004, the facility was empty.

In October 2004, the Iraqi interim government warned the U.S. that nearly 380 tons of conventional explosives had been removed from the Al Qa'qaa facility. The Bush administration was criticized for failing to guard known weapons stashes of this size after the invasion. Critics of the Bush administration claimed that U.S. forces were to blame for the looting, which put weapons that were formerly under UN control into the hands of insurgents.

The Bush administration asserted before the 2004 U.S. election that the explosives were either removed by Iraq before invaders captured the facility, or properly accounted for by US forces, even while White House and Pentagon officials acknowledged that they had vanished after the invasion.

MSNBC wrote:
"Time" magazine reported the sequence of events: "In late April IAEA's chief weapons inspector for Iraq warned the U.S. of the vulnerability of the site, and in May 2003, an internal IAEA memo warned that terrorists could be looting "the greatest explosives bonanza in history." Seventeen months later, on October 10, in response to a long-standing request from the IAEA to account for sensitive materials, the interim Iraqi government notified the agency that AlQaqaa had been stripped clean. The White House learned about the notification a few days later."

Evidence indicated that the explosives were most likely removed after invading US forces captured the facility. The looting was witnessed by U.S. Army reservists and National Guardsman from separate units as well as officials of the new Iraqi government. Frank Rich editorialized in "The New York Times" (May 15, 2005):
"For a timeline of events resulting in the storage and subsequent loss of the high explosives, please see Al Qa'qaa high explosives timeline."

Sami al-Araji, Iraq's deputy minister of industry, noted that besides al Qa'qaa, looters had targeted explosives and other weapons material in the Nida Factory, the Badr General Establishment, Al Ameer, Al Radwan, Al Hatteen, and Al Qadisiya. Some of these factories had WMD (weapon of mass destruction) significance, such as the Nida Factory and Al Radwan, which were part of Saddam's nuclear program in the early 1990s. The looting of five of these sites were also confirmed by the IAEA's satellite reconnaissance.

Former U.S. Ambassador Peter W. Galbraith (who supported Bush's war in Iraq) reported two additional incidents of significant looting in post-invasion Iraq. He witnessed U.S. troops standing outside Baghdad's Disease Center as looters attacked the complex on 16 April 2003, "taking live HIV and black fever virus among other potentially lethal materials." At the same time, looters attacked Iraq's nuclear facilities at Tuwaitha, taking "barrels of yellowcake (raw uranium), apparently dumping the uranium and using the barrels to hold water. US troops were at Tuwaitha but did not interfere." Galbraith noted that the facilities were all under IAEA seal and that "they remained untouched until the US troops arrived."

Former counterterrorism directors for the National Security Council Daniel Benjamin and Steven Simon noted the danger of these nuclear materials falling into the hands of terrorists as a result of the U.S. invasion: "Another potential consequence of the invasion is the spread of weapons of mass destruction to al-Qaeda or other terrorists ... [T]he International Atomic Energy Agency certified that there were highly radioactive materials at the al-Tuwaitha facilities, including partially enriched—though not weapons-grade—uranium. These materials could be used to fabricate one or more radiological dispersion devices—or 'dirty bombs,' as they have come to be known. Some of these materials appear to be missing—how much remains unclear—and it seems a fair conjecture that someone ... may have 'privatized' these weapons with the intent of selling them to the highest biddeer. Ultimately, this material could find its way into the hands of al-Qaeda. It is difficult to imagine a more horrifyingly ironic outcome to the war."

Many commentators expressed fears that the explosives had fallen into the hands of terrorists and would be used by the Iraqi insurgency to mount attacks against US and Iraqi troops. Many insurgent attacks have been carried out using improvised explosive devices made from military munitions, most often 122 mm artillery shells and landmines. IEDs made with high explosives are far more powerful and devastating and have been used in some of the most damaging attacks carried out in Iraq, such as the August 19, 2003 suicide attack on the U.N. headquarters, and the March 17, 2004 attack on the Mount Lebanon Hotel, both in Baghdad. It is not clear whether these attacks were mounted using explosives from Al Qa'qaa. However, on October 28, 2004 a video was released by a group calling itself "Islam's Army Brigades, Al-Karar Brigade" in which a masked man claimed that "the American intelligence" had helped them to obtain a "huge amount of the explosives that were in the Al Qa'qaa facility" and that the explosives would be "use[d] against the occupation forces and those who cooperate with them in the event of these forces threatening any Iraqi city." And a December 2003 report from a joint Defense Department intelligence task force concluded that the insurgents in Iraq "retain access to virtually all the weapons systems and ordnances previously controlled by the Iraqi military, security and intelligence assets. Unsecured arms depots and storage sites, in addition to open and black market availability of weapons and ammunition, eliminate the need for the [insurgents] to maintain a formidable arsenal."

Montgomery McFate of the Human Terrain Team program noted in 2005:
The high explosives were stored under the supervision of the United Nations due to their sensitive nature and dual use in WMDs.
According to the IAEA, there were 340 tonnes consisting of:
These explosives were stored in solid crystalline form and could be used to make powerful plastic explosives, are safe to transport and do not detonate on impact. The total quantity, 341.744 tonnes (753,417 pounds), would require approximately 40 large trucks to convey.

In addition to the explosives, al Qa'qaa held some of the remnants of Iraq's chemical warfare program from the early 1990s, "including 800 pieces of chemical equipment." The areas that had been involved in chemical processing were "wrecked by fire and possible extensive looting" after the invasion; as "The New York Times" reported, "Unknown is the fate of such equipment there like separators, heat exchangers, mixers and chemical reactors, all of which can be used in making chemical weapons." (13 March 2005). The "Times" reported that "the kinds of machinery at the various sites included equipment that could be used to make missile parts, chemical weapons or centrifuges essential for enriching uranium for atom bombs." Gary Milhollin, director of the Wisconsin Project on Nuclear Arms Control, said, "Targeted looting of this kind of equipment has to be seen as a proliferation threat."

The HMX was stored at the Qa'qaa Store, one of a number of facilities at the Al Qa'qaa complex in Iraq. Al Qa'Qaa is very large, occupying 28 km² of land near to Iskandariya and about 48 km south of Baghdad. It includes almost 1100 individual structures and buildings. This is about the same size as Newport, Rhode Island, Little Cayman or Bath. As a result of its large size, most accounts of the complex deal only with a specific facility located within its bounds.

The Qa'qaa Store was located at the southern end of the facility in underground bunkers. The bunker doors were sealed by IAEA officials upon being closed. Although the doors were sealed, the bunker itself was not hermetically sealed. Air ventilation shafts leading into the bunkers were not sealed. The high explosives subject to the controversy were the only materials under UN seal at Al Qa'qaa.

The RDX was stored at the Al Mahaweel Stores, a site physically separate from, but administered by, Al Qa'qaa.

Satellite imagery of the main Al Qa'qaa complex (about 28 km ¹) is publicly available for 2001 from GlobalSecurity.org and for 2003 and 2004 from DigitalGlobe.




The Al Qa'qaa complex was occupied for two days by the United States Army's 3rd Infantry Division following a brief battle on April 3, 2003, shortly before the fall of Baghdad. Although no banned weapons were discovered, atropine and 2-Pam chloride — both antidotes for nerve gas — were reported found there. Thousands of bottles of white powder were also discovered, but were found to be explosives rather than chemical weapons.

On April 10, 2003, troops from the Second Brigade of the 101st Airborne Division arrived at Al Qa'qaa "en route" to Baghdad. They stopped overnight and moved on the following day. According to the brigade's commander, Colonel Joseph Anderson, at this point the complex showed few signs of looting or damage. Al Qa'qaa was reportedly unoccupied and unguarded until the arrival of the 75th Exploration Task Force (better known as Task Force 75) on May 27. By this time, according to Wathiq al-Dulaimi, a local security chief, and other local Iraqis, the complex had been thoroughly looted with enterprising locals even renting their trucks to looters. Task Force 75 found that the complex had largely been stripped of anything of value. Although they searched 32 bunkers and 87 other buildings, they found no signs of chemical, biological or nuclear weapons. The team did not find any of the explosives sealed by the IAEA inspectors two months earlier.

On April 13, a team from the 3rd Infantry Division led by Maj. Austin Pearson arrived at Al-Qaqaa. Pearson said at a Pentagon news conference that his mission was to secure and destroy ammunition and explosives. He estimated that his team, "Task Force Bullet", removed 250 tons of material including TNT, plastic explosives, detonation cords and munitions.

Pearson's story provoked skepticism as it came the morning after new videotape surfaced indicating that the explosives were still at the base after Saddam's fall; the videotape (from April 18, 2003) shows what appeared to be high explosives still in barrels bearing IAEA seals. "The photographs are consistent with what I know of Al Qaqaa", David A. Kay, who directed the hunt in Iraq for WMD and visited the site, told The New York Times. "The damning thing is the seals. The Iraqis didn't use seals on anything. So I'm absolutely sure that's an IAEA seal."

The situation did not become publicly known for over a year afterwards, but IAEA officials reportedly warned as early as May 2003 that looting at Al Qa'qaa could be "the greatest explosives bonanza in history." Although IAEA inspectors were unable to inspect the site themselves due to the US ban on their presence, they were able to obtain commercial satellite imagery in late 2003 that showed severe damage to the facility. Two of roughly ten bunkers in which high explosives had been stored appeared to have been leveled by blasts. Other bunkers were damaged and some were untouched.

On October 10, 2004, Dr. Mohammed J. Abbas of the Iraqi Ministry of Science and Technology wrote to the IAEA to say that the Qa'qaa stockpile had been lost after April 9, 2003, because of the "theft and looting of the governmental installations due to lack of security." Nearly 340 tonnes of HDX and RDX explosives, an amount equivalent to 40 ten-ton truckloads, was said to be missing.

The news led to an immediate controversy in the 2004 U.S. presidential election. Presidential challenger John Kerry has accused President George W. Bush of presiding over an inexcusable failure to prevent the loss of the explosives, while President Bush has criticized Senator Kerry for "jump[ing] to conclusions without knowing the facts."

On October 28, 2004, the DoD released imagery dated March 17, 2003, showing two trucks parked outside one of the 56 bunkers at Al Qa Qaa. However, the bunker nearest where the trucks were parked are not any of the nine bunkers identified by the IAEA as containing the missing explosive stockpiles.

On the same day, the London "Financial Times" reported that the French and Russians may have been involved in the removal of the explosives from Al Qa'qaa before the war began, quoting Deputy Undersecretary for Defense John A. Shaw, who said "various Russian units on the eve of hostilities [helped] to orchestrate the collection of munitions and assure their transport out of Iraq via Syria". He also told "The Washington Times" "the organized effort was done in advance of the conflict". "The Washington Times" also reported that defense officials believed the Russians could also explain what happened to Iraq's weapons of mass destruction programs. The Russian Government has denounced this theory as "nonsense", saying that there were no Russian military in the country at the time. Shaw's theory has attracted little public support from elsewhere in the administration.

On October 29, 2004, "The New York Times" reported the existence of a videotape made by a KSTP-TV St. Paul, Minnesota television crew embedded with U.S. 101st Airborne Division troops on April 18, 2003, nine days after Hussein's fall. The television crew accompanying US troops recorded the sealed explosives containers at the site, displaying the ammunition cache of explosives and other weapons supplies. Commentators have pointed out that the complex would have been under intensive surveillance during the war as a suspected centre of WMD production. They point out that an operation involving removing 40 truckloads of materials should have been extremely visible and would probably have been attacked, had it been spotted. Some said that the materials being moved might just as easily have been WMDs being moved to the battlefront. However, there is no indication that any such transport operation was spotted by US forces. The tape displaying the sealed explosives containers, as they were being found by the 101st Airborne Division troops, was re-broadcast by ABC on October 27, and by MSNBC on October 28, 2004. The explosives, classified as "dual use" materials, had been sealed by the IAEA, and reported 18 months earlier.

The administration subsequently stated that it was a "mystery" when the explosives disappeared and that the President did not want to comment on the matter until the facts were known. The Bush administration asserted that an investigation had begun into how, where, and when the explosives went missing; no such investigation has been reported on since the 2004 election.

In May 2005, Iraqi official Sami al-Araji reported on the Iraqi government's investigation into the theft, indicating that the looters "came in with the cranes and the lorries, and they depleted the whole sites. They knew what they were doing; they knew what they want. This was sophisticated looting." ("The New York Times", March 13, 2005).



Willow Run

Willow Run, also known as Air Force Plant 31, was a manufacturing complex in Michigan, United States, located between Ypsilanti Township and Belleville, built by the Ford Motor Company to manufacture aircraft, especially the Consolidated B-24 Liberator heavy bomber. Construction of the Willow Run Bomber Plant began in 1940 and was completed in 1942.

The plant began production in summer 1941; the dedication plaque is dated June 16. The plant initially built components. The aircraft manufacturer Douglas Aircraft, and the B-24's designer, Consolidated Aircraft, assembled the finished airplane. Remote assembly proved problematic, however, and by October 1941 Ford received permission to produce complete Liberators. Willow Run's Liberator assembly line ran until May 1945, building almost half of all the Liberators produced.

Willow Run Airport was built as part of the bomber plant. The airfield passed into civilian hands after the war and is now controlled by Wayne County Airport Authority. Part of the airport complex operated at various times as a research facility affiliated with the University of Michigan, and as a secondary United States Air Force Installation. Willow Run Airport has remained active as a cargo and general aviation airfield. Since 1992, it has been home to the Yankee Air Museum.

Willow Run takes its name from a small tributary of the Huron River that meandered through pastureland fields and woodland along the Wayne–Washtenaw county line until the late 1930s. By the mid-1920s, a local family operating as Quirk Farms had bought the land in Van Buren Township that became the airport. Quirk Farms was purchased by automobile pioneer Henry Ford in 1931. Ford, a keen exponent of the virtues of country living, used it as farmland for a "social engineering" experiment that brought inner-city boys to the Willow Run Camp to learn about farming, nature, and the rural way of life.

The residents of the Willow Run Camp planted, tended, and harvested field crops and collected maple syrup, selling their products at the farm market on the property. In the process, the boys were to learn self-discipline and the values of hard work, and benefit from the fresh air of the country.

Camp Willow Run was for boys age 17–19, mostly sons of dead or disabled WWI vets and those helping to support their families. According to the Benson Ford Research Center, the camp offered:

Henry and Clara Bryant Ford dedicated a series of churches, the chapels of Martha and Mary as a perpetual tribute to their mothers, Mary Ford and Martha Bryant. The Fords built seven of these: The first at Greenfield Village, Michigan, was completed in 1929. The others, completed in the 1930s, were located in Dearborn, Michigan (site of the Fords' Fair Lane estate); Sudbury, Massachusetts; two in Richmond Hill, Georgia (the Fords' winter home); Macon, Michigan; and Willow Run.

The Willow Run Chapel was the one originally built for Camp Willow Run, and became the place of worship for the Belleville Presbyterian Church in 1979 after a series of handoffs. After the war, Ford sold the chapel to Kaiser-Frazer, who in turn sold it to General Motors as part of the purchase of the Willow Run bomber plant. GM used the building to store files until an undetermined time, where it was sold to the Cherry Hill Baptist Church. When Cherry Hill outgrew the little chapel and decided to build a new church, it sold the chapel to the Belleville Presbyterian Church for one dollar in July 1978.

The Willow Run chapel of Martha and Mary now stands a few miles from where it was originally constructed, on property that used to be owned by Henry Ford's Quirk Farms. Of the seven chapels, this is the only one currently in use as a regular place of worship. It still has the original pews and other furnishings; the only other set in active use belongs to the Greenfield Village chapel.

Like virtually all of the United States' industrial concerns, Ford Motor Company, by this time under the direction of Henry Ford's only son Edsel, directed its manufacturing output during World War II to Allied war production.

In early 1941 the Federal government established the Liberator Production Pool Program to meet the projected demand for the B-24, and the Ford company, joined the program shortly thereafter. Ford Motor would not only build the bombers, it would supply the airfield as well; the farm at Willow Run was an ideal location for the airfield's runways, being under the personal ownership of Henry Ford (thus solving any land acquisition problem) and sited between the main roads and rail lines connecting Detroit with Ann Arbor and points to the west. Easements were acquired from landowners across the county line in Ypsilanti Township where the Liberator plant (and eventually the airport terminal) would be built.

Although officially retired, Henry Ford still had a say in the company's affairs and refused government financing for Willow Run, preferring to have his company build the factory and sell it to the government, which would lease it back to the company for the duration of the war. Ford Motor was to have first option on the plant after war production ended, an option it ultimately chose not to exercise, although a rumor in Drew Pearson's syndicated column had Ford planning a postwar use as a tractor factory, but that never came to pass. Ford would eventually sell its land to the Reconstruction Finance Corporation's Defense Plant Corporation in July 1944, shortly after the Ford farms were transferred to the company's ownership.

Architect Albert Kahn designed the main structure of the Willow Run bomber plant, which had of factory space, and an aircraft assembly line over a mile (1600 m) long. It was thought to be the largest factory under one roof anywhere in the world. The Willow Run plant featured four large turntables two-thirds of the way along the assembly lines, allowing the B-24 production lines to make a 90° turn before continuing to final assembly. According to legend, this arrangement allowed the company to pay taxes on the entire plant (and its equipment) to Washtenaw County, and avoid the higher taxes of Wayne County where the airfield is located; overhead views suggest that avoiding encroachment on the airfield's taxiways was also a motivation.

Even with people driving 100 miles or renting every spare room between Ann Arbor and Grosse Pointe, the sheer size of Willow Run led inevitably to a housing shortage. Because of the urgent need for shelter, the Federal Public Housing Administration took action and built temporary housing.

The resulting housing complexes were built in several different groups. Willow Run Lodge was a series of dormitories for single people and was built on the land north of Michigan Avenue and south of Geddes Road. This covered 90 parcels of land totaling .

In February 1943, the first dormitory (Willow Run Lodge) opened, consisted of fifteen buildings containing 1,900 rooms, some single- and others double-occupancy, with room for 3,000 people. Between June and December 1943, construction was completed on temporary "flat-top" buildings providing homes for 2,500 families. This section was known as Willow Run Village. The flat-tops contained four, six, or eight apartments with one, two, or three bedrooms.

Also in the Willow Run Village were the West Court buildings, with peaked rooftops and space for couples or three adults. Of the 1,000 apartments in West Court, some had no bedrooms and were called "zero bedroom" apartments, and the rest had one bedroom. The first of these apartments were ready for occupancy in August 1943. Another large dormitory project, containing 1,960 rooms and known as West Lodge, was also ready for tenants at that time.

By the end of 1943 there were six different temporary projects in the vicinity of Willow Run: two dormitory projects, two trailer projects (one renting trailers, and another for privately owned trailers; each with community laundry, shower, and toilet facilities), and two projects with apartments for couples or families, West Court and the Village. Between them, there was a shelter for more than 15,000 people, roughly the number of people living in Ypsilanti at the time.

In addition to the Willow Run Lodge and Village housing projects, another community named Parkridge Homes was also built in 1943 to house African-American Willow Run employees. Efforts to desegregate Willow Run Lodge and Village and build additional integrated housing were rebuffed by the Detroit Housing Commission and the National Housing Agency, so noted African-American architect Hilyard Robinson was contracted to design an 80-unit community. The housing complex remained in use until 2016 as public housing when it was demolished and rebuilt with new modern units. In May 2017, the Michigan State Historic Preservation Office recognized Parkridge Homes with the unveiling three historic markers signifying the importance to Ypsilanti history.

Also constructed at this time was the Parkridge Community Center.

Sociologist and professor Lowell Juilliard Carr and James Edson Stermer of the University of Michigan studied the sociological conditions at Willow Run arising from the wartime surge in the worker population in their book of 1952. They discuss "cultural inadequacy theory", stating that "industrial culture provides no criterion by which either a manufacturer or a government official can determine in advance when a manufacturer should divert his own capital to housing and other community services and when he shall rely on the capital of others for such facilities and services".

Despite intensive design efforts led by Ford production executive Charles E. Sorensen, the opening of the plant still saw some mismanagement and bungling, and quality was uneven for some time. Although the Ford Trimotor had been a success in the 1920s, the company had since shied away from aviation, and initially, Ford was assigned to provide B-24 components with final assembly performed by Consolidated at its Fort Worth, Texas plant, or by Douglas Aircraft at its Tulsa, Oklahoma, plant. However, in October 1941, Ford received permission from Consolidated and the Army to assemble complete Liberators on its own at its new Willow Run facility. Even then it would take nearly a year before finished Liberators left the factory.

According to Max Wallace, Air Corps Chief, General "Hap" Arnold told Charles Lindbergh, then a consultant at the plant, that "combat squadrons greatly preferred the B-17 bomber to the B-24 because 'when we send the 17's out on a mission, most of them return. But when we send the 24's out, most of them don't.'"

A 1943 committee authorized by Congress to examine problems at the plant issued a highly critical report; the Ford Motor Company had created a production line that too closely resembled an automobile assembly line "despite the warning of many experienced aircraftmen."

Although the jumping of an automotive company into aircraft production posed these quality problems, it also brought remarkable production rates. The plant held the distinction of being the world's largest enclosed "room." The first Ford-built Liberator rolled off the Willow Run line in September 1942; the first series of Willow Run Liberators was the B-24E model
The Willow Run Plant had many initial startup problems, due primarily to the fact that Ford employees were used to automobile mass production and found it difficult to adapt these techniques to aircraft production. The plant at Willow Run was also beset with labor difficulties, high absentee rates, and rapid employee turnover. The factory was nearly an hour's drive from Detroit, and the imposition of wartime gasoline and tire rationing had made the daily commute difficult. In only one month, Ford had hired 2,900 workers but had lost 3,100.

Also, Henry Ford was cantankerous and rigid in his ways. He was violently anti-union and there were serious labor difficulties, including a massive strike. In addition, Henry Ford refused on principle to hire women. However, he finally relented and did employ "Rosie the Riveters" on his assembly lines, probably more because so many of his potential male workers had been drafted into the military than due to any sudden change of principle on his part.

By autumn 1943, the top leadership role at Willow Run had passed from Charles Sorensen to Mead L. Bricker.

At the request of the government, Ford began to decentralize operations and many parts were assembled at other Ford plants as well as by the company's sub-contractors, with the Willow Run plant concentrating on final aircraft assembly. The bugs were eventually worked out of the manufacturing processes, and by 1944, Ford was rolling a Liberator off the Willow Run production line every 63 minutes, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.

At its peak monthly production (August 1944), Willow Run produced 428 B-24s with highest production listed as 100 completed bombers flying away from Willow Run between April 24 and April 26, 1944. By 1945, Ford produced 70% of the B-24s in two 9-hour shifts. Ford built 6,972 of the 18,482 total B-24s and produced kits for 1,893 more to be assembled by the other manufacturers. The B-24 holds the distinction of being the most produced heavy bomber in history.

After their manufacture, the next step in the process was the delivery of the aircraft to the operational squadrons. This was done at Willow Run by 1st Concentration Command (1st CC). The 1st CC was responsible for completing the organization and equipment of tactical and combat bombardment squadrons prior to their deployment to the overseas combat theaters. It also provided a final inspection of the aircraft and made any appropriate final changes; i.e., install long-range fuel tanks, remove unnecessary equipment, and give it a final flight safety test.

While the planes were being serviced and made ready for overseas movement, personnel for these planes were also being processed. Pilots, co-pilots, navigators and crew chiefs were assigned as a crew for each aircraft, sleeping on 1,300 cots as they waited for the B-24s to roll off the assembly line. Paperwork was handled, necessary specific B-24 life support equipment was issued and some technical training for supporting the aircraft accomplished.

Once production began, it became difficult to introduce changes dictated by field experience in the various overseas theaters onto the production line in a timely fashion. Consequently, newly constructed Liberators needed modifications for the specific geographic areas they were to be flown in combat. For this reason, a series of Air Technical Service Command modification centers were established for the incorporation of these required theater changes into new Liberators following their manufacture and assignments. There were seven known modification centers: the Birmingham Air Depot in Alabama; Consolidated's Fort Worth plant, the Oklahoma City Air Materiel Center at Tinker Field, the Tucson Modification Center at Tucson International Airport; the Northwest Airlines Depot in Minneapolis; the, Martin-Omaha manufacturing plant, and the Hawaiian Air Depot at Hickam Field. The Birmingham Air Depot's primary mission was modifying Liberators from Willow Run.

The B-24E was the first variant for primary manufacture at Willow Run. Ford built 490 complete planes and supplied B-24E components as kits that could be trucked for final assembly at Consolidated in Fort Worth and Douglas in Tulsa, 144 and 167 kits respectively.
B-24Es built and fully assembled at Ford were designated B-24E-FO; those assembled at Tulsa and Fort Worth out of parts supplied by Ford were designated B-24E-DT and B-24E-CF respectively. Because of production delays the B-24Es produced at Willow Run were, generally, obsolete by the time they came off the production lines, and most were relegated to training roles in the United States and hence few ever saw combat.

The B-24H was the first variant produced by Ford at Willow Run in large numbers that went into combat. The B-24H differed from earlier B-24s by having a nose turret to increase defensive firepower. Due to the many structural changes required the first B-24Hs were delivered slightly behind schedule, with the first machines rolling off the production lines at Ford in late June 1943. Production for the B-24H at Willow Run was 1,780 aircraft.

Upon the introduction of the B-24J, all three of the Liberator manufacturing plants converted to the production of this version. The B-24J incorporated a hydraulically driven tail turret and other defensive armament modifications in the nose of the aircraft. The bomber plant produced its first B-24J in April 1944; 1587 were built at Willow Run.

During June 1944, the Army determined that the San Diego and Willow Run plants would be capable of meeting all future requirements for Liberator production. The Boeing B-29 Superfortress was taking over the long-range bombing role in the Pacific Theater and no new B-24 units were programmed for deployment in the other combat theaters of Europe, the Mediterranean or in the China Burma India.

The B-24L was the first product of the new, downsized Liberator production pool. It was an attempt to reverse the trend toward ever-increasing weight of the Liberator as more and more armament, equipment, and armor had been added, with no corresponding increase in engine power. With the weight reduction measures and more powerful engines, it also had a much longer range than earlier models. 1,250 B-24L aircraft were built at Willow Run.

The B-24M was the last large-scale production variant of the Liberator. Apart from a new tail turret, the B-24M differed little from the B-24L. The first B-24Ms were delivered in October 1944, and by the end of its production in 1945, Willow Run had built 1677; a further 124 B-24Ms to be built by Ford were cancelled before delivery.

Ford had switched over to the single-tailed B-24N in May 1945, but the end of the war in Europe in the same month brought a rapid end to Liberator production; the contract with Ford was officially terminated on 31 May 1945. Orders for 5,168 unbuilt B-24N bombers were cancelled and only seven 'pre-production' YB-24N were built by Ford. Liberator production at Willow Run ended June 1945.

Although Ford had an option to purchase the plant once it was no longer needed for war production, the company declined to exercise it, and ended its association with Willow Run.

After Ford declined to purchase the plant, it was sold to the Kaiser-Frazer Corporation, a partnership of construction and shipbuilding magnate Henry J. Kaiser and Graham-Paige executive Joseph W. Frazer. The plant produced both Kaiser and Frazer automobile models, including the compact Henry J, which with minor differences was also sold through Sears-Roebuck as the Allstate.

Willow Run produced 739,000 cars as part of Kaiser-Frazer and Kaiser Motors, from 1947 through 1953, when after years of losses, the company (now called Kaiser Motors after Frazer's exit from the partnership) purchased Willys-Overland and began moving its production at Willow Run to the Willys plant in Toledo, Ohio.

As the US Air Force struggled to expand its airlift capacity during the Korean War, Kaiser-Frazer built C-119 Flying Boxcar cargo planes at Willow Run under license from Fairchild Aircraft, producing an estimated 88 C-119s between 1951 and 1953. Kaiser bought half of the Chase Aircraft company in order to access the military contract for the C-123 Provider transport aircraft. Senate hearings into the C-119 production by Kaiser found that the Kaiser aircraft were costing far more than Fairchild's. C-123 contracts were cancelled by the USAAF and the only airframes built were scrapped

Later in 1953, after a fire on August 12 destroyed General Motors' Detroit Transmission factory in Livonia, Michigan, the Willow Run complex was first leased and then later sold to GM. The salvaged Hydramatic transmission tooling and machinery relocated to Willow Run and were back in production just nine weeks after the fire.
Over the years, GM expanded the bomber plant by roughly half, into a nearly GM Powertrain factory and engineering center. A parcel of land to the south of Powertrain was set aside for assembly operations that began in 1959, with a Fisher Body plant that built bodies for the Chevrolet models assembled there, including the Corvair and Nova. In 1968, General Motors began reorganizing its body and assembly operations into the GM Assembly Division (GMAD). GMAD required 16 years to completely absorb Fisher Body's operations, and Fisher would manufacture bodies at Willow Run Assembly until the 1970s; vehicles would roll off the line there until 1992.

In addition to making automatic transmissions, Willow Run Transmission also produced the M16A1 rifle and the M39A1 20mm autocannon for the US military during the Vietnam War.

By the time General Motors entered bankruptcy in 2009, manufacturing and assembly operations at Willow Run had dwindled to almost nothing; the GM Powertrain plant closed in December 2010 and the complex passed into the control of the RACER Trust, which is charged with cleaning up, positioning for redevelopment and ultimately, selling properties of the former General Motors.

On the other side of the airport from the assembly plant were a group of World War II hangars, which were sold to the University of Michigan in 1946. The university operated the Michigan Aeronautical Research Center (MARC), later known as Willow Run Laboratories (WRL), from 1946 to 1972. MARC and WRL produced innovations, including the first ruby laser and operation of the ruby maser, as well as early research into antiballistic missile defense and advanced remote sensing.

In 1972, the university spun off WRL into the Environmental Research Institute of Michigan, which eventually left Willow Run for offices in Ann Arbor.
Ford built the factory and sold it to the government, then leased it back for the duration of the war. When Ford declined to purchase the facility after the war, Kaiser-Frazer Corporation gained ownership, and in 1953 Ford's rival General Motors took ownership and operated the factory as Willow Run Transmission until 2010. Willow Run Assembly operated from 1959 to 1992 on a parcel to the south of the airport. The Fisher Body division also operated at Willow Run Assembly until its operations were assumed by the GM Assembly Division in the 1970s. In 2009, General Motors announced that it would shut down all operations at the GM Powertrain plant and engineering center in the coming year.

Since the 2010 closure of Willow Run Transmission, the factory complex has been managed by the RACER Trust, which controls the properties of the former General Motors. In 2011, A.E. Equities Group Holdings offered to buy the former Powertrain plant from the RACER Trust. In April 2013, a redevelopment manager for the RACER Trust said unused portions of the powertrain plant would likely be razed as a step toward redeveloping the property. Indeed, the majority of the plant was demolished in late 2013 and early 2014. In 2014, the Yankee Air Museum moved into the bomber factory.

In November 2016, RACER Trust sold Willow Run to an entity created by the State of Michigan, which leases the property to the American Center for Mobility (AMC).

The Willow Run complex has given its name to a community on the east side of Ypsilanti, defined roughly by the boundaries of the Willow Run Community School District.
The airfield, owned by the Wayne County Airport Authority since 2004, continues to operate as the Willow Run Airport and is primarily used for cargo and general aviation flights. The Yankee Air Museum resides on the airport grounds, occupying as of April 2013 a hangar and other properties.

For a period of time before the eventual demolition of Willow Run Assembly, portions were used as a warehouse, about a quarter of which was leased by GM as a facility for parts distribution.

In April 2013, the "Detroit Free Press" confirmed that the facility's current owner, RACER Trust, was negotiating with the Yankee Air Museum to preserve a small portion of the original bomber plant as a new home for the museum. Yankee was originally granted until August 2013 (deadline was later extended) to raise the funds needed to purchase and separate a portion of the approximately 5,000,000 sq. ft. building, which later became the GM Powertrain facility. The museum would consolidate operations scattered on various parcels at Willow Run, and the Trust expects to clear the remainder of the plant for redevelopment. The portion of the original bomber plant that Yankee seeks to preserve is less than 5% of the massive facility, comprises the end of the former B-24 assembly line at the far eastern edge of the property, and contains the two iconic bay doors from which the finished Consolidated B-24 Liberator bombers exited the plant during World War II.

The campaign to save a portion of Willow Run for the Yankee Air Museum was called SaveTheBomberPlant.org, and is centered on a fundraising website by the same name. The campaign attracted national, and even international, attention from media outlets that include many major news dailies in the US as well as National Public Radio, "The History Channel" magazine, National Geographic TV, "The Guardian" and the "Daily Mail", the latter two of the UK.

Building owner RACER Trust extended the original fundraising deadline (August 1, 2013) a total of three times since the Yankee Air Museum launched its SaveTheBomberPlant.org campaign. The first two extensions were to October 1, 2013, and then to November 1, 2013. On October 26, 2013, RACER Trust and the Yankee Air Museum again reached a third, and final, deadline extension agreement that gave Yankee until May 1, 2014, to raise the $8 million estimated as necessary to secure, enclose and preserve a portion of the original Willow Run plant for the Yankee Air Museum. The majority of the $8 million goal reflects separation costs to make the preserved portion of the plant viable as a standalone structure. RACER Trust has been supportive of the campaign, even reconfiguring engineering and demolition plans to save cost for the museum.

By the May 1, 2014, deadline, the Yankee Air Museum had raised over $7 million of its original $8 million fundraising goal, which was enough to enable the building's owners to move forward with signing a Purchase Agreement with Yankee, with the actual purchase expected to be finalized in late summer or fall of 2014.

Meanwhile, the remaining portion of the Willow Run property, which includes over 95% of the historic original bomber plant building, was optioned to Walbridge, Inc., for redevelopment as a connected car research and test facility. The option to Walbridge has since lapsed and the property remains available for purchase and redevelopment.

Michigan Live reporter Amy Biolchini toured the empty Willow Run facility in early 2013, observing:

Part of the tour led them to a hidden room within the facility:

Demolition of the majority of the Willow Run facility began in December 2013. The Yankee Air Museum was able to gain control of approximately 144,900 square feet of the plant, and plans to develop a permanent home for the museum. By mid-2014, the majority of the facility had been demolished and cleared.




Paatos

Paatos is a Swedish rock band that was formed in 1999 by Reine Fiske and Stefan Dimle (both previous members of Landberk), Petronella Nettermalm, Ricard Nettermalm and Johan Wallen. Paatos is usually classified as progressive rock, albeit influenced by bands such as Portishead and Massive Attack.

Paatos was formed in 1999 by Reine Fiske and Stefan Dimle of the Swedish band Landberk, and Ricard "Huxflux" Nettermalm and Johan Wallen of the band Agg. The band appeared at a folk rock festival with Turid Lindqvist and later recruited vocalist Petronella Nettermalm, Ricard's wife. 

The band recorded their first single "Perception/Tea" in early 2001, and quickly put together material for their full-length debut, "Timeloss", released in 2002. The same year, the band composed and performed music for the soundtrack of the film "Nosferatu".

Reine Fiske was replaced by Peter Nylander on guitar in 2003. During this time, the band got noticed by British band Porcupine Tree and played a couple of concerts in Sweden as their opening act. Steven Wilson went on to mix Paatos' next studio album, "Kallocain", released in the summer of 2004.

After the release of third album "Silence of Another Kind", the band again provided the support for Porcupine Tree on the successful European "Deadwing" tour of 2006. Recordings of that tour appeared as the live album "Sensors".

During a lengthy break from band activities, it was announced in April 2009 that Stefan Dimle and Johan Wallén had left Paatos. In December of the same year, it was announced that the band has a new member, bassist Ulf "Rockis" Ivarsson.

The band released "Breathing" in February 2011. Later that year they went out on a European tour supporting Riverside.

"V", released in 2012, marked the final studio sessions of the band.



Interstate 265

Interstate 265 (I-265) is a Interstate Highway partially encircling the Louisville metropolitan area. Starting from I-65 in the southern part of Louisville, it runs through Jefferson County, Kentucky, crosses the Ohio River on the Lewis and Clark Bridge into Indiana, meets I-65 for a second time, and then proceeds westbound to terminate at the I-64 interchange.

The entire Kentucky stretch of the road is cosigned with Kentucky Route 841 (KY 841). An additional stretch of freeway between U.S. Route 31W (US 31W)/US 60/KY 1934 and I-65 in the southern Louisville is solely designated as KY 841. The portion from I-71 to the Ohio River, while designated as I-265 by AASHTO, is only signed as KY 841. The highway is named the Gene Snyder Freeway (originally named the Jefferson Freeway), after the former congressman from Kentucky, and usually called "the Snyder" by locals.

Likewise on the Indiana side, the stretch from I-65 to the bridge, while designated as I-265 is signed as State Route 265 (SR 265). The highway is known as the Lee H. Hamilton Freeway after the former congressman from Indiana.

I-265 signage for the section from I-71 to the Indiana I-65 interchange has not yet been placed.

I-265 in the US state of Indiana presently runs from I-64 at the western edge of New Albany to the Lewis and Clark Bridge near Utica. Beginning at its western terminus, the freeway is concurrent with State Road 62 (SR 62) until exit 10.

I-265 in the US state of Kentucky presently runs from the Lewis and Clark Bridge in northern Louisville to an interchange with I-65 in southern Louisville. The entire freeway is concurrent with KY 841.

The Gene Snyder Freeway, in which KY 841 and I-265 overlap for between I-65 and the Indiana state line, has seen an increase in serious accidents. The primary factors stem from its low-level grass median which offers little to no protection for crossover incidents. Driver inattention and increased traffic and congestion has led to a decline in the overall level-of-service. In 2006, cable barriers were installed in the median for between I-71 and I-64, with further installation possible in the near future. A section of the freeway spanning from exit 30 to exit 32 is currently signed in kilometers, which is unusual in the United States.

Kentucky Route 841 (KY 841) is a state highway in the suburbs of Louisville. The route is a partial beltway, encircling Louisville on its southern and eastern sides. Compass direction changes to the north and south of exit 23, the Taylorsville Road interchange. The western terminus of the route is at US 31W and US 60 in the southwest Louisville community of Valley Station, where KY 841 continues to the west as KY 1934 while the northern terminus is at the Lewis and Clark Bridge north of the north of the East End Tunnel. Even though the section between its terminus at KY 1934 and I-65 was built to Interstate Highway standards, it is designated only as KY 841 due to American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) numbering rules. The exit numbering for the Kentucky portion of beltway currently starts at the western terminus of KY 841. The KY 841 designation mostly concurrent with I-265 in Kentucky has remained.

Originally signed just as KY 841, the Jefferson Freeway was initially constructed in the 1960s in two sections—one between KY 155 (Taylorsville Road) and US 60 (Shelbyville Road) and a second section between KY 1447 (Westport Road) and US 42—as short connectors to the eastern suburban expansion as well as a new Ford plant. By 1970, I-264 had become very congested and was in need of reconstruction and other improvements. I-265 was proposed as an outer beltway to provide pass-through motorists relief from the congestion of I-264. Construction started in the early 1980s and was finished later that decade and signed in 1987.

State Road 265 (SR 265) was what the segment of the highway between I-65 and SR 60 at exit 10 in Indiana was originally known as. It was legally rechristened in June 2019 to I-265 after a new section of highway that includes the Lewis and Clark Bridge (known as the East End Bridge during planning and construction) fully opened to traffic on December 18, 2016, however the SR 265 signs along the road and the exits still remain and have not been updated to I-265 signage, while the Kentucky portion of the new roadway likewise has not had I-265 signage added as of yet. In early 2023, Indiana DOT announced plans to rename as well as renumber the exits of the freeway beginning in the fall of 2023 and with completion expected over the .

Negotiations between Indiana and Kentucky to build the bridge had taken place over the preceding 30 years.

In late 2005, members of the Louisville Metro Council proposed a committee to begin planning a western bridge over the Ohio River to link the southwestern end of the highway in Kentucky to Indiana.

On December 18, 2016, SR 265 was extended east of SR 62, which crosses the Ohio River connecting with KY 841, and north of US 42 in Kentucky as part of the Ohio River Bridges Project, creating a bypass around the eastern side of the city of Louisville.

The I-265/I-64 interchange, currently a cloverleaf with no collector–distributor lanes, is being reconstructed as part of the I-Move Kentucky Project with an estimated completion in the autumn of 2023.


Henry Rutgers

Henry Rutgers (October 7, 1745 – February 17, 1830) was a United States Revolutionary War hero and philanthropist from New York City. Rutgers University was named after him, and he donated a bond which placed the college on sound financial footing. He also gave a bell that is still in use.

Rutgers was born in New York City, in the Province of New York which was then a part of British America. He was the son of New Netherland colonists Hendrick Rutgers and Catharine (née DePeyster) Rutgers.

His maternal grandparents were Johannes de Peyster, the 23rd Mayor of New York City, and Anna (née Bancker) de Peyster, the sister of Evert Bancker, the 3rd and 12th Mayor of Albany, New York. His paternal grandparents were Harmanus Rutgers and Rachel (née Meyers) Rutgers, herself a granddaughter of Claes Martenszen van Rosenvelt, the first Roosevelt to arrive in America. Through his father's sister, he was a first cousin of Samuel Provoost, the first Bishop of the Episcopal Diocese of New York. He was a third cousin twice removed of both U.S. Presidents Theodore Roosevelt and Franklin Delano Roosevelt.

In 1728 Harmanus Rutgers, Jr. purchased a farm near present-day East Broadway and Oliver Streets. Rutgers was a brewer and had a barn on Catherine Street to store the barley he grew. A lane that would later become Cherry Street ran along the southern border. His son Hendrick inherited the property and in 1754 built a new farmhouse farther to the north and nearer the East River. The Rutgers extended their holdings, purchasing water lots. Fill was added to the water on either side at the ends of the larger streets that ran perpendicular to the shore, forming slips or inlets where small boats could dock.

Rutgers graduated from King's College (now Columbia University) in 1766. Following his graduation, he promptly became an advocate for independence of the American colonies from Great Britain. He went on to serve as a captain of American forces at the Battle of White Plains, and later as a colonel for the New York militia. During the British occupation of New York, Rutgers withdrew to Albany. During his absence, the British used the family home as an army hospital.

Rutgers continued to play a role in the defense of the young nation after the Revolution, presiding over a meeting held June 24, 1812, to organize American forces in New York in anticipation of a British attack in the ensuing War of 1812.

In 1783, Rutgers was elected to the New York State Assembly, where he served in the 7th New York State Legislature. He also served on the New York Board of Education Regents from 1802 to 1826. He was a presidential elector, chosen by the legislature, in 1808, 1816, and 1820.

Rutgers supported the American Colonization Society, arguing against abolitionists that free people of color should be removed from the United States rather than allowed to grow as a population. He was himself a slaveowner, like many of his relatives.

Rutgers continued to expand his holdings, extending his water lots further out into the river. In his later years, Rutgers, a bachelor, devoted much of his fortune to philanthropy. As a landowner with considerable holdings on the island of Manhattan (especially in the vicinity of Chatham Square), he donated land for the use of schools, churches, and charities in the area. Both Henry Street and Rutgers Street in lower Manhattan are named for him, as well as the Rutgers Presbyterian Church (formerly the Collegiate Presbyterian Church) which was also named for Rutgers who donated the parcel of land at the corner of Henry Street and Rutgers Street on which the original church was built in 1798.

Rutgers' most lasting legacy, however, is due to his donations to Queen's College in New Brunswick, New Jersey, which at the time was suffering considerable financial difficulties and temporarily closed. The college had been founded as a seminary for the Reformed Church in America and appealed to Rutgers, a devout member of the church with a reputation for philanthropy, for aid. Rutgers donated a bond valued at $5000 to reopen the faltering school, and subsequently donated a bronze bell that was hung in the cupola of the Old Queens building which housed the college. In gratitude, and hoping the college would be remembered in Rutgers' will, the trustees renamed it Rutgers College on December 5, 1825. (Rutgers left nothing to the college upon his death.) The institution later became Rutgers University, then Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey.

Rutgers died in 1830 in New York City, at the age of 84. His body was initially buried in the Reformed Church on Nassau Street (the same church in which he was baptized) in Manhattan. However, as cemeteries in Manhattan were redeveloped during the mid-1800s, Rutgers' body was re-interred several times (first moved in 1858 to the Middle Church in Lafayette Place, on the corner of Nassau Street and Cedar Street in Manhattan, and then, in 1865, interred in Green-Wood Cemetery). For many years, no one remembered where his body had been finally buried, although it was long believed that he was buried in a Dutch Reformed churchyard in Belleville, New Jersey. One road running alongside this New Jersey graveyard is now called Rutgers Street (signed as, but not technically part of, Route 7).

Misplaced by history for over 140 years, Rutgers' final grave was rediscovered in October 2007 by Civil War research volunteers sifting through burial records of the historical Green-Wood Cemetery. In 1865, Rutgers' body had been finally buried in an unmarked grave (he is interred in Lot 10776, Sec. 28, in an underground vault) within the Dutch Reformed Church's plot at Green-Wood Cemetery in Brooklyn.

The Green-Wood Historic Fund and members of the Rutgers Community honored Rutgers' memory on Flag Day, June 14, 2008, by unveiling a bronze marker at his gravesite. Elsewhere in Green-Wood Cemetery lies the grave of Mabel Smith Douglass, founder and first dean of the New Jersey College for Women (renamed Douglass College in her honor). Douglass College is part of Rutgers University's New Brunswick campus.


Denniston, New Zealand

Denniston is a small settlement, 15 kilometres (9 miles) east of Westport, on the West Coast of the South Island of New Zealand. It is situated on the Denniston Plateau, above sea level in the Papahaua Ranges.

It is named for R. B. Denniston, manager of the first major mine to open on the West Coast in the 1870s. During the first few decades of the 20th century, up to 1400 people lived in the townships on the Denniston Plateau to service the large coal mines there. Coal was transported in railway wagons from the plateau via the Denniston Incline to Conns Creek, where steam locomotives of New Zealand Railways took coal trains to the port of Westport.

The Denniston Incline closed in 1967. The plateau now has a population of fewer than 10 people, and virtually all the buildings and structures are gone, although many historical relics remain – scattered throughout the plateau and incline area amongst the scrub vegetation.

The open-cast Escarpment Mine Project was established by Bathurst Resources in an area of 200 hectares of conservation land on the southern Denniston Plateau. Mining commenced in 2014, but was suspended in 2016 in response to the closure in June of the Holcim cement works at Cape Foulwind and a decline in global prices for hard coking coal.

The townships of the Denniston Plateau, and the Denniston Incline itself, existed solely to extract coal from the plateau. Living conditions at Denniston were harsh; the rocky, windswept plateau is often immersed in cloud, receives a high annual rainfall, and very low temperatures are common. Once good road access to the plateau was established and the demand for coal declined, the townships shrank – and disappeared altogether once the incline and mines closed. A former schoolhouse, now used as a museum, is one of the few buildings remaining. Very few people now live on the plateau but the area is of increasing interest to tourists interested in its history. Future opencast mining is a possibility.

The setting and history of Denniston is similar to that of Millerton, located on a similar plateau to the north.

The Westport Colliery Company, predecessor to the Westport Coal Company, was formed in 1878 to mine the high quality coal on the Mount Rochfort Plateau, commonly known as the Denniston Plateau. To access the coal, the company extended the nearby Wellington Coal Company's branch railway on the south bank of the Waimangaroa River by to Conns Creek, and constructed the Denniston Incline, and the roperoads from the mines to the top of the incline. To raise additional capital to develop the mines further, the Westport Colliery Company was reformed into the Westport Coal Company in 1881. The company also operated mines in other places on the West Coast, including Millerton, and by 1905, the company was by far the largest coal producer in New Zealand. The Westport Coal Company's mines and the Denniston Incline were taken over by the New Zealand State Mines Department in 1948.

The Denniston Incline began operation in April 1880. It was a self-acting ropeway that used gravity to lower 12.5 ton gross laden weight New Zealand Railways' coal wagons one at a time from Brakehead, at Denniston, at the top to Conns Creek below. Each descending wagon hauled an empty one up the incline by means of wire ropes, each wagon attached to its own rope and brake drum. The two drums were mounted beside each other on a common shaft, and the wire rope wound in opposite directions on each drum. So while one drum was letting the rope out and lowering a full wagon down the incline, the other drum was winding its rope in and pulling an empty wagon up the incline. Hydraulic pistons slowed the rotation of the winding drums to control the speed of the wagons.

The Denniston Incline was actually two inclines. The higher of the two began at Brakehead, and descended steeply to the appropriately named Middle Brake. Here wagons were disconnected from the first incline's rope, and placed on the rope of the second incline for a more gentle descent to Conns Creek, where the accumulated wagons would then be marshalled into trains before being taken to Westport. The drum from Middle Brake is now on display at Westport's Coaltown Museum.

The upper part of each incline had essentially two sets of railway tracks side by side (three rails, with the inner rail shared by both tracks), while below the midsection of each incline (where wagons passed each other) the two sets of track were 'interwoven'. Each side of the inclines alternately had wagons ascending and descending – otherwise the ropes would get crossed over. (An image of a full wagon descending the upper part of one incline can be seen below in External links.) The southern side of the inclines was called the 'Company Side', as that was the side the company offices were located on; the northern side of the inclines was called the 'Donkey Side'.

The system did not always function as intended and collisions, derailments and runaways were not unknown. The remains of several wrecked wagons still lie beside, or even some distance from, the incline formation.

The Denniston incline fell a total of in 1,670 metres (83 chains or 1.04 miles), with some sections having gradients steeper than 1 in 1.3. The short-lived Koranui Incline on the other side of the valley was higher, with a total fall of , and over twice as long as the Denniston Incline, with a length of .

Wagons could be delivered from Denniston to Conns Creek at a rate of 12 to 18 wagons per hour. The track gauge was the standard NZR track gauge of . The railway wagons used on the incline were mainly the common "Q" class hopper wagons, the hoppers of which could be detached from their wagon bodies and lifted by wharf crane over the hold of a ship, and the bottom discharge doors of the wagons then opened manually to discharge coal into the ships' holds. (Two images of a crane lifting a hopper out of a wagon and over a ship's hold can be seen below in External links.)

The mines on the Denniston Plateau included the Banbury, Ironbridge, Coalbrookdale, Whareatea, and Sullivan mines. The first mine was the Banbury, which began production in 1880. A double track gauge 560-metre long horse tramway was built from the top of the incline to the Banbury Mine above the Waimangaroa Gorge to carry coal from the mine to the top of the incline. Later, horse-power was replaced by a steam engine-powered moving endless rope to which mine tubs were hooked by chains for their journeys to and from the bins at Brakehead. By 1889, the double track tramway (now called a roperoad) had been extended through and beyond the Banbury Mine, past the Ironbrook Mine and on to the Coalbrookdale Mine—a distance of about . The roperoad system was renewed along a partly new alignment between 1900 and 1904. (An image of one of these roperoads can be seen below in External links.)

In 1952, a monocable aerial ropeway in length was commissioned (with buckets carrying coal suspended from the rope) to carry coal from the new Whareata and Sullivan mines to Brakehead, and the roperoad was abandoned. The Coalbrookdale and Ironbridge mines had reached the end of their economic lives and closed in 1944 and 1945 respectively; Banbury Mine had closed in 1890.

The Westport Coal Company's coal production from the Denniston Plateau increased to an annual peak in 1910, when 464 men working underground produced 348,335 tons of coal. Production then declined. In all, the incline carried an estimated 12.6 million tons of coal during its life. Some mining continued and the Escarpment Mine operated from 1964 to 1982.

There were three main townships on the Denniston Plateau – Denniston, Burnett's Face, and Coalbrookdale. There were no roads connecting the townships, and everyone walked alongside the roperoads to move about. The population of the plateau as a whole peaked in 1911, at just over 1400 inhabitants (the population of Denniston township peaked later, in 1926).

The first settlement, known as "The Camp", was located on a rock ledge above the Waimangaroa River. It was built below the level of the plateau between two escarpments for protection from relentless winds. The first workers developed the Banbury Mine, but many did not stay long owing to the inhospitable conditions. However, by 1883 there were about a hundred residents, a school, and a brass band. The company's offices were above The Camp and Brakehead, alongside the tramway from the mine to the top of the incline.

A bridle track was built between Waimangaroa and Denniston by 1885. Prior to this, the only access for people and goods had been to ride in coal wagons travelling at high speed up or down the incline.

Settlement soon spread up onto the plateau itself, and by 1887, there were three hotels, a postal and telegraph office, four general stores, three butchers and three bakers in Denniston. Living conditions were squalid and visitors complained about the unsanitary and 'smelly' nature of the township. The cottages were utilitarian small wooden buildings with roofs and chimneys of corrugated iron. There was no running water, no baths in houses, and toilets were tin sheds with cans that were emptied by night cart men. Large families were often confined to two-room huts for long periods during bad weather. There were no shrubs, flowers or gardens. Even after 20 years, these poor living conditions still prevailed.

Denniston played a key role in the development of the union movement in New Zealand, and the country's first miner's union was formed at Denniston in 1884. A report to the coal industry in 1919 attributed much of the industrial unrest and dissatisfaction of the Deniston miners to their 'sordid' living conditions.

Denniston had a communal recreation and sports ground, its own sports clubs and Returned Services Association, and churches included Presbyterian, Methodist, Anglican, Roman Catholic, and Salvation Army. There were five lodges (Masonic, Druids, Odd Fellows, Orange and Buffaloes). In the days before social welfare, in an isolated community on low hourly wages, churches, unions, friendly societies and lodges provided important security for their members. Miners had formed their own Medical Association in 1883 (a doctor was contracted to visit Denniston twice a week) and an Accident and Relief Fund Association was formed in 1890. A hospital, which opened in 1910 – paid for by subscriptions, levies and fundraising efforts – was built in a central location to deal with emergencies from mines in all directions. Denniston did not have a cemetery as the ground was too hard; bodies were transported from Denniston to Waimangaroa for burial, initially down the Denniston Incline and later by road.

The peak of population came in 1926, when there were 910 living in the township. During the 1932–35 Depression, and after World War 2, people began to move away from Denniston, with many houses being moved in sections for re-erection at Waimangaroa or Westport. For the remaining workers, the provision of buses enabled them and their families to live in more pleasant conditions down on the coastal plain. The school, last shop, and last hotel (the Red Dog Saloon, owned by Johnny Cotter) closed in the 1960s, and the Post Office closed in 1971. The last lodge, the Buffaloes Lodge, closed in 1996 – though by then it had relocated from Denniston to the former Waimangaroa RSA rooms.

The development of the Ironbridge Mine led to the establishment of the settlement known as Burnett's Face, about 2 kilometres southeast from Denniston. It was initially a cluster of tents, but by 1891 there were wooden cottages, a school, two hotels, a butchery, a bakery, several stores, two halls, and two billiard saloons. Its main road was the constantly running roperoad skipway linking the mine with the bins at the head of the Denniston Incline. By the 1950s, little remained of the settlement.

Another township, Coalbrookdale, stretched for several hundred metres along sides of the roperoad in the lower Coalbrookdale Valley, southwest of Burnett's Face. There were about 21 buildings in Coalbrookdale in 1891, and the population peaked in 1896 when there were 165 people living in the valley. There was a licensed hotel from 1894 to c.1921. The last permanent resident departed in 1956.

The community at Denniston served no other purpose than to support the operations of the coal mines and the incline. Once a usable road was put through from Waimangaroa to the plateau, people started to drift away from the plateau to the warmer climate of Waimangaroa or Westport below.

By the 1960s, demand for coal was falling and the Denniston Incline closed on 16 August 1967. The Conns Creek branch, which connected to the foot of the incline, was cut back to become a long spur siding where the coal carried by truck from the bins at Brakehead was transferred into railway wagons. A few months later, in 1968, the aerial ropeway from the mines also closed in favour of trucking of coal down the hill directly from the mines. In May 1968, the Inangahua earthquake caused much damage to the incline, making the closure irreversible. Thus, what was once described as the "Eighth Wonder of the World" by locals, faded into history.

Little remains of the Incline or the townships on the plateau but relics can be found throughout the area. Middle Brake is one of the most intact industrial areas remaining because its inaccessibility resulted in much equipment being left on site. At Brakehead and Denniston township, the main street grid, building foundations, chimneys, and the square water tanks that many houses had, are the main relics that can be seen. Most of the former building sites are empty and covered in low scrub and only a few buildings still stand. The former high school is occupied by the Friends of the Hill and is used as a museum and information centre. Other remaining buildings are now privately owned.

Denniston is listed as a Category 1 Historic Place on the New Zealand Heritage List, and considered to have special or outstanding historical or cultural significance or value.

The Denniston Incline and the key historical areas of the plateau are now managed by the New Zealand Department of Conservation. At Brakehead, replicas have been built of some of the former trackwork and three original Q wagons placed on the site.

With recognition of the historic nature of Denniston and its increasing status as a local tourist icon and one that is close to Westport, a group of mainly locals, The Friends of the Hill, seek to preserve Denniston's heritage and interpret it for the benefit of people visiting one of New Zealand's most famous coalfield settlements. The growth of interest in Denniston has been aided by "The Denniston Rose", a historical novel by Jenny Pattrick, set in the 1880s at Denniston.

Coal is still mined on the Denniston Plateau, at a small scale, and to the north at the Stockton Mine near Millerton. In 2010, Bathurst Resources announced the Escarpment Mine Project to mine for coal on the Denniston Plateau, a move strongly opposed by environmentalists.

In March 2013 the Environment Court gave Bathurst the go-ahead, though groups such as Forest & Bird vowed to continue fighting.


Information panels:
Images:

Video:

Wright R-1820 Cyclone

The Wright R-1820 Cyclone 9 is an American radial engine developed by Curtiss-Wright, widely used on aircraft in the 1930s through 1950s. It was produced under license in France as the Hispano-Suiza 9V or Hispano-Wright 9V, and in the Soviet Union as the Shvetsov M-25.

The R-1820 Cyclone 9 represented a further development of the Wright P-2 engine dating back to 1925. Featuring a greater displacement and a host of improvements, the R-1820 entered production in 1931. The engine remained in production well into the 1950s.

The R-1820 was built under license by Lycoming, Pratt & Whitney Canada, and also, during World War II, by the Studebaker Corporation. The Soviet Union had purchased a license for the design, and the Shvetsov "OKB" was formed to metricate the American specification powerplant for Soviet government-factory production as the "M-25", with the R-1820's general design features used by the Shvetsov design bureau for many of their future radials for the Soviet air forces through the 1940s and onwards. In Spain the R-1820 was license-built as the "Hispano-Suiza 9V" or "Hispano-Wright 9V".

The R-1820 was at the heart of many famous aircraft including early Douglas airliners (the prototype DC-1, the DC-2, the first civil versions of the DC-3, and the limited-production DC-5), every wartime example of the Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress and Douglas SBD Dauntless bombers, the early versions of the Polikarpov I-16 fighter (as the M-25), and the Piasecki H-21 helicopter.

The R-1820 also found limited use in armoured vehicles. The G-200 variant developed at 2,300 rpm and powered the strictly experimental M6 Heavy Tank.

The Wright R-1820 was converted to a diesel during World War II by Caterpillar Inc. as the D-200 and produced at 2,000 rpm in the M4A6 Sherman.

Notes: Unit numbers ending with W indicate engine variants fitted with water-methanol emergency power boost systems.

The Hispano-Suiza 9V is a licence-built version of the R-1820. 


Preserved Wright R-1820 engines are on display at the following museums:


List of highways numbered 17

Route 17, or Highway 17 can refer to the following roads:

For the roads named "A17", see list of A17 roads.




















Satellite flare

Satellite flare, also known as satellite glint, is a satellite pass visible to the naked eye as a brief, bright "flare". It is caused by the reflection toward the Earth below of sunlight incident on satellite surfaces such as solar panels and antennas (e.g., synthetic aperture radar). Streaks from satellite flare are a form of light pollution that can negatively affect ground-based astronomy, stargazing, and indigenous people.

Many satellites flare with magnitudes bright enough to see with the unaided eye, i.e. brighter than magnitude +6.5. Smaller magnitude numbers are brighter, so negative magnitudes are brighter than positive magnitudes, "i.e." the scale is reverse logarithmic .

The Iridium constellation was one of the first anthropogenic sources of near-space light pollution to draw criticism. Larger satellite constellations, like OneWeb and Starlink, have received increased criticism. Scientific and policy analyses have raised questions about which regulatory bodies hold jurisdiction over human actions that obscure starlight in ways that affect astronomy, stargazers, and indigenous communities.

The time and place of the satellite's flare can be predicted only when the satellite is controlled, and its orientation in space is known. In this case it is possible to predict the exact time of the flare, its place in the sky, the brightness and duration.

The first generation of the Iridium constellation launched a total of 95 telecommunication satellites in low Earth orbit which were known to cause Iridium flares, the brightest flares of all orbiting satellites, starting in 1997. From 2017 to 2019 they were replaced with a new generation that does not produce flares, with the first generation completely deorbited by 27 December 2019.

While the first-generation Iridium satellites were still controlled, their flares could be predicted. These Iridium communication satellites had three polished door-sized antennas, 120° apart and at 40° angles with the main bus. The forward antenna faced the direction the satellite is traveling. Occasionally, an antenna reflects sunlight directly down at Earth, creating a predictable and quickly moving illuminated spot on the surface below of about diameter. To an observer this looks like a bright flash, or flare in the sky, with a duration of a few seconds.

Ranging up to −9.5 magnitude, some of the flares were so bright that they could be seen in the daytime. This flashing caused some annoyance to astronomers, as the flares occasionally disturbed observations.

As the Iridium constellation consisted of 66 working satellites, Iridium flares were visible quite often (2 to 4 times per night). Flares of brightness −5 magnitude occurred 3 to 4 times per week, and −8 magnitude were visible 3 to 5 times per month for stationary observers.

Flares could also occur from solar panels, but they were not as bright (up to −3.5 magnitude). Such flares lasted about twice as long as those from the main mission antennas (MMA), because the so-called "mirror angle" for the solar panels was twice that for the MMAs. There were also rare cases of flares from MMAs and solar panels, or two MMAs (front and either right or left) of one satellite in a single pass.

The flares were bright enough to be seen at night in big cities where light pollution usually prevents most stellar observation. When not flaring, the satellites were often visible crossing the night sky at a typical magnitude of 6, similar to a dim star.

Planned low-orbit satellite constellations such as Starlink are a concern for astronomers, stargazers, and indigenous communities because of light pollution.

In February 2020, the Russian Academy of Sciences said it would send a letter to the United Nations complaining that Starlink's satellites will damage "30-40% of astronomical images."

Numerous satellite operators have criticized SpaceX for attempting to overwhelm the FCC with paperwork as a means to gain approval to launch 42,000 satellites, which has raised questions about which aspects of space law pertain to light pollution from satellites.

In normal dark sky conditions, the naked eye can see objects as dim as +6.5, which means about 5,600 stars or about one star for every seven of the planned Starlink satellites. In perfect dark sky conditions about 45,000 stars brighter than +8 can be visible to the naked eye, or about one-to-one with the proposed Starlink satellites. Ground based telescopes are even more sensitive, so astronomers have raised concerns about the persistent brightness of Starlink.

SpaceX and Elon Musk have asserted in meetings with the National Academy of Sciences and in FCC filings that "SpaceX is committed to reducing satellite brightness to allow enjoyment of the skies and not thwart scientific discovery" and that its objectives are (1) to "make the satellites generally invisible to the naked eye within a week of launch," and (2) to "minimize Starlink's impact on astronomy by darkening satellites so they do not saturate observatory detectors."

Many other controlled satellites also flare to magnitudes visible to the naked eye, i.e. larger than +6.5.

MetOp-B and C, however, can produce predictable flares up to −5 magnitude (MetOp-A in no longer controlled) . Four COSMO-SkyMed satellites can produce flares up to -3 magnitude, and lasting much longer than the Iridium flares.
The Terrasar X and Tandem X also can produce predictable flares up to -3 magnitude. 

The International Space Station (ISS) is known to cause bright ISS flares.

Starlink satellites can flare repeatedly in an isolated area of the sky, typically directly above the sun (below the horizon) as they transit the highest latitude of their orbits. This is due to the large number of Starlink satellites that are orbiting the Earth. The flares from Starlink have been misidentified as UFOs by airline pilots due to their strange repetitive nature which appears similar to an aircraft flying a racetrack holding pattern.

When a satellite's orientation goes out of control, it becomes possible to predict only a trajectory of its pass, at any point of which it can flare up. These satellites are also described as "tumbling". This category includes many rotating rocket bodies, some failed Iridium satellites, ALOS satellite (which can produce flashes up to −10 mag), etc.
The most important and valuable information about tumbling satellites is the period of flashes. It can vary from 0.3–0.5 seconds (rapidly rotating objects) to a minute or more (slowly rotating objects). Other important characteristics are the amplitude of changes in brightness and period of repetition of these changes.

Humanity Star was a passive satellite which is primarily designed to produce satellite flares.

While satellites may be seen by chance, there are websites and mobile apps which provide location specific information as to when and where in the sky a satellite flare may be seen (for controlled satellites), or trajectory of a tumbling satellite's pass (for uncontrolled satellites) in the sky.

Among others, reflections from satellites and other human space objects are often reported as unidentified flying objects (UFOs).



Nanpō Islands

The is a collective term for the groups of islands that are located to the south of the Japanese archipelago. They extend from the Izu Peninsula west of Tokyo Bay southward for about , to within of the Mariana Islands. The Nanpō Islands are all administered by Tokyo Metropolis.

The Hydrographic and Oceanographic Department of the Japan Coast Guard defines the Nanpō Shotō as follows:


The Geospatial Information Authority of Japan, a government agency that is responsible for standardization of place names, does not use the term Nanpō Shotō, although it has agreed with the Japan Coast Guard over the names and extents of the subgroups of the Nanpō Shotō.

The Japanese claim to have discovered the islands in 1593; however, many of the islands were known by the Spanish sailors that went from Philippines to New Spain since Bernardo de la Torre's voyage in 1543, while the British claimed the islands in 1827. However, archeological evidence has since revealed that some of the islands were prehistorically inhabited by members of an unknown Micronesian ethnicity.

Neither Japan nor Britain developed the Nanpō Islands, although a small colony of Europeans and Americans was established at Chichi-jima. Japan began colonizing the islands in 1853, claimed them in 1861, then finally annexed them in 1891 as part of Tokyo Prefecture. By the mid-1930s the islands were closed to foreigners and a small Imperial Japanese Navy base was established at Chichi-jima.

Chicago 16

Chicago 16 is the thirteenth studio album by the American rock band Chicago, released on June 7, 1982. It is considered their "comeback" album because it was their first album to go platinum since 1978's "Hot Streets." It made it into the "Billboard" 200 top ten, and produced their second number one single in the United States, "Hard to Say I'm Sorry". The album was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) in August, 1982, two months after its release, and platinum in December, 1982. "Hard to Say I'm Sorry" was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Pop Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocal.

"Chicago 16" was the first album in a decade-long association with their new label Warner Bros. Records; the band's first project to be produced by David Foster, who has been called the "key" to their comeback; their first album to include some songs exclusively by composers outside of the group; and is also the first album since "Chicago VII" (1974) not to feature Laudir de Oliveira as a band member. It is also the first studio album to be released two years after the previous, as previous studio albums were released annually.

The band brought in Sons of Champlin founder Bill Champlin as keyboardist and singer. The group also retained Chris Pinnick from the "Chicago XIV" sessions. Through the band's manager, Jeff Wald, and on suggestion of Danny Seraphine, producer David Foster would make contact with the band. Jeff Wald was dismissed as manager and the band enlisted Irving Azoff and Howard Kaufman as their new managers shortly thereafter.

Once they agreed to Foster producing the album (the band had considered him for 1980's "Chicago XIV"), Foster radically redefined Chicago's sound for the 1980s, with all of the latest technologies and techniques, and also brought in outside songwriters and studio players to the sessions. Three members of Toto lent their expertise to the sessions. In 2015 former Chicago drummer Danny Seraphine defended this choice to change their sound: 

The soft rock leanings of Peter Cetera and Foster permeate much of "Chicago 16". The band was moving to a new label after an entire career at Columbia. Robert Lamm was also unavailable for the majority of the album's production because of personal issues, and the once-prolific writer only shared a sole partial writing credit on the release, with no lead vocal contributions. Lamm said of this change: In an interview in 2019, Cetera described the initial songwriting efforts from band members that were presented to Foster as "pure shit," blaming alcohol and drug abuse in the band for the decline in the quality of songwriting. Eventually, Foster and Cetera collaborated to write the album's two hit singles.
Percussionist Laudir de Oliveira was dismissed from the band after the "Chicago XIV" tour, as his Latin-American style would not fit with the "more pop-oriented sound" of the band.

Upon its June 1982 release, "Chicago 16" was a hit album, especially as "Hard to Say I'm Sorry" became the band's second number one US single, going to number one on both the "Billboard" Hot 100 chart and the "Billboard" Adult Contemporary chart. The album ultimately went platinum and reached number nine on the "Billboard" 200 chart. The single would also be included in its lengthier form "Hard to Say I'm Sorry/Get Away" on the "Summer Lovers" movie soundtrack. "Love Me Tomorrow", the second single lifted off the album, features a lengthy orchestration at the end. It went to number 22 on the "Billboard" Hot 100 chart and number eight on the "Billboard" Adult Contemporary chart. A third single, "What You're Missing", was released and peaked at number 81 on the "Billboard" Hot 100 chart.

The Rhino remaster does not include the full-length versions of "What You're Missing" and "Love Me Tomorrow." The former was replaced with its single edit, and the latter had two bars of the sequence (prominently featuring strings) that begins the instrumental bridge removed. However, this remastered version does include a Bill Champlin demo, called "Daddy's Favorite Fool", as a bonus track. A subsequent international release in 2010 (included in the Studio Albums 1979-2008 box set from 2015) has the original album restored, with additional bonus tracks of the single versions of "Hard To Say I'm Sorry", "What You're Missing", and Love Me Tomorrow" as well as "Daddy's Favorite Fool."

The original UK LP release contains "Rescue You" before "What Can I Say," unlike subsequent releases of this album.

"Remember There's Someone Who Loves You" (Champlin, Lamm) and "Come On Back" (Bill Gable, Lamm) were recorded during the sessions and remain unreleased.




Reissue

Outline of poker

The following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to poker:

Poker – family of card games that share betting rules and usually (but not always) hand rankings. Poker games differ in how the cards are dealt, how hands may be formed, whether the high or low hand wins the pot in a showdown (in some games, the pot is split between the high and low hands), limits on bet sizes, and how many rounds of betting are allowed.

Poker can be described as all of the following:




List of poker hands

List of poker variants


Poker strategy


Poker probability

Poker psychology



History of poker




Sud Aviation Vautour

The Sud-Ouest Aviation (SNCASO) S.O. 4050 Vautour II (French for "vulture") was a French jet-powered bomber, interceptor, and attack aircraft developed and manufactured by aircraft company Sud Aviation.

The Vautour was operated by France's "Armée de l'Air", having been originally developed by Sud Aviation in response to a French requirement for a jet aircraft for bombing, low-level attack and all-weather interception operations. The Vautour was used in the Force de frappe under the Commandement des Forces Aériennes Stratégiques; each aircraft was suitable for the carriage of a nuclear weapon. The shortcomings of the type as a bomber, such as its lack of radar or other advanced navigation/attack systems, led to the type being replaced by the more capable Dassault Mirage IV. The Vautour never saw combat use with the French Air Force.

The only other customer for the Vautour was Israel. During its service with the Israeli Air Force (IAF), the type undertook various mission and roles and was quickly used in combat. Vautours were used during the wars between Israel and its neighbors, including the Six-Day War and the War of Attrition. Only one air-to-air kill was recorded by a Vautour; the type was used more for bombing and ground strafing and was reportedly considered by Israel to be comparable to the Soviet-built Ilyushin Il-28 medium bombers used by its regional adversaries. During the early 1970s, the Vautour was replaced by the American Douglas A-4 Skyhawk.

In the aftermath of the Second World War, France set about the rebuilding and modernisation of its armed forces. In regards to aviation, this task had been made substantially more difficult due to setbacks incurred by the German occupation of France during the conflict; nearly all aircraft factories had been destroyed while individual design teams had scattered, meaning that there was little to no continuity of work and that the nation would be basically starting from scratch. Additionally, France had little technical knowledge or operational know-how with the newly developed field of jet propulsion in comparison to other powers, such as the United States and the United Kingdom. A major step towards bridging this gap was a licensing arrangement between Hispano-Suiza and British engine manufacturer Rolls-Royce Limited, under which the former would manufacture the Rolls-Royce Nene turbojet engine; accordingly, the majority of early French jet aircraft were powered by the Nene while an indigenous engine was to be developed in the form of the Snecma Atar engine.

During June 1951, the French "Armée de l'Air" (AdA) issued a detailed requirement for a jet-powered aircraft capable of functioning in several roles, including as a bomber, a low-level attack aircraft, or an all-weather interceptor. In response to this requirement, French aircraft manufacturer SNCASO decided to adapt its existing "S.O. 4000" design so that it could perform the desired missions roles. During 1951, test flight of the S.O.4000 prototype had demonstrated promising performance for the type, supporting the decision to proceed with a further development of the design. According to aviation authors Bill Gunston and Peter Gilchrist, "It would be fair to claim that in the early 1950s the Vautour was the most promising twin-jet warplane in Western Europe". An initial order for three prototypes was placed by the AdA. On 16 October 1952, the first prototype of the revised design, which had been designated as the "S.O. 4050", conducted its maiden flight.

The flight test programme proceeded relatively smoothly; during one early flight, a prototype was recorded as having exceeded Mach 1 during a shallow dive. A follow-on order for six pre-production aircraft was soon received; one of these was powered by a pair of Armstrong Siddeley Sapphire engines while another was furnished with Rolls-Royce Avon engines, both British designs, while the remainder were powered by the French Atar engine. Subsequent production aircraft would use the Atar engine, having proven to be sufficiently mature and, with the aid of water injection, capable of sufficient power to enable the Vautour to take off while carrying a full payload.

 "Vautour II", the aircraft was manufactured in three distinct variants. During 1958, the aircraft entered service with the AdA; the Vautour would remain in use by the AdA for several decades. While the final French aircraft being retired from frontline service during 1979, a number were retained and soldiered on in various secondary duties into the early 1980s. The Vautour ultimately saw no combat usage during its service with the AdA; throughout the majority of its service life, the type was maligned as obsolete and relatively underpowered. Although it had been a moderately competent aircraft when it had been originally developed, the Vautour never benefitted from the adoption of sufficiently powerful engines, even though suitable powerplants did become available over time. As an interceptor, it was soon outclassed by the newer Dassault Mirage III, while in its roles either as a bomber or attack aircraft, the lack of an advanced navigation/attack system became a crippling limitation upon its effectiveness.

The only export customer for the Vautour was Israel, who had chosen to procure a number of other types of combat aircraft from France as well. During the 1950s, France and Israel closely cooperated on various areas of defence, including armaments, aviation, and nuclear research. According to author Sylvia K. Crosbie, a major motivating factor in the Israeli decision to procure the Vautour was to make a political statement to the country's neighbours, viewing the aircraft as a counterpart, and a response, to the Soviet-built Ilyushin Il-28 medium bombers, which had been acquired by Egypt.

During 1956, two years prior to the Vautour even entering squadron service, France had issued a more demanding requirement for a supersonic replacement aircraft. The Vautour was used as a stop-gap measure as the airborne carrier of France's independent nuclear deterrent while the more capable follow-on aircraft was being selected and developed; its performance in this role was typically thought to be limited at best. While the newer bomber requirement would ultimately result in the selection, development and manufacture of the Dassault Mirage IV bomber; Sud Aviation had also chosen to respond to the requirement, producing their own proposal for the production of an envisioned "Super Vautour". According to aviation author Bill Gunston, the unbuilt 'stretched' Super Vautour variant would have featured an increased combat radius of 1,700 miles as well as the ability to attain at least Mach 0.9.

The Sud Aviation Vautour was a jet-propelled mid-sized combat aircraft, typically employed as a bomber and attack aircraft, as well as having some usage as an interceptor. In terms of its basic configuration, it had a shoulder-wing monoplane configuration, furnished with a 35° swept wing and a "flying" tail. Power was provided by a pair of SNECMA Atar 101 turbojet engines, which were carried in pods located underneath the wings. The Vautour was equipped with a bicycle-type landing gear configuration in which the main units were located upon the underside of the fore and aft fuselage, these were augmented by smaller stabilizing gear set into bottom of the engine pods. The internal space of the central fuselage was largely dedicated to a large 5.0 meter (16 ft 5 in) weapons bay, along with substantial internal fuel tankage.

The Vautour IIB bomber lacked any sort of radar arrangement or many of the contemporary navigational aids and attack systems that were installed upon several aircraft performing the same role during this era. Aiming of the armaments was performed by a bombardier, who would principally perform his bomb-aiming function using a Second World War-vintage American-built Norden bombsight. The navigator/bombardier position was within the nose section, which was glazed to provide external visibility. Both the Vautour IIB and IIA models were restricted to performing missions only under clear-weather operations during daylight. The Vautour IIN interceptor model was not as restrictive, having some capacity to conduct both nighttime and adverse weather operations, having been furnished with a radar system. During its service in Israel, where the weather of the local climate was generally favorable and daylight missions commonplace, the Vautour's lack of advanced targeting and navigation equipment was found to be not a crippling limitation. However, when operated in Europe, these restrictions were considered to be a major disadvantage. As a result, the French AdA never deployed their single-seat Vautour IIA fleet in a frontline capacity; the majority of its IIB bombers were quickly converted to the improved Vautour IIBR standard, which was used to perform photo reconnaissance missions instead.

The Vautour was capable of being equipped with various armaments. In Israeli service, it was typically armed with a pair of 30 mm cannons, as well as up to four removable underwing rocket pods, containing up to 19 air-to-ground rockets each; up to 3,000lb of bombs or alternatively a maximum of 232 68 mm rockets could be accommodated internally in the bomb bay. 4,000lb of bombs could also be mounted externally. The Vautour IIB bomber could be used to carry and deploy nuclear weapons in addition to its conventional arsenal. The internal bomb bay of a single aircraft could contain either one AN-11 or one AN-22 nuclear bomb; however, in AdA service, the primary carrier of nuclear weapons would quickly be transitioned to the newer and more capable Dassault Mirage IV, which supplemented and eventually replace the Vautour IIB bomber.

Originally, the AdA had intended to order a total of 440 Vautours, comprising 300 of the IIA model and 140 of the IIN variant. However, plans were modified; ultimately no Vautour IIAs would enter AdA service and around 30 were believed to be constructed, 18 of which being sold to Israel at a relatively low price. In place of the IIA, the Vautour IIB was procured instead, which was suitable for performing level bombing runs across all altitudes, as well as the low altitude toss bombing attack profile. To address a deficiency of the Vautour that had been determined mid-service life, this being its limited range in comparison to contemporary strategic bombers, considerable emphasis was placed upon the introduction and perfection of aerial refueling techniques in the AdA. This led to the adoption of a 'buddy pack' to enable pairs of Vautours to refuel one another in mid-air, allowing for the range factor to be better addressed.

A fleet of 40 AdA-operated Vautour IIBs constituted the original air-based component of the French force de frappe, the Commandement des Forces Aériennes Stratégiques (CFAS) of the French Air Force, which had been established during 1955. However, their use in the strategic bomber role was determined to be less than optimal; allegedly, the Vautour's performance was commonly considered to be marginal and suitable for use as a stop gap measure at best. The deficiencies of the type contributed to France issuing a more stringent requirement calling for a new high performance bomber aircraft to be developed to perform the strategic mission. While efforts were made by Sud Aviation to design improved variants of the Vautour to conform with the new demands, the AdA opted to pursue rival aircraft company Dassault Aviation's proposal, which eventually resulted in the deployment of the Mirage IV, which eventually succeeded the Vautour in the bombing role in French service.

As early as 1955, preliminary agreements for Israel's procurement of the Vautour were being drawn up and advanced plans being laid for its deployment. During early 1957, the type was officially selected to replace the British-built de Havilland Mosquito then in service with the Israeli Air Force (IAF). On 1 August 1957, the first Vautour arrived in Israel, delivered secretly via French air bases in Tunisia and with AdA markings. The planes were delivered at a rate of 1 or 2 per month. Their entry into service had allegedly been delayed by several months due to political issues between Israel and France, which was resolved when permission to commence operations was granted by the latter. Deliveries of the type were completed in 1958. During August 1958, the existence of Israeli Vautours was publicly revealed in an air display.

Crosbie described the Vautour as being "Israel's most important delivery system at the time", also observing the type to possess the capability to launch attacks upon the majority of Egyptian targets while carrying a payload of 6,000-8,000lb bombs. The IAF fielded a pair of squadrons equipped with the type. In Israeli service, the Vautour was used to perform many different roles, the IIN variant were initially tasked with night fighter operations, before transitioning to the attack role or being converted to perform aerial reconnaissance or electronic warfare operations. The Vautour proved to be quite capable as a reconnaissance aircraft; on 23 January 1962, one overflew right across Egypt to the Libyan border, evading repeated attempts at interception; during the following years, the type was used to gather evidence of Soviet-provided surface to air missiles (SAM)s present in Egypt. Likewise, in the electronic warfare mission, the aircraft proved effective at disabling Egyptian air defenses via onboard jamming equipment.

In Israeli service, the Vautour had a relatively active combat career. As early as 1959, the type was being used against Egyptian targets; the Vautour would also participate in a series of actions throughout major conflicts between Israel and its neighbours, including the Six-Day War and the War of Attrition. Israeli Vautours were normally used to conduct bombing and strafing runs, along with several air-to-air engagements. During the Six-Day War, Israeli Vautours engaged in air-to-air combat with Iraqi Air Force aircraft while in the process of performing raiding missions against H-3 airfield in Iraq's western region. On 6 June 1967, Captain Ben-Zion Zohar scored the type's only aerial victory, having downed an Iraqi Hawker Hunter during one such engagement, although this did not mean the aircraft had a clear advantage over the latter, emphasized by a pair of Vautours being downed after being struck by cannon fire from Iraqi Hunters on the following day. Overall, a total of 15 Vautours were recorded as lost in combat. Remaining examples of the type were retired during 1971 in favor of the American-built Douglas A-4 Skyhawk; the last aircraft left operational service during March 1972, their final role being decoy aircraft flown in the vicinity of the Sinai. The Israelis were pleased with the Vautour's range and versatility, and it was well regarded in Israeli service.


The Vautour was produced in three principal variants, which had 90% commonality:
Some IIB aircraft were converted to various specialized roles, principally reconnaissance (IIBR and IIBN), ECM, and eventually target tug (IIB-TT).

Total production was 149 aircraft, divided as follows:





Spectrum (band)

Spectrum are an Australian progressive rock band which formed in April 1969 and broke up in April 1973. The original line-up was Mark Kennedy on drums, Lee Neale on organ (ex-Nineteen87), Bill Putt on bass guitar (ex-Lost Souls), and Mike Rudd on guitar and lead vocals (ex-Chants R&B, The Party Machine). In August 1970 Kennedy was replaced by Ray Arnott on drums. These members also performed under the alter ego, Indelible Murtceps, from 1971 to 1973. Spectrum had a number-one hit, "I'll Be Gone" (January 1971), on the "Go-Set" National Top 60 singles chart. After Spectrum and Indelible Murtceps disbanded, Putt and Rudd formed Ariel. In 1999 the pair formed Spectrum Plays the Blues, which later trimmed their name back to Spectrum. On 7 August 2013 Bill Putt died, after a heart attack.

Spectrum were formed in April 1969 in Melbourne, as a progressive rock group, by Mark Kennedy on drums (ex-Gallery), Lee Neale on organ (ex-Nineteen87), Bill Putt on bass guitar (ex-Gallery, The Lost Souls), and Mike Rudd on guitar, harmonica and lead vocals (ex-Chants R&B, The Party Machine, Sons of the Vegetal Mother). Initially the group drew on the work of contemporary bands such as Traffic, Soft Machine and Pink Floyd; they played cover versions of their material. Spectrum developed their own style as Rudd began writing original material. Alongside Kennedy's drum solos, Putt's bass playing and Neale's keyboard work, a feature of Spectrum's sound was Rudd's guitar playing — he eschewed the near-universal use of guitar picks – using a finger-picking style on a vintage Fender Stratocaster to develop a characteristic sound.

During twelve months of regularly performing on the local dance and discothèque circuit, Spectrum refined their original material. They appeared at various "head" (see cannabis slang) venues around Melbourne: T.F. Much Ballroom, Garrison and Sebastian's, alongside other progressive rockers, Tully, Tamam Shud and Sons of the Vegetal Mother. Spectrum used an elaborate set-up which included a large PA and a full multi-media light show; often supplemented by a performance troupe, Tribe. Early in 1970 they cut a demo single which they hawked to record companies as a 7" acetate. One side was an early, folk version of "I'll Be Gone". The B-side was another original, "You Just Can't Win". According to rock music historian, Ian McFarlane, these acetates are now "impossibly rare" and only two or three copies are known to have survived.

Despite a loyal following and praise from the music press – including from Australia's pop newspaper "Go-Set" – the band were almost broke by mid-1970. After they signed to EMI under their progressive rock imprint, Harvest Records, the band went into the studio in August 1970 to make their first official recordings, using producer, Howard Gable (The Masters Apprentices). Rudd described the recording sessions, "[we had] gone into the studio in order to record 'Launching Place Parts I & II', to help promote the Launching Place Festival. When we had finished recording those, Howard asked us did we have any others and I said, 'Yeah, I've got this one called "I'll Be Gone"', which we recorded as an afterthought. But then it became a hit single." Rudd had decided to add a harmonica part to the song.

The festival at Launching Place occurred in December 1970. "I'll Be Gone" was released in January 1971, which became a surprise No. 1 Australian hit on the "Go-Set" National Top 60 singles chart in May that year. It became one of the most enduring Australian rock songs of that era. McFarlane described it as a "shuffling, hypnotic" track, for which "suddenly the band was in big demand."

Spectrum released their debut studio album, "Spectrum Part One", in March 1971, although it did not include the hit single. Rudd had refused to add it as "It didn't fit with the innovative roaming style of the rest of the music." The album reached No. 10 in April. Kennedy had left in August of the previous year just after it was recorded, he had "lost patience" as the group "struggled for gigs (promoters found them 'too progressive')." He was replaced on drums and vocals by Ray Arnott (ex-Chelsea Set, Cam-Pact, Company Caine). Rudd praised Kennedy's musicianship: "Mark really carried us through the first year because people would say 'Wow, look at that drummer, they must be a good group'... He used to play things like drum solos!, but he was very good. By the same token, I was almost relieved to get away from that 'cause the emphasis swung back to the material and the band in general rather than one player." Kennedy later worked with Leo de Castro, Ayers Rock and then Marcia Hines.

Spectrum's follow up singles, "Trust Me" (June 1971) and "But That's Alright" (November), did not reach the top 60. During October that year Spectrum formed a side project, Indelible Murtceps, using the same line-up of Arnott on drums, Neale on electric piano, Putt on bass guitar and Rudd on vocals and guitar. They performed at pubs, and local dances, playing a more dance/pop-oriented repertoire and using a simpler set-up than when performing as Spectrum.

Their second album, "Milesago", was released in December 1971, as the first Australian rock music double album. It is also the first Australian rock album to be recorded using a 16-track recorder – newly installed – at Armstrong Studios during the previous September. McFarlane stated that it "remains one of the landmark releases of the Australian progressive rock era." It peaked at No. 9 on the "Go-Set" Top 20 Albums chart. By September 1972 Neale had left both bands; he was replaced by John Mills on keyboards. Neale quit the music scene permanently after leaving Spectrum and Indelible Murtceps.

Spectrum's third studio album, "Testimonial", was co-credited to Indelible Murtceps. It appeared in July 1973, which reached No. 12. In March, before its release, Arnott announced he was going to join Mighty Kong. Putt and Rudd decided to end both bands; each played their farewell gig at the Dallas Brooks Hall in Melbourne on 15 April 1973. It was recorded and released in December 1973 as a double live album, "Terminal Buzz". Both of these releases were produced by Peter Dawkins.

Spectrum had toured other Australian rock festivals, including, Wallacia (January 1971), Myponga (February), Sunbury (January 1972, January 1973), Mulwala (April 1972), and Rosebud. Their national profile was limited by a lack of radio airplay in other capitals and, other than festivals, they rarely toured outside Victoria. Ian McFarlane opined that the group were "one of the first underground bands of the early 1970s to gain mainstream acceptance. [Their] brand of progressive rock was often built around long, complex musical passages, very much in the vein of UK bands... Yet the band did embrace a commercial aesthetic at times."

Following the disbandment of Spectrum and Indelible Murtceps, Rudd, Putt and Mills formed Ariel in mid-1973. The other members were Tim Gaze on guitar and Nigel Macara on drums (both ex-Tamam Shud). After Ariel disbanded in 1977, Rudd and Putt continued their musical collaborations in a series of groups: Instant Replay, Mike Rudd and the Heaters, W.H.Y., No. 9 and The Burwood Blues Band. After Mighty Kong disbanded at the end of 1973, Ray Arnott was a member of The Dingoes (1974–76), Ray Arnott Band (1978–80), Cold Chisel 1983–84) and Jimmy Barnes Band (1984–85).

EMI issued a compilation album, "Red Orange Yellow Green Blue Indigo Violet", early in 1984 and during March that year Spectrum undertook a reunion tour with the line-up of Arnott, Putt, and Rudd joined by Tony Fossey on keyboards (ex-Mike Rudd and the Heaters). Subsequent reformations occurred: in 1989 with Fossey, Putt and Rudd joined by Martyn Sullivan on guitar and bass guitar; and David Hicks on drums. In the following year Hicks was replaced by Trevor Courtney on drums. The 1991 line-up of Courtney, Putt, Rudd, Sullivan, with Cres Crisp on keyboards performed as Spectrum Plays the Blues. During the early 1990s Putt and Rudd worked as an acoustic duo with various guest musicians. From 1995 they continued "to perform under a variety of names, to suit different situations and line-ups, but predominantly still call themselves Spectrum."

By 1999 Putt and Rudd had formed another band together, Spectrum Plays the Blues, which included Spectrum material in their set list. They issued two albums, "Spill" (March 1999) and "No Thinking" (June 2004); before they trimmed the name back to Spectrum. In May 2008 the first new recording under that name, "Breathing Space", was released as a six-track EP on the band's own label, Volcano Records. The EP features guest musicians, including Gaze.

In 2004, TISM sampled "Launching Place, Part II" in their song "As Seen on Reality", which appeared on their album "The White Albun" that year.

Aztec Music reissued "Milesago" on CD for the first time, with extra tracks. The label then reissued "Spectrum Part One" in 2007, with its bonus tracks titled "Spectrum Part Two". A second EP, "Breathing Space Too", was released on Volcano in 2009, and a third EP, "Breathing Space As Well", followed in 2011. Spectrum played in either three- or four-piece mode. Spectrum's bass guitarist Bill Putt died of a heart attack on 7 August 2013. Rudd continued Spectrum with Dirk Dubois very briefly then Broc O'Connor on bass guitar, Daryl Roberts on keyboards and Peter 'Robbo' Robertson on drums and percussion. Spectrum's keyboardist Lee Neale died on 31 March 2019.

Current

Former


 was coordinated by teen-oriented pop music newspaper, "Go-Set" and was established in February 1966 and conducted an annual poll during 1966 to 1972 of its readers to determine the most popular personalities.


Wright Cyclone series

Wright Cyclone was the name given to a family of air-cooled radial piston engines designed by the Wright Aeronautical Corporation and used in numerous American aircraft in the 1930s and 1940s.

The Wright Aeronautical Corporation was formed in 1919, initially to develop liquid-cooled Hispano-Suiza V8 engines under license. The corporation's first original design, the R1, was also the first successful high-powered radial in the USA. Funded by contracts from the US Navy for new air-cooled radials, Wright started a new design (initially called the P2) in 1924. The resignation of Frederick Rentschler to form the Pratt & Whitney Aircraft Company, along with several key engineering personnel, seriously affected the development of the P2 and it did not go into production.

A new design was launched in 1926, known as the R-1750 Cyclone. This was a nine-cylinder radial with a displacement of 1750 cu in and internally cooled exhaust valves. It was type-tested at 500 hp in 1927.

In 1932, the R-1750 was developed to a capacity of 1823 cu in. This was the F model Cyclone, designated R-1820. This engine introduced a forged aluminum crankcase and was developed through the 1930s to reach 890 hp. It used a General Electric supercharger, and Wright concluded that this feature limited the potential power output of the engine. For the next development, the G-Series of 1937, Wright developed its own single-speed supercharger. The G-series was developed to deliver 1200 hp at 2500 rpm and made up the bulk of R-1820 Cyclone production during World War 2. It was installed in the Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress. The final phase of development of the single-row radial design was the H-Series at 1350 hp. A licensed, metricated variant was developed as the Shvetsov M-25.

Wright went on to develop two-row engines with 14 cylinders in two rows of seven, called the Cyclone 14, R-2600. This was installed in the Boeing 314, Grumman TBM/TBF Avenger, North American B-25 Mitchell, and some models of the Douglas A-20 Havoc (RAF Boston).

The penultimate Cyclone development was the 18-cylinder engine R-3350, named the Duplex Cyclone or Cyclone 18. Among other applications, it was installed in the Boeing B-29 Superfortress, Douglas A-1 Skyraider, Lockheed P-2 Neptune, and Lockheed C-121 Constellation. In commercial applications it stayed in production until 1957.

An experimental 22-cylinder two-row radial intended to compete with the large Pratt & Whitney radial engines. Three prototypes are known to have been built, but development was abandoned to allow resources to be used for the R-3350 development program.


MyoD

MyoD, also known as myoblast determination protein 1, is a protein in animals that plays a major role in regulating muscle differentiation. MyoD, which was discovered in the laboratory of Harold M. Weintraub, belongs to a family of proteins known as myogenic regulatory factors (MRFs). These bHLH (basic helix loop helix) transcription factors act sequentially in myogenic differentiation. Vertebrate MRF family members include MyoD1, Myf5, myogenin, and MRF4 (Myf6). In non-vertebrate animals, a single MyoD protein is typically found.

MyoD is one of the earliest markers of myogenic commitment. MyoD is expressed at extremely low and essentially undetectable levels in quiescent satellite cells, but expression of MyoD is activated in response to exercise or muscle tissue damage. The effect of MyoD on satellite cells is dose-dependent; high MyoD expression represses cell renewal, promotes terminal differentiation and can induce apoptosis. Although MyoD marks myoblast commitment, muscle development is not dramatically ablated in mouse mutants lacking the MyoD gene. This is likely due to functional redundancy from Myf5 and/or Mrf4. Nevertheless, the combination of MyoD and Myf5 is vital to the success of myogenesis.

MyoD was cloned by a functional assay for muscle formation reported in Cell in 1987 by Davis, Weintraub, and Lassar. It was first described as a nuclear phosphoprotein in 1988 by Tapscott, Davis, Thayer, Cheng, Weintraub, and Lassar in Science. The researchers expressed the complementary DNA (cDNA) of the murine MyoD protein in a different cell lines (fibroblast and adipoblast) and found MyoD converted them to myogenic cells. The following year, the same research team performed several tests to determine both the structure and function of the protein, confirming their initial proposal that the active site of the protein consisted of the helix loop helix (now referred to as basic helix loop helix) for dimerization and a basic site upstream of this bHLH region facilitated DNA binding only once it became a protein dimer. MyoD has since been an active area of research as still relatively little is known concerning many aspects of its function.

The function of MyoD in development is to commit mesoderm cells to a skeletal myoblast lineage, and then to regulate that continued state. MyoD may also regulate muscle repair. MyoD mRNA levels are also reported to be elevated in aging skeletal muscle.

One of the main actions of MyoD is to remove cells from the cell cycle (halt proliferation for terminal cell cycle arrest in differentiated myocytes) by enhancing the transcription of p21 and myogenin. MyoD is inhibited by cyclin dependent kinases (CDKs). CDKs are in turn inhibited by p21. Thus MyoD enhances its own activity in the cell in a feedforward manner.

Sustained MyoD expression is necessary for retaining the expression of muscle-related genes.

MyoD is also an important effector for the fast-twitch muscle fiber (types IIA, IIX, and IIB) phenotype.

MyoD is a transcription factor and can also direct chromatin remodelling through binding to a DNA motif known as the E-box. MyoD is known to have binding interactions with hundreds of muscular gene promoters and to permit myoblast proliferation. While not completely understood, MyoD is now thought to function as a major myogenesis controller in an on/off switch association mediated by KAP1 (KRAB [Krüppel-like associated box]-associated protein 1) phosphorylation. KAP1 is localized at muscle-related genes in myoblasts along with both MyoD and Mef2 (a myocyte transcription enhancer factor). Here, it serves as a scaffold and recruits the coactivators p300 and LSD1, in addition to several corepressors which include G9a and the Histone deacetylase HDAC1. The consequence of this coactivator/corepressor recruitment is silenced promoting regions on muscle genes. When the kinase MSK1 phosphorylates KAP1, the corepressors previously bound to the scaffold are released allowing MyoD and Mef2 to activate transcription.

Once the "master controller" MyoD has become active, SETDB1 is required to maintain MyoD expression within the cell. Setdb1 appears to be necessary to maintain both MyoD expression and also genes that are specific to muscle tissues because reduction of Setdb1 expression results in a severe delay of myoblast differentiation and determination. In Setdb1 depleted myoblasts that are treated with exogenous MyoD, myoblastic differentiation is successfully restored. In one model of Setdb1 action on MyoD, Setdb1 represses an inhibitor of MyoD. This unidentified inhibitor likely acts competitively against MyoD during typical cellular proliferation. Evidence for this model is that reduction of Setdb1 results in direct inhibition of myoblast differentiation which may be caused by the release of the unknown MyoD inhibitor.

MyoD has also been shown to function cooperatively with the tumor suppressor gene, Retinoblastoma (pRb) to cause cell cycle arrest in the terminally differentiated myoblasts. This is done through regulation of the Cyclin, Cyclin D1. Cell cycle arrest (in which myoblasts would indicate the conclusion of myogenesis) is dependent on the continuous and stable repression of the D1 cyclin. Both MyoD and pRb are necessary for the repression of cyclin D1, but rather than acting directly on cyclin D1, they act on Fra-1 which is immediately early of cyclin D1. MyoD and pRb are both necessary for repressing Fra-1 (and thus cyclin D1) as either MyoD or pRb on its own is not sufficient alone to induce cyclin D1 repression and thus cell cycle arrest. In an intronic enhancer of Fra-1 there were two conserved MyoD binding sites discovered. There is cooperative action of MyoD and pRb at the Fra-1 intronic enhancer that suppresses the enhancer, therefore suppressing cyclin D1 and ultimately resulting in cell cycle arrest for terminally differentiated myoblasts.

Wnt signalling from adjacent tissues has been shown to induce cells in somites that receive these Wnt signals to express Pax3 and Pax7 in addition to myogenic regulatory factors, including Myf5 and MyoD. Specifically, Wnt3a can directly induce MyoD expression via cis-element interactions with a distal enhancer and Wnt response element. Wnt1 from dorsal neural tube and Wnt6/Wnt7a from surface ectoderm have also been implicated in promoting myogenesis in the somite; the latter signals may act primarily through Myod.

In typical adult muscles in a resting condition (absence of physiological stress) the specific Wnt family proteins that are expressed are Wnt5a, Wnt5b, Wnt7a and Wnt4. When a muscle becomes injured (thus requiring regeneration) Wnt5a, Wnt5b, and Wnt7a are increased in expression. As the muscle completes repair Wnt7b and Wnt3a are increased as well. This patterning of Wnt signalling expression in muscle cell repair induces the differentiation of the progenitor cells, which reduces the number of available satellite cells. Wnt plays a crucial role in satellite cell regulation and skeletal muscle aging and also regeneration. Wnts are known to active the expression of Myf5 and MyoD by Wnt1 and Wnt7a. Wnt4, Wnt5, and Wnt6 function to increase the expression of both of the regulatory factors but at a more subtle level. Additionally, MyoD increases Wnt3a when myoblasts undergo differentiation. Whether MyoD is activated by Wnt via cis-regulation direct targeting or through indirect physiological pathways remains to be elucidated.

IFRD1 is a positive cofactor of MyoD, as it cooperates with MyoD at inducing the transcriptional activity of MEF2C (by displacing HDAC4 from MEF2C); moreover IFRD1 also represses the transcriptional activity of NF-κB, which is known to inhibit MyoD mRNA accumulation.
NFATc1 is a transcription factor that regulates composition of fiber type and the fast-to-slow twitch transition resulting from aerobic exercise requires the expression of NFATc1. MyoD expression is a key transcription factor in fast twitch fibers which is inhibited by NFATc1 in oxidative fiber types. NFATc1 works to inhibit MyoD via a physical interaction with the MyoD N-terminal activation domain resulting in inhibited recruitment of the necessary transcriptional coactivator p300. NFATc1 physically disrupts the interaction between MyoD and p300. This establishes the molecular mechanism by which fiber types transition in vivo through exercise with opposing roles for NFATc1 and MyoD. NFATc1 controls this balance by physical inhibition of MyoD in slow-twitch muscle fiber types.

The histone deacetyltransferase p300 functions with MyoD in an interaction that is essential for the myotube generation from fibroblasts that is mediated by MyoD. Recruitment of p300 is the rate-limiting process in the conversion of fibroblasts to myotubes. In addition to p300, MyoD is also known to recruit Set7, H3K4me1, H3K27ac, and RNAP II to the enhancer that is bound with and this allows for the activation of muscle gene that is condition-specific and established by MyoD recruitment. Endogenous p300 though, is necessary for MyoD functioning by acting as an essential coactivator.
MyoD associatively binds to the enhancer region in conjunction with a placeholding "putative pioneer factor" which helps to establish and maintain a both of them in a specific and inactive conformation. Upon the removal or inactivation on the placeholder protein bound to the enhancer, the recruitment of the additional group of transcription factors that help to positively regulate enhancer activity is permitted and this results in the MyoD-transcription factor-enhancer complex to assume a transcriptionally active state.

MyoD has been shown to interact with:


Montgomery M. Taylor

Montgomery Meigs Taylor (13 October 1869 – 21 October 1952) was an admiral in the United States Navy. He served in the Navy from 1890 to 1933, fought in the Battle of Manila Bay during the Spanish–American War in 1898, and later commanded the Control Fleet and the Scouting Fleet. He served as commander-in-chief of the United States Asiatic Fleet from 1931 to 1933.

Taylor was born on October 13, 1869, in Washington, D.C., to Joseph Hancock and Mary Meigs Taylor. He was born in the house of his grandfather, Montgomery C. Meigs, Quartermaster General of the United States Army during the American Civil War, for whom he was also named. His grand-uncle was President Zachary Taylor. His brother was John R. M. Taylor, an officer in the United States Army during the Philippine–American War.

Taylor grew up in Washington, D.C., where he attended public school.

Taylor was appointed in 1886 to the United States Naval Academy, where he was an outstanding halfback on the first football team the school fielded. He graduated in 1890, and was to have trained aboard the armed steamer , but she was wrecked before he could join her. He spent the next two years aboard the screw sloop , the screw sloop , and finally the protected cruiser . He was appointed an ensign in 1892, and his first assignment was aboard the protected cruiser . He also served short stints aboard the screw sloops and and the steamer .

Taylor was next assigned to the gunboat . He traveled to Shanghai, China, via commercial steamer and joined the ship in the summer of 1900. "Yorktown" was ordered back to the United States on 10 September 1900. Taylor disembarked at Nagasaki, Japan, and joined the protected cruiser , Admiral George Dewey's flagship, in September 1897.

During the Spanish–American War of 1898, Taylor served as a battery commander aboard "Olympia" and took part in the Battle of Manila Bay on 1 May 1898. Taylor received a promotion to lieutenant after "Olympia" returned to the United States in 1899.

Taylor was assigned to the full-rigged ship USS "Chesapeake" in November 1899 for the ship's sea trials, but after a month was ordered to leave the ship and proceed to Washington, D.C., for coursework in modern armament. In February 1900, he successfully applied for sea duty in the Pacific. Over the next few years, Taylor served on several ships:


Talor was promoted to lieutenant commander on 1 July 1905 and to commander on 4 March 1911.

After 21 years at sea, Taylor received his first land assignment. He was appointed aide to the Commandant of the Brooklyn Navy Yard in Brooklyn, New York, in 1911, and served there until 1913. He was given command of the auxiliary cruiser in 1913, serving until 1915. "Buffalo" cruised through the Caribbean Sea and along the west coast of Central America before being ordered to Alaska. While in port at Kodiak, Alaska, Taylor learned that World War I had broken out in Europe in 1914.

From 1915 to 1916, Taylor attended the Naval War College in Newport, Rhode Island, with orders to report to the armored cruiser to serve as her commanding officer in the event of a national emergency. After graduating in 1916, he was promoted to captain on 16 August 1916 and given command of the battleship .

After the United States entered World War I in 1917, Taylor was assigned duties in the Office of Naval Operations at the United States Department of the Navy. He took command of the battleship in 1918. "Florida" operated in cooperation with the British Grand Fleet during the war, and Taylor received the Navy Distinguished Service Medal for this service.

Taylor was assigned to the staff of the Naval War College from 1919 to 1921. In June 1922 he became commander of the 15th Naval District and of the Naval Operating Base at Coco Solo in the Panama Canal Zone.

Taylor returned to the United States in 1923 and was appointed a member of the Naval Examining and Retiring Board in the Department of the Navy. In June 1923, he was appointed commander of the Control Fleet, a unit consisting of submarines, destroyers, and Marine Corps units designed to control sea lanes after they had been cleared of enemy forces by the Navy Battle Fleet.

Taylor was promoted to rear admiral on 1 October 1922. He was director of fleet training from 1925 to 1927, and afterward commanded the 3rd Battleship Division of the Battle Fleet, with the battleship as his flagship. During fleet exercises in August 1927, he received an informal reprimand from his superior, Admiral Henry A. Wiley, (Commander-in-Chief, United States Fleet), for launching planes from aircraft carriers after confronting an enemy rather than using his ships' superior speed to escape. In September 1927, Taylor made Joseph J. Clark (later an admiral himself who played a significant role in the Battle of the Philippine Sea in June 1944) his division chief of staff.

Taylor was given command of the Scouting Fleet on 30 March 1926. The Scouting Fleet, based in the Atlantic Ocean, was an operational step down for Taylor. Although it contained two divisions of battleships, these were some of the Navy's oldest battleships, and the Scouting Fleet primarily consisted of cruiser and destroyer divisions. The old aircraft carrier was also attached to the Scouting Fleet for aircraft training purposes. Taylor's job was to train the Scouting Fleet for scouting missions. He was promoted to vice admiral in the summer of 1928.

Taylor's command of the Scouting Fleet ended on March 8, 1929. He was succeeded by Rear Admiral William Carey Cole. Taylor was named chief of the War Plans Division of the Office of Naval Operations. Although energetic, deeply interested in Asia and the Pacific region, and a student of blockades and invasions, Taylor contributed little to war planning in these crucial years. According to naval historian Edward S. Miller, Taylor believed that Japan (a rising naval power in the Pacific) "deserved" American friendship, and that Japanese attempts to control Manchuria were a positive development. Naval historian Robert Love agrees, noting that Taylor deeply distrusted the Chinese and believed the Nationalist Government unwilling to defend its own territory. During this period, Taylor became good friends with Japanese Admiral Kichisaburo Nomura. While serving in the War Plans office, Taylor was appointed to the navy board assigned with selecting officers for promotion to admiral, commander, and captain. He also was appointed to the board of inquiry into comments made by Major General Smedley Butler (USMC) about an alleged crime committed by Benito Mussolini. Butler retired before the board finished its work.

Taylor was promoted to admiral and appointed Commander-in-Chief of the Asiatic Fleet (CICAF) on April 2, 1931. His command became effective September 1, 1931. He won the position based on a reputation for quick thinking and making decisions without waiting for approval by superiors. His chief of staff was Captain Frank Jack Fletcher (a future admiral who would successfully lead fleets in the Battle of the Coral Sea and Battle of Midway). Admiral Taylor believed that the role of the United States Navy in the Far East was "sitting tight" and not getting involved. He openly counseled American non-intervention in the Japanese invasion of Manchuria (which began on September 19, 1931) and believed that Japan could not be convinced to give up her war-won possessions on the mainland without coercion. Nonetheless, he acted decisively to ensure that the United States was positioned to intervene if necessary. The Asiatic Fleet was based in Manila in the Philippines. After the Mukden Incident, Taylor dispatched four fast destroyers to Shanghai without orders. He then ordered (again without approval from superiors) a troop of U.S. Marines to board his remaining ships so that the Asiatic Fleet had a ground force to use as well. As he prepared to sail, only then did U.S. Fleet Admiral William V. Pratt order him to proceed to Shanghai.

Taylor's tenure as commander-in-chief of the Asiatic Fleet was a tumultuous one. On February 24, 1932, Taylor helped Italy and China avoid an international incident. An artillery shell from the mainland hit the Italian Navy ship "Libia", leading the Italians to threaten retaliation. Taylor convinced the Italians that, in the absence of any intentional shelling, they should consider the matter closed. His advice was taken, and Admiral Pratt publicly praised him for his quick thinking. On March 5, 1932, Taylor joined a joint British, French, and Italian committee sponsored by the League of Nations to investigate the war between China and Japan. The Asiatic Fleet returned to Manila in late March 1932. In May 1933, Taylor ordered the Asiatic Fleet to make a goodwill tour of Japan. He was cordially received by Emperor Hirohito.

Admiral Taylor became nationally known for his tact and diplomacy in dealing with the Japanese. Nonetheless, he stepped down as CINCAF on August 18, 1933. His successor was Admiral Frank B. Upham.

Montgomery M. Taylor retired from the U.S. Navy due to age restrictions on November 1, 1933.

Retirement did not end Taylor's public service, however. He was appointed to serve on the United States Maritime Commission on September 26, 1936, replacing Admiral Harry G. Hamlet. He remained on the commission until 1938, and then resigned. Thomas M. Woodward was appointed to fulfill the remainder of Taylor's term, which was due to end on September 26, 1939.

Taylor never married. After a lengthy illness, he died at Bethesda Naval Medical Center of a stroke on October 21, 1952. He was buried in Arlington National Cemetery.

His awards and medals included the Dewey Medal, Spanish Campaign Medal, Philippine Campaign Medal, World War I Victory Medal, and the Navy Distinguished Service Medal.

He was a member of the Aztec Club of 1847 by right of his relationship to Major General Zachary Taylor. 



Donald K. Stern

Donald K. Stern is an American attorney who served as the U.S. Attorney for Massachusetts from 1993 to 2001. He was best known for prosecuting mob figures, including fugitive Winter Hill Gang leader James "Whitey" Bulger and his partner, Stephen "The Rifleman" Flemmi. In 2001 he went into private practice as a Partner in the Boston office of Bingham Dana and Gould, which later merged into Bingham McCutchen LLP.

In 2002, he was chair of a blue-ribbon commission appointed by the Acting Governor of Massachusetts, Jane M. Swift, to investigate allegations involving the Suffolk County Sheriff's Department.

In 2008 he joined the firm of Cooley Godward Kronish LLP as a Partner in their Boston office. He teaches a course called Government Lawyer at Harvard Law School.

In May 2013, he left Cooley to join Affiliated Monitors as Managing Director, Corporate Monitoring and Consulting Services.

In May 2013 he also joined Yurko, Salvesen & Remz, P.C., a boutique litigation law firm in Boston, as Of Counsel, where his practice focuses on internal investigations, white collar defense, and business litigation.

I, Max

I, Max was a sports commentary show featuring host Max Kellerman and Michael Holley that aired nightly on Fox Sports Net. The concept of the show involved Kellerman and his ego (explaining the name of the show) against the world, represented by Holley, broadcasting via satellite from Boston, with producer Bill Wolff, the former "Disembodied Voice" from "Around the Horn", appearing live from NYC as the "impartial" mediator.

On January 18, 2018 on his daily sports radio show in Boston on WEEI 93.7 the "Dale & Holley" show Michael Holley said Woody Paige was the first choice to join Kellerman but Paige declined the offer and the role was offered to Holley.

Each show opened with Kellerman relaying three bits of information he has heard/been told of. He always concluded by saying, "but I, Max, say wrong, wrong, wrong" and would add a pithy comment afterward.

The show was divided into segments, with topics in each segment being scored as "rounds" (not unlike boxing, which Max has a background in as an analyst for HBO and previously ESPN2). The show was originally scored on a 10-point scale system like a boxing match, with the loser of the round scoring 9 in most cases (8 or less if Wolff determined the argument to be weak enough to warrant it). This later was changed to the winner of the argument getting credit for winning the round. Originally a 15-round format, the show later reduced the rounds to 12.

The show was conducted as follows:


Late in the show's run, the format changed. The first round would still feature the same debate between Holley and Max, but they were no longer scored. The next two segments usually consisted of Kellerman conducting interviews, although there was an occasional second segment game from the previous format that Holley would participate in (otherwise, his time on the show ended after the first segment). The final segment saw Bill Wolff make his first appearance of the show and again saw Max answer emails from viewers, with Wolff arbitrarily deciding after the segment was over whether Kellerman would receive love or hate mail.

The show was the most popular show on Fox Sports Net, though many people thought the show to be too similar in style to Max's former show, "Around the Horn". Despite the high ratings, the last episode of "I, Max" aired on February 18, 2005, nine months after it debuted. Max Kellerman, on the other hand, has an explanation for the demise of "I, Max". According to statements made by Kellerman frequently on his radio show, the show was the highest-rated show on Fox Sports. The cancellation of "I, Max", according to Kellerman, was due to his not agreeing to making changes to the show's format that he viewed would damage the show. He also took time away from sports television media just beforehand and after the cancellation due to grief over his brother's October 2004 death from a homicide, which former boxer James Butler was convicted for carrying out.

Michael Holley

Michael S. Holley (born February 26, 1970) is an American television and radio sports commentator, sports reporter and author. He formerly wrote columns for the "Boston Globe", "Chicago Tribune", "The Plain Dealer", and "Akron Beacon Journal".

While working for the "Akron Beacon Journal" in 1993, Holley was one of several reporters who worked on a project studying race relations in Northeastern Ohio. The series, entitled "A Question of Color," won the 1994 Pulitzer Prize for Meritorious Public Service.

Holley worked as a reporter and columnist for the "Boston Globe" from 1997-2001 and then again from 2002-2005, briefly leaving the paper to work for the "Chicago Tribune".

In 2005, Holley left the "Globe" to replace Bob Neumeier as co-host of the WEEI midday sports radio talk show. The show was renamed the "Dale & Holley Show" and featured Holley and former Boston Bruins play-by-play announcer Dale Arnold who discussed the various Boston sports teams.

On February 15, 2011, it was announced Holley would join Glenn Ordway as co-host of the afternoon
drive WEEI program "The Big Show". Mike Salk replaced Glenn Ordway as host of The Big Show and the show was renamed "Salk and Holley" on March 20, 2013. Mike Salk left the station on March 12, 2014 ending Salk and Holley. On April 1, 2014 WEEI-FM relaunched the Dale and Holley show with his former co-host Dale Arnold from 2-6 PM.

On February 28, 2018, Holley announced at the 5 p.m. hour that he would be leaving WEEI immediately after the show to pursue a full time television role with NBC Sports Boston. It was a very emotional decision for Holley after spending 13 years with the station and 10 of those with his radio partner and friend on and off the air, Dale Arnold.

In October 2008, Holley replaced Donny Marshall as host of "Celtics Now", a weekly program on Comcast SportsNet that covers on and off court stories related to the Boston Celtics.

Holley is the author of three books one of which, "Patriot Reign: Bill Belichick, the Coaches, and the Players Who Built a Champion", made the New York Times Best Seller list for nonfiction.

Holley has appeared on the ESPN television program "Around the Horn" as well as "I, Max" on Fox Sports Net.

On September 14, 2020, Holley joined Peacock to co-host a new show with Michael Smith called Brother From Another from 3-5 ET.

Michael Holley was born in Akron, Ohio. He earned a Bachelor of Arts degree in Journalism from Point Park College in May 1992. On April 30, 2005 he gave the commencement speech to the class of 2005 at Point Park University, where he received an honorary Doctor of Humane Letters degree. Max Kellerman, graduate of Columbia University, often made verbal jabs at Point Park University while the two were featured on "I, Max."

Holley married on July 14, 2007.



Papa Gino's

Papa Gino's, Inc. is a restaurant chain based in Dedham, Massachusetts, specializing in traditional thin crust pizza along with pasta, subs, salads, and a variety of appetizers. As of 2023, there are 79 Papa Gino's locations in Connecticut, Massachusetts, New Hampshire and Rhode Island.

Papa Gino's originated in East Boston, Massachusetts as a single location named "Piece O' Pizza," which opened in 1961. In 1968, the owners, Helen and Michael Valerio, changed the name to "Papa Gino's" and began expanding the business to multiple locations, 220 when they sold the company to a group of investors in 1991.

In 1997, Papa Gino's bought D'Angelo Sandwich Shops, another Massachusetts-based fast-food outlet, specializing in sandwiches, from prior owner Yum! Brands (then known as PepsiCo Inc.'s Pizza Hut unit). A few months later, executives of a holding company, Papa Gino's Holdings Corporation (later known as PGHC Holdings), bought out the company in a deal financed by Bunker Hill Capital Partners.

On September 18, 2018, Bunker Hill Capital Partners ended their investment with PGHC Holdings. On November 4, 2018, dozens of Papa Gino's locations closed abruptly, including their only location in Maine, at the Auburn Mall, bringing the chain from over 150 locations to 97. Employees were not given advance notice of the closures and were told to apply to other restaurants when they arrived for work at closed stores. The following day, PGHC Holdings filed for bankruptcy protection and announced that it had reached an agreement in principle to sell its restaurant chains to Wynnchurch Capital.

On June 14, 2022, it was revealed that Papa Gino’s would be opening a new restaurant for the first time since it emerged from bankruptcy. 

Since the late 1990s, the chain has partnered with the Boston Red Sox and New England Patriots, as well as individual players with the teams such as former Red Sox designated hitter David Ortiz. Patriots linebacker Tedy Bruschi replaced kicker Adam Vinatieri as pitchman in the fall of 2006, after Vinatieri was signed by the Indianapolis Colts. In 2020, Papa Gino's continues to partner with the Providence Bruins, the Worcester Red Sox and Holy Cross. They also partner with many local kids teams in the communities that they serve.




Pratt &amp; Whitney Wasp series

The Pratt & Whitney Wasp was the civilian name of a family of air-cooled radial piston engines developed in the 1930s, 1940s, and 1950s.

The Pratt & Whitney Aircraft Company (P&W) was founded in 1925 by Frederick B. Rentschler, who had previously been the President of Wright Aeronautical. He brought with him some of Wright's best designers and the new team quickly came up with their first design, the R-1340 Wasp.


Note: the designations refer to the engine configurations as follows: "R" = Radial, followed by the approximate displacement in cubic inches.


Tuscumbia

Tuscumbia is the name of these places and things in the United States of America:

System bus

A system bus is a single computer bus that connects the major components of a computer system,
combining the functions of a data bus to carry information, an address bus to determine where it should be sent or read from, and a control bus to determine its operation. The technique was developed to reduce costs and improve modularity, and although popular in the 1970s and 1980s, more modern computers use a variety of separate buses adapted to more specific needs.

The system level bus (as distinct from a CPU's internal datapath busses) connects the CPU to memory and I/O devices.
Typically a system level bus is designed for use as a backplane.

Many of the computers were based on the "First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC" report published in 1945. In what became known as the Von Neumann architecture, a central control unit and arithmetic logic unit (ALU, which he called the central arithmetic part) were combined with computer memory and input and output functions to form a stored program computer. The "Report" presented a general organization and theoretical model of the computer, however, not the implementation of that model.
Soon designs integrated the control unit and ALU into what became known as the central processing unit (CPU).

Computers in the 1950s and 1960s were generally constructed in an ad-hoc fashion.
For example, the CPU, memory, and input/output units were each one or more cabinets connected by cables. Engineers used the common techniques of standardized bundles of wires and extended the concept as backplanes were used to hold printed circuit boards in these early machines. 
The name "bus" was already used for "bus bars" that carried electrical power to the various parts of electric machines, including early mechanical calculators.
The advent of integrated circuits vastly reduced the size of each computer unit, and buses became more standardized.
Standard modules could be interconnected in more uniform ways and were easier to develop and maintain.

To provide even more modularity with reduced cost, memory and I/O buses (and the required control and power buses) were sometimes combined into a single unified system bus.
Modularity and cost became important as computers became small enough to fit in a single cabinet (and customers expected similar price reductions).
Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC) further reduced cost for mass-produced minicomputers, and memory-mapped I/O into the memory bus, so that the devices appeared to be memory locations. This was implemented in the Unibus of the PDP-11 around 1969, eliminating the need for a separate I/O bus.
Even computers such as the PDP-8 without memory-mapped I/O were soon implemented with a system bus, which allowed modules to be plugged into any slot.
Some authors called this a new streamlined "model" of computer architecture.

Many early microcomputers (with a CPU generally on a single integrated circuit) were built with a single system bus, starting with the S-100 bus in the Altair 8800 computer system in about 1975.
The IBM PC used the Industry Standard Architecture (ISA) bus as its system bus in 1981. The passive backplanes of early models were replaced with the standard of putting the CPU and RAM on a motherboard, with only optional daughterboards or expansion cards in system bus slots.
The Multibus became a standard of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers as IEEE standard 796 in 1983. 
Sun Microsystems developed the SBus in 1989 to support smaller expansion cards.
The easiest way to implement symmetric multiprocessing was to plug in more than one CPU into the shared system bus, which was used through the 1980s.
However, the shared bus quickly became the bottleneck and more sophisticated connection techniques were explored.

Even in very simple systems, at various times the data bus is driven by the program memory, by RAM, and by I/O devices.
To prevent bus contention on the data bus, at any one instant only one device drives the data bus.
In very simple systems, only the data bus is required to be a bidirectional bus.
In very simple systems, the memory address register always drives the address bus, the control unit always drives the control bus,
and an address decoder selects which particular device is allowed to drive the data bus during this bus cycle.
In very simple systems, every instruction cycle starts with a READ memory cycle where program memory drives the instruction onto the data bus while the instruction register latches that instruction from the data bus.
Some instructions continue with a WRITE memory cycle where the memory data register drives data onto the data bus into the chosen RAM or I/O device.
Other instructions continue with another READ memory cycle where the chosen RAM, program memory, or I/O device drives data onto the data bus while the memory data register latches that data from the data bus.

More complex systems have a multi-master bus—not only do they have many devices that each drive the data bus, but also have many bus masters that each drive the address bus.
The address bus as well as the data bus in bus snooping systems is required to be a bidirectional bus, often implemented as a three-state bus.
To prevent bus contention on the address bus, a bus arbiter selects which particular bus master is allowed to drive the address bus during this bus cycle.

Intel has used the term "Dual Independent Bus" (DIB) for two different purposes. The first one came when Intel changed from a single local bus to the DIB, using the external front-side bus to the main system memory and I/O devices, and the internal back-side bus to the L2 CPU cache. This was introduced in the Pentium Pro in 1995.

In 2005 and 2006 Intel introduced the 8500 and 5000 chipsets, where DIB referred to the two front-side buses on a chipset, which doubles the system bandwidth compared to having just one FSB shared by all the CPUs. However, the information needed to guarantee the cache coherence of shared data located in different caches have to be sent in broadcast (snooped) to check the other FSB's CPUs' cache state, reducing the available bandwidth. To reduce the coherency traffic, a snoop filter was included in the higher-end chipsets, in order to have cache state information available on-chipset. In 2007 Intel extended the idea of multiple buses in the 7300 chipset with four independent FSBs, calling it "dedicated high-speed interconnects" (DHSI). 

The system bus approach is obsolete in the modern personal and server computers, which instead use higher-performance interconnection technologies such as HyperTransport and Intel QuickPath Interconnect, while the system bus architecture continued to be used on simpler embedded microprocessors.
The systems bus can even be internal to a single integrated circuit, producing a system-on-a-chip. Examples include AMBA, CoreConnect, and Wishbone.

Direct Media Interface is an example of a system bus (besides directly accessed PCIE lanes) implemented by Intel and known since at least 2004. It's primarily used to access memory-mapped I/O devices and communicate CPU to the chipset.


Tallgrass prairie

The tallgrass prairie is an ecosystem native to central North America. Historically, natural and anthropogenic fire, as well as grazing by large mammals (primarily bison) provided periodic disturbances to these ecosystems, limiting the encroachment of trees, recycling soil nutrients, and facilitating seed dispersal and germination. Prior to widespread use of the steel plow, which enabled large scale conversion to agricultural land use, tallgrass prairies extended throughout the American Midwest and smaller portions of southern central Canada, from the transitional ecotones out of eastern North American forests, west to a climatic threshold based on precipitation and soils, to the southern reaches of the Flint Hills in Oklahoma, to a transition into forest in Manitoba.

They were characteristically found in parts of the upper Mississippi River Valley, in the central forest-grasslands transition, the central tall grasslands, the upper Midwest forest-savanna transition, and the northern tall grasslands ecoregions. They flourished in areas with rich loess soils and moderate rainfall around 30-35 inches (700–900 mm) per year. To the east were the fire-maintained eastern savannas. In the northeast, where fire was infrequent and periodic windthrow represented the main source of disturbance, beech-maple forests dominated. In contrast, shortgrass prairie was typical in the western Great Plains, where rainfall is less frequent, and soils are less fertile. Due to expansive agricultural land use, very little tallgrass prairie remains.

Retreating glaciers deposited the parent material for soil in the form of till, i.e. unsorted sediment, about 10,000 years ago. Wind-dropped loess and organic matter accumulated, resulting in deep levels of topsoil. Animals such as bison, elk, deer, and rabbits added nitrogen to the soil through urine and feces. Prairie dogs, a type of squirrel, considered to be a keystone species, dug tunnels that "aerated the soil and channeled water several feet below the surface".
For 5,000 to 8,000 years, more than of prairie grasslands were a major feature of the landscape. Between 1800 and 1930, the vast majority was destroyed. Settlers transformed what they named "the Great American Desert" or "The Inland Sea" into farmland. Major reasons for the prairie's demise were the confined grazing pattern of European cattle versus bison, the near-extermination of prairie dogs, and the plowing and cultivation of the land, which breached tallgrass root systems and interrupted reproduction. Furthermore, extensive tile drainage has changed the soil's water content and hydrodynamics, and ongoing soil erosion results in its increasing loss.

Estimates differ of how much original tallgrass prairie survives, ranging from less than 1% mostly in "scattered remnants found in pioneer cemeteries, restoration projects, along highways and railroad rights-of-way, and on steep bluffs high above rivers" to 4%.

Tallgrass prairie is capable of supporting significant biodiversity. Parts of the ecoregion are among the "top ten ecoregions for reptiles, birds, butterflies, and tree species. Tallgrass species are found in the understory layer." Oak (blackjack oak ("Quercus marilandica") and post oak ("Q. stellata") ) and hickory tree species occur in some areas, but generally in moderate densities. Bison ("Bison bison") were a dominant species.

The tallgrass prairie biome depends on prairie fires, a form of wildfire, for its survival and renewal. Tree seedlings and intrusive alien species without fire tolerance are eliminated by periodic fires. Such fires may either be set by humans (for example, Native Americans used fires to drive bison and improve hunting, travel, and visibility) or started naturally by lightning.

White-tailed deer fecal matter has nutrients for plant biodiversity in Tallgrass prairie area.

As its name suggests, the most obvious features of the tallgrass prairie are tall grasses, such as indiangrass ("Sorghastrum nutans"), big bluestem ("Andropogon gerardi"), little bluestem ("Schizachyrium scoparium"), and switchgrass ("Panicum virgatum"), which average between tall, with occasional stalks as high as . Prairies also include a large percentage of forbs, such as lead plant ("Amorpha" spp.), prairie rosinweed ("Silphium" spp.), gayfeathers ("Liatris" spp.), sunflowers ("Helianthus" spp.), asters ("Aster" and "Symphyotrichum" spp.), coneflowers ("Echinacea" spp., and "Rudbeckia" spp.), and many other species.

Technically, prairies have less than 5–11% tree cover. A grass-dominated plant community with 10–49% tree cover is a savanna.

After the steel plow was invented by John Deere in 1833, this fertile soil became one of America's most important resources. Over 95% of the original tallgrass prairie is now farmland.

The tallgrass prairie survives in areas unsuited to plowing: the rocky hill country of the Flint Hills, which runs north to south through east-central Kansas; the eastern fringe of the Red River Valley (Tallgrass Aspen Parkland) in Manitoba and Minnesota; the "Coteau des Prairies", which extends from South Dakota through Minnesota and into Iowa; and the far north portion of Oklahoma. In Oklahoma, the tallgrass prairie has been maintained by ranchers, who saw the hat-high grass as prime grazing area for cattle.

The Tallgrass Prairie Preserve in Osage County, Oklahoma, and the somewhat smaller Tallgrass Prairie National Preserve in Kansas, attempt to maintain this ecosystem in its natural form. They have reintroduced plains bison to the vast expanses of grass. Other U.S. preserves include Midewin National Tallgrass Prairie in Illinois, Broken Kettle Preserve and Neal Smith National Wildlife Refuge in Iowa, Konza Prairie in Kansas, and Prairie State Park in Missouri. In eastern North Dakota is Sheyenne National Grassland, the only national grassland on the tallgrass prairie. Also, several small tallgrass prairie reservations are in Cook County, Illinois, including the National Natural Landmark, Gensburg-Markham Prairie. Tallgrass prairie remnants can also be found among nature preserves within the Hobart Nature District, located in Hobart, Indiana just outside of Chicago.

The original extent of tallgrass prairie in Canada was the plain in the Red River Valley, southwest of Winnipeg in Manitoba ("see" map). While most of Manitoba's tallgrass prairie has been destroyed through cultivation and urban expansion, relatively small areas persist. One of the largest blocks of remaining tallgrass prairie in Manitoba is protected by several conservation partners in a conservation area called the Tallgrass Aspen Parkland. The Manitoba Tall Grass Prairie Preserve, which occupies small portions of the municipalities of Stuartburn and Emerson – Franklin, forms a part of the Tallgrass Aspen Parkland. This preserve contains about of tallgrass prairie, aspen parkland, and wetlands.

A small pocket of less than of tallgrass prairie remains in the southwest corner of Windsor, Ontario, protected by Ojibway Park, and Spring Garden Area of Natural Scientific Interest, along with the interconnected parks: Black Oak Heritage Park, Ojibway Prairie Provincial Nature Reserve, and the Tallgrass Prairie Heritage Park. Aside from the Provincial Nature Reserve, all are operated by the City of Windsor's Parks and Recreation.

Considered the birthplace of ecological restoration, the first tallgrass prairie restoration was the 1936 Curtis Prairie at the University of Wisconsin-Madison Arboretum. The UW Arboretum was the center of tallgrass prairie research through the first half of the 20th century, with the development of the nearby Greene Prairie, Aldo Leopold Shack and Farm and pioneering techniques like prescribed burning. The latter half of the 20th century saw the growth of tallgrass prairie restoration beyond Wisconsin borders, with projects in Illinois such as at Knox College, College of DuPage, Morton Arboretum, and Fermi National Laboratory, and projects in Iowa including Grinnell College's Conard Environmental Research Area. These major tallgrass restoration projects marked restoration’s growth from isolated studies to widespread practice. Tallgrass prairie restoration efforts picked up wider public recognition in the 1980s, spurred by the publication of a book of appreciation, John Madson's "Where the Sky Began: Land of the Tallgrass Prairie" (1982). Nonprofit organizations throughout the former tallgrass prairie region began to reserve or restore small remnants of native prairie. For example, the Native Prairies Association of Texas was founded in 1986 to locate, restore, and protect prairies in Texas; the group currently protects about of Texas prairies.

The Midewin National Tallgrass Prairie, founded in 1996 near Elwood, Illinois, was as of 2006 the largest tallgrass prairie restoration area in the United States. In Minnesota, Glacial Ridge National Wildlife Refuge was established in 2004. The core of the refuge is a preserved tallgrass prairie remnant, and an additional are either in the process of restoration or will be soon. According to The Nature Conservancy, so far, 100 wetlands have been restored and of land have been seeded with native plant species.

Several books have been published on tallgrass prairie restoration, including:



Chicago 17

Chicago 17 is the fourteenth studio album by American rock band Chicago, released on May 14, 1984. It was the group's second release for Full Moon/Warner Bros. Records, their second album to be produced by David Foster and their last with founding bassist/vocalist Peter Cetera. As of 2023, it remains Chicago's best-selling album, with over 6.1 million units being sold in the United States, the United Kingdom, and Japan. Four singles were released from the album, all of which peaked in the top 20 on the "Billboard" Hot 100 chart. The success of the music videos for "Stay the Night", "You're the Inspiration", and "Hard Habit to Break" on MTV propelled "Chicago 17" to achieve an RIAA certification of six times platinum.

In 1985, the album received three Grammy Awards. David Foster won for Producer of the Year, Non-Classical (tied in this category with Lionel Richie and James Anthony Carmichael), Humberto Gatica won for Best Engineered Recording – Non-Classical, and David Foster and Jeremy Lubbock won for Best Instrumental Arrangement Accompanying Vocal(s) for "Hard Habit to Break" which was also nominated for Record of the Year, Best Pop Performance by a Duo or Group With Vocals and Best Vocal Arrangement for Two or More Voices. In his review of the album for AllMusic, music critic Stephen Thomas Erlewine says "Chicago 17" is "the pinnacle of [producer David Foster's] craft and one of the best adult contemporary records of the '80s," and one of the most influential albums "within its style." Writing for "Billboard", Bobby Olivier said the album "is one of the greatest pure power ballad albums of all time — or at least from 1984 — and "[Hard] Habit [to Break]" is one of the finest entries."

In 2006, Rhino Entertainment remastered and reissued the album, using the original analog versions of "Please Hold On" (which was co-written with Lionel Richie who was enjoying success from his album "Can't Slow Down") and "Prima Donna" and adding a Robert Lamm demo, "Here Is Where We Begin" as a bonus track.

In keeping with the majority of their albums up to that time (1984), the traditional "Chicago" logo, designed by John Berg and Nick Fasciano, is the main feature of the album cover. It does not feature any photos of the group. In a 2020 article for "Muse by Clio", it was listed among "Nine Great Album Covers, Chosen by Gregory Sylvester." Sylvester describes the cover as, " ... an illusion of a package within a package ... brown kraft paper, twine and a faux red stamp." The album cover looks like a package wrapped in brown paper tied with twine and (on the back) secured with tape. On the front, the "Chicago" logo appears to be in bas-relief (it is not), covered by the wrapping paper. The number "17," in Arabic numerals rather than the Roman numerals used by the group formerly, appears to be stamped on the wrapping paper below the logo. In the upper left-hand quadrant of the cover back, a pink "receipt form" is depicted (designated as a "TOPS FORM 3014" in small print at the bottom of the "receipt"), tucked underneath the "twine," with the "Chicago" logo stamped on it near the top in purple ink and, below the logo, a "DESCRIPTION OF PACKAGE" lists the tracks on side one and side two. The bottom of the "receipt form" shows production and engineering credits and the Warner Bros. logo "stamped" on the slip. On the inner dust sleeve, a large group photo of the band appears on one side: (back row, left to right) Lee Loughnane, Bill Champlin, James Pankow, Walt Parazaider, Robert Lamm, (front row, left to right) Danny Seraphine, Peter Cetera. The reverse side of the dust sleeve gives track listings, song lyrics, and song and album credits, including credits for artwork and packaging: Art Direction/Design, Simon Levy; Album Cover Art, Larry Vigon; Photography, Harry Langdon, James Goble.

Some songs were recorded during the "Chicago 17" sessions but not released. "Good for Nothing" was later released on the "We Are the World" superstar charity album in 1985. This is the last released Chicago song to feature Peter Cetera on vocals.

A song called "Sweet Marie" recorded during sessions for the "Chicago 17" album has been performed by the Norwegian band TOBB. Bill Champlin offered this song to the band. It was released on May 14, 2014 by TOBB, the 30th anniversary of the "Chicago 17" album's release. It was performed by Chicago on rare occasions in 1984, and has surfaced online from VHS recordings of some of their performances.

A subsequent international release in 2010 (included in the Studio Albums 1979 - 2008 boxed set from 2015) has the original album restored, with additional bonus tracks of alternate versions of "Only You", "You're the Inspiration", and "Prima Donna" as well as "Here Is Where We Begin". A demo version of "Hard Habit to Break" exists with Robert Lamm on vocals, as briefly heard during the documentary “Now More Than Ever: The History of Chicago.”

All information in this section from except as noted.

Chicago

Additional personnel

Production

Production for 2006 reissue

Ciriaco De Mita

Luigi Ciriaco De Mita (; 2 February 1928 – 26 May 2022) was an Italian politician who served as Prime Minister of Italy from April 1988 to July 1989.

A member of the Christian Democracy (DC), De Mita served as its secretary and leader from May 1982 until February 1989, becoming one of the most influential politicians in the country, as well as one of the most prominent members of DC's left-wing. During his long-time career, he also served as Minister of Industry, Commerce and Crafts from 1973 to 1974, Minister of Foreign Trade from 1974 to 1976, and Minister for Interventions in the South from 1976 until 1979. He was a member of the Chamber of Deputies for more than 40 years between 1963 and 2008 and also member of the European Parliament. During his final years, De Mita served as mayor of his hometown Nusco from 2014 until his death in 2022.

Ciriaco De Mita was born in Nusco in the Avellinese hinterland in 1928. His father was a tailor and postman, while his mother was a housewife. After attending the classical high school in nearby Sant'Angelo dei Lombardi with excellent grades, he won a scholarship in the Augustinianum College and enrolled at the Catholic University of the Sacred Heart in Milan, where he graduated in law and then started working as a consultant at Enrico Mattei's Eni legal office.

As a young man, De Mita joined the Christian Democracy (DC) and entered politics. In 1953, De Mita was among the proponents of "La Base", a leftist wing of the party, close to Giovanni Marcora. He rose through the ranks of the party, becoming a member of its national council in 1956 during the party's congress in Trento.

In the 1963 general election, he was elected to the Chamber of Deputies for the constituency of Benevento–Avellino–Salerno with more than 67,000 votes. and he will be a deputy uninterruptedly until the elections of 1994. In 1968 De Mita was appointed undersecretary of state to the Ministry of Interior, becoming a member of the government for the first time. 

De Mita was appointed deputy secretary of the Christian Democracy in 1969, serving under the leadership of Arnaldo Forlani; he hold the position until February 1973. During the 1970s, De Mita hold various positions in the government. He served in the cabinet of Mariano Rumor as Minister of Industry, Trade and Crafts from 8 July 1973 until 23 November 1974; Minister of Foreign Trade from 23 November 1974 to 30 July 1976 in the government of Aldo Moro and Minister for Extraordinary Interventions in Southern Italy in the cabinet of Giulio Andreotti from 30 July 1976 to 21 March 1979.

In the 1982 party congress, De Mita was elected secretary of the Christian Democracy with a clear objective of renewing the party. As party's leader, De Mita suffered a huge loss in the 1983 general election. In 1986, De Mita was re-elected secretary with 60% support from the party.

His secretariat is remembered for a rivalry with Bettino Craxi, socialist leader who in the 1980s held the office of Prime Minister for four years. Craxi had always promoted his reformist drive as opposed to the inaction of the Christian democrats and in 1987 he clashed with De Mita for the breaking of the so-called "relay pact" ("patto della staffetta"), under which the Italian Socialist Party (PSI) would have had to cede the leadership of the government to the DC in the last year of the legislature. Craxi refused to do this and in 1987 a snap election was called.

In 1984 De Mita pushed the future president of Italy, Sergio Mattarella, and Leoluca Orlando to intensify their political commitment with the task of cleaning up the Sicilian branch of the DC from Mafia control. De Mita appointed Mattarella as extraordinary commissioner for Palermo.

De Mita remained secretary of the DC until 22 February 1989, when he became president of the party, a position he held until 1992.

After the elections of 1987, De Mita waited a year to become Prime Minister and was appointed on 13 April 1988, heading a "Pentapartito" with DC, PSI, PSDI, PRI and PLI. Three days later, on 16 April 1988, in Forlì, Red Brigades killed Senator Roberto Ruffilli, an advisor of De Mita. De Mita's government obtained a vote of confidence from the Chamber of Deputies on 21 April, government that had as its main objective the reform of the institutions based on four urgent points: the Italian Parliament, the presidency of the Council of Ministers, local entities and the rules of procedure of the Chamber of Deputies.

In June 1988 his cabinet approved the relocation of 72 U.S. Air Force F-16 fighters to Italy, in response to Spain's request to remove them from its territory.

In social policy, De Mita's time in office witnessed the passage of a law in May 1988 that introduced a new benefit for salaried workers called "benefit for the family nucleus" ("assegno per il nucleo familiare"), with the amount varying depending on the number of family members and the family income of the previous year.

After a government crisis caused by rivalry with Craxi, De Mita resigned on 19 May 1989. He was called to form a new coalition government, but did not succeed. His government finally fell in July 1989 and was succeeded by Giulio Andreotti on 23 July. 

In September 1992, he was appointed Chairman of the Bilateral Commission for Constitutional Reform, a position he left in March 1993 when was succeeded by Nilde Iotti. In the 1994 elections, De Mita did not run for reelection as a deputy, but ran again in 1996 after a lag of two years and then re-elected in 2001 and 2006. He then joined the Italian People's Party and later Democracy is Freedom – The Daisy until 2008.

De Mita was Member of the European Parliament between 1999 and 2004, and 2009 to 2014.

On 25 May 2014, De Mita was elected as mayor of Nusco, his native town, and re-elected in 2019, serving until his death in 2022.

In 1958, De Mita married Anna Maria Scarinzi (born 12 February 1939), with whom he had one son and three daughters, Antonia (born 23 December 1967), Giuseppe (born 10 May 1969), Floriana (born 19 March 1973), and Simona (born 21 April 1974). His nephew Giuseppe De Mita was member of the Chamber of Deputies between 2013 and 2018, and whose political career Ciriaco was in charge of catapulting. 

De Mita died on 26 May 2022, at the age of 94, while recovering from surgery for a fracture of a femur following a fall at home. His funeral was held the following day in Nusco.

Source: Ministry of the Interior

Polish Operation of the NKVD

The Polish Operation of the NKVD (Soviet security service) in 1937–1938 was an anti-Polish mass-ethnic cleansing operation of the NKVD carried out in the Soviet Union against Poles (labeled by the Soviets as "agents") during the period of the Great Purge. It was ordered by the Politburo of the Communist Party against so-called "Polish spies" and customarily interpreted by NKVD officials as relating to 'absolutely all Poles'. It resulted in the sentencing of 139,835 people, and summary executions of 111,091 Poles living in or near the Soviet Union. The operation was implemented according to NKVD Order No. 00485 signed by Nikolai Yezhov. 

The majority of the shooting victims were ethnically Polish, but not all, with some belonging to various minority groups from the Kresy macro-region, for instance, Ruthenians; these groups in the Soviet worldview had some element of Polish culture or heritage, and were therefore also "Polish". The remainder were 'suspected' of being Polish, without further inquiry, or classified as possibly having pro-Polish sympathies. The NKVD agents looked through local phone books to expedite the procedure and detained people with names that sounded Polish.

While similar to other operations such as the "Greek Operation", "Finnish Operation", "Latvian Operation" and "Estonian Operation", the Polish Operation was the largest ethnic shooting and deportation action during the Great Purge campaign of political murders in the Soviet Union.<ref name="B/E/F"></ref> According to official data, victims of the "Polish Operation" accounted for 41.7% of the sentenced people and 44.9% of the executed people during all such ethnic operations.

The top secret NKVD Order No. 00485, titled ""On the liquidation of the Polish diversionist and espionage groups and POW units"," was approved on August 9, 1937 by the Party's Central Committee Politburo, and was signed by Nikolai Yezhov on August 11, 1937. It was distributed to the local subdivisions of the NKVD simultaneously with Yezhov's thirty-page "secret letter," explaining what the "Polish operation" was all about. The letter from Yezhov was titled, ""On fascist-resurrectionist, spying, diversional, defeationist, and terrorist activity of Polish intelligence in the USSR"". Joseph Stalin was approving of the operation saying "‘Very good! Dig up and purge this Polish espionage mud in the future as well. Destroy it in the interest of the USSR.."<ref name="hoover/pdf">The Great Terror (Chapter 4) – from: "Stalin's Loyal Executioner: People's Commissar Nikolai Ezhov, 1895–1940" by Marc Jansen and Nikita Petrov, pp. 95 (17 / 33). Internet Archive.</ref>
The "Order" adopted the simplified so-called "album procedure" (as it was called in NKVD circles). The long lists of Poles condemned by a lower NKVD organ (so-called "dvoika", a two-man team) during early meetings, were then collected into "albums" and sent to the midrange NKVD offices for a stamp of approval by a "troika" (a three-man team; a communist official, NKVD leader, and party procurator). Poles were the first ever major Soviet population group to be sentenced in this manner. After the approval of the entire "album", the executions were carried out immediately. This procedure was also used later on in other mass operations of the NKVD.

The "Polish Operation" was a second in a series of national operations of the NKVD, carried out by the Soviet Union against ethnic groups including Latvian, Finnish, German, and Romanian, based on a theory about an internal enemy (i.e., the fifth column), labelled as the "hostile capitalist surrounding" residing along its western borders. In the opinion of historian Timothy Snyder, this fabricated justification was intended only to cover-up the state-sanctioned campaign of mass-murder aiming to eradicate Poles as a national (and linguistic) minority group. Another possible cause, according to Snyder, might have sprung from the necessity to explain the Holodomor, the Soviet-made famine in Ukraine, which required a political scapegoat. A top Soviet official, Vsevolod Balitsky, chose the Polish Military Organization which was disbanded in 1921. The NKVD declared that it continued to exist. Some Soviet Poles were tortured in order to confess to its existence, and denounce other individuals as spies. Meanwhile, the Communist International helped by revisiting its files in search of Polish members, producing another bountiful source of made-up evidence.

The operation took place approximately from August 25, 1937, to November 15, 1938. The largest group of people with a Polish background, around 40 percent of all victims, came from Soviet Ukraine, especially from the districts near the border with Poland. Among them were tens of thousands of peasants, railway workers, industrial labourers, engineers and others. An additional 17 percent of victims came from Soviet Byelorussia. The rest came from around Western Siberia and Kazakhstan, where exiled Poles had lived since the Partitions of Poland, as well as from the southern Urals, northern Caucasus and the rest of Siberia, including the Far East.

The following categories of people were arrested by the NKVD during its Polish Operation, as described in Soviet documents:

Although the Soviet authorities claim that the executed victims were all ethnic Poles, some of those killed were also ethnic Belarusians, Jews, Ukrainians and Russians mistaken and alleged for being ethnic Poles due to their surnames or religious denominations. 47.3% of the total number of "Poles" who were arrested in Belarus were actually ethnic Belarusian Catholics, of whom many declared themselves to be Poles in the 1920s. They made up 14.2% of those arrested in the Polish Operation across the Soviet Union (September–November 1938). 13.4% of those arrested were ethnic Ukrainians. 8.8% of the arrested were ethnic Russians.

According to archives of the NKVD, 111,091 Poles and people accused of ties with Poland, were sentenced to death, and 28,744 were sentenced to labor camps; 139,835 victims in total. This number constitutes 10% of the total number of people officially convicted during the Yezhovshchina period, based on confirming NKVD documents.

According to historian Bogdan Musiał: "It is estimated that Polish losses in the Ukrainian SSR were about 30%, while in the Belorussian SSR... the Polish minority was almost completely annihilated or deported." Musiał is also of the opinion that "it does not seem unlikely, as Soviet statistics indicate, that the number of Poles dropped from 792,000 in 1926 to 627,000 in 1939."

Almost all victims of the NKVD shootings were men, wrote Michał Jasiński, most with families. Their wives and children were dealt with by the NKVD Order № 00486. The women were generally sentenced to deportation to Kazakhstan for an average of 5 to 10 years. Orphaned children without relatives willing to take them were put in orphanages to be brought up as Soviet, with no knowledge of their origins. All possessions of the accused were confiscated. The parents of the executed men – as well as their in-laws – were left with nothing to live on, which usually sealed their fate as well. Statistical extrapolation, wrote Jasiński, increases the number of Polish victims in 1937–1938 to around 200–250,000 depending on the size of their families.

In Leningrad, the NKVD reviewed local telephone books and arrested almost 7,000 citizens with Polish-sounding name with the vast majority of such nominal "suspects" were executed within 10 days of arrest.
The Polish-majority villages of Siberia were also targeted. In Belostok, Tomsk Oblast, 100 men of Polish origins were executed and their bodies thrown into the Ob River. In Polozovo, Tomsk Oblast 33 Poles were arrested, of which 32 were executed and one died in captivity, and in Vershina 30 Poles were arrested (29 men and one woman), of which one person died during transport to Irkutsk and the rest were executed there.

The small Polish communities of the more remote parts of the USSR were also targeted in the "Polish Operation". According to the former secret police archives in Tbilisi, Georgia alone, at least 89 people were victims of the "Polish Operation", and further 125 Poles were victims of other concurrent operations, whereas, according to Kyrgyz archives, at least 180 Poles fell victim to all simultaneous operations of the Great Purge in Kyrgyzstan.

According to historian Michael Ellman, "The 'national operations' of 1937–38, notably the 'Polish operation', may qualify as genocide as defined by the UN Convention, although there is as yet no legal ruling on the matter". Karol Karski argues that the Soviet actions against Poles are genocide according to international law. He says that while the extermination was targeting other nationalities as well, and according to the criteria other than ethnicity, but as long as Poles were singled out based on their ethnicity, that makes the actions to be genocide. The historian Terry Martin refers to the "national operations", including the "Polish Operation", as ethnic cleansing and "ethnic terror". According to Martin, the singling out of diaspora nationalities for arrest and mass execution "verged on the genocidal". Historian Timothy Snyder called the Polish Operation genocidal: "It is hard not to see the Soviet "Polish Operation" of 1937-38 as genocidal: Polish fathers were shot, Polish mothers sent to Kazakhstan, and Polish children left in orphanages where they would lose their Polish identity. As more than 100,000 innocent people were killed on the spurious grounds that theirs was a disloyal ethnicity, Stalin spoke of "Polish filth". On the other hand, Stalin often praised Poland as a good nation and the Poles as brave fighters, the third most "dogged" soldiers after the Russians and Germans. Norman Naimark called Stalin's policy towards Poles in the 1930s "genocidal" but did not consider the entire Great Purge genocidal since it targeted political opponents as well. Simon Sebag Montefiore presents a similar opinion.

According to historians Olle Sundström and Andrej Kotljarchuk, most scholars (for example, Nicolas Werth, Michael Mann and Hiroaki Kuromiya) focus on the security dilemma in the border areas suggesting the need to secure the ethnic integrity of Soviet space "vis-à-vis" neighboring capitalistic enemy states. They stress the role of international relations and believe that representatives of ethnic minorities such as the Poles, were killed not because of their ethnicity, but because of their possible relations to countries hostile to the USSR and fear of disloyalty in the case of an invasion.



Lettice Knollys

Lettice Knollys ( , sometimes latinized as Laetitia, alias Lettice Devereux or Lettice Dudley), Countess of Essex and Countess of Leicester (8 November 1543 – 25 December 1634), was an English noblewoman and mother to the courtiers Robert Devereux, 2nd Earl of Essex, and Lady Penelope Rich. By her second marriage to Elizabeth I's favourite, Robert Dudley, Earl of Leicester, she incurred the Queen's unrelenting displeasure.

A grandniece of Elizabeth's mother, Anne Boleyn, and close to Elizabeth since childhood, Lettice Knollys was introduced early into court life. At 17 she married Walter Devereux, Viscount Hereford, who in 1572 became Earl of Essex. After her husband went to Ireland in 1573, she possibly became involved with Robert Dudley, Earl of Leicester. There was plenty of scandalous talk, not least when Essex died in Ireland of dysentery in 1576. Two years later Lettice Knollys married Robert Dudley in private. When the Queen was told of the marriage, she banished the Countess forever from court, effectively curtailing her social life. The couple's child, Robert, Lord Denbigh, died at the age of three, to the great grief of his parents and ending all prospects for the continuance of the House of Dudley. Lettice Knollys' union with Leicester was nevertheless a happy one, as was her third marriage to the much younger Sir Christopher Blount, whom she unexpectedly married in 1589 only six months after the Earl's death. She continued to style herself Lady Leicester.

The Countess was left rich under Leicester's will; yet the discharge of his overwhelming debts diminished her wealth. In 1604–1605 she successfully defended her widow's rights in court when her possessions and her good name were threatened by the Earl's illegitimate son, Robert Dudley, who claimed that he was his father's legitimate heir, thus implicitly declaring her marriage bigamous. Lettice Knollys was always close to her large family circle. Helpless at the political eclipse of her eldest son, the second Earl of Essex, she lost both him and her third husband to the executioner in 1601. From the 1590s she lived chiefly in the Staffordshire countryside, where, in reasonably good health until the end, she died at age 91 on Christmas Day 1634.

Lettice Knollys was born on 8 November 1543 at Rotherfield Greys, Oxfordshire. Her father, Sir Francis Knollys, was a Member of Parliament and acted as Master of the Horse to Prince Edward. Her mother, Catherine Carey, was a daughter of Mary Boleyn, sister to Anne Boleyn. Thus Catherine was Elizabeth I's first cousin, and Lettice Knollys her first cousin once removed. Lettice was the third of her parents' 16 children.

Sir Francis and his wife were Protestants. In 1556 they went to Frankfurt in Germany to escape religious persecution under Queen Mary I, taking five of their children with them. It is unknown whether Lettice was among them, and she may have passed the next few years in the household of Princess Elizabeth, with whom the family had a close relationship since the mid-1540s. Her parents and the remainder of the family returned to England in January 1559, two months after Elizabeth I's succession. Francis Knollys was appointed Vice-Chamberlain of the Royal Household; Lady Knollys became a senior Lady of the Bedchamber, and her daughter Lettice a Maid of the Privy Chamber.

In late 1560 Lettice Knollys married Walter Devereux, Viscount Hereford. The couple lived at the family seat of Chartley in Staffordshire. Here, the two eldest of their five children, the daughters Penelope and Dorothy, were born in 1563 and 1564, respectively. Lettice Devereux returned to court on at least one occasion, in the summer of 1565, when the Spanish ambassador Diego Guzmán de Silva described her as "one of the best-looking ladies of the court" and as a favourite with the Queen. Pregnant with her first son, she flirted with Robert Dudley, Earl of Leicester, the Queen's favourite. The Queen found out at once and succumbed to a fit of jealousy. The Viscountess went back to Staffordshire where, in November 1565, she gave birth to Robert, later 2nd Earl of Essex. Two more sons followed: Walter, who was born in 1569, and Francis, who died soon after birth at an unknown date.

Walter Devereux was raised to the earldom of Essex in 1572. In 1573 he successfully suggested to the Queen a project to plant Englishmen in Ulster. In the autumn he went to Ireland, not to return for two years. During this time Lettice Devereux possibly engaged in a love-affair with the Earl of Leicester; her whereabouts in the following years are largely unknown, though. In 1573 Leicester sent her a present of venison at Chartley from his seat Kenilworth Castle in Warwickshire, and she made hunting visits to Kenilworth in 1574 and 1576. She was also present in July 1575 when Dudley entertained the Queen with a magnificent 19-days festival at the castle. Elizabeth and the court (including the Earl of Leicester) then progressed to Chartley, where they were welcomed by the Countess of Essex.

When Walter Devereux returned to England in December 1575, the Spanish agent in London, Antonio de Guaras, reported:As the thing is publicly talked of in the streets, there can be no harm in my writing openly about the great enmity between the Earl of Leicester and the Earl of Essex, in consequence, it is said, of the fact that while Essex was in Ireland his wife had two children by Leicester. ... Great discord is expected in consequence.

These rumours were elaborated on years later in "Leicester's Commonwealth", a Catholic underground libel against the Protestant Earl of Leicester that satirically detailed his alleged enormities. Here the Countess of Essex, after having a daughter by Leicester, kills a second child "cruelly and unnaturally" by abortion to prevent her homecoming husband from discovering her affair. There is no evidence that any such children ever existed.

The Earl of Essex returned to Ireland in July 1576. At Dublin, he died of dysentery on 22 September during an epidemic, bemoaning the "frailness of women" in his last words. Rumours of poison, administered by Leicester, immediately sprang up and continued, notwithstanding an official investigation which concluded that Essex had died of natural causes. His body was carried over to Carmarthen, where his widow attended the funeral.

The Countess' jointure, the lands left to her under her husband's will, was too little to live by and did not comprise Chartley, so that she and her children had to seek accommodation elsewhere. She partly lived in her father's house at Rotherfield Greys, but also with friends; "Leicester's Commonwealth" claimed that Leicester had her move "up and down the country from house to house by privy ways". She pleaded for an augmentation of her jointure with the authorities and, to reach a compromise with the late Earl's executors, threatened "by some froward advice" to claim her dower rights. These would have amounted to one third of the Devereux estate. After seven months of wrangling, she reached a more satisfactory settlement, the Countess declaring to be "content to respect my children more than myself". She equally—though unsuccessfully—tried to move the Queen to forgive Essex' debts to the Crown, which very much burdened the inheritance of her son, the young Earl of Essex.

Lettice Knollys married Robert Dudley, Earl of Leicester on 21 September 1578 at around seven o'clock in the morning. Only six other people were present at the Earl's country house of Wanstead Hall in Essex; among these were the bride's father and brother, Francis and Richard Knollys; the bridegroom's brother, Ambrose, Earl of Warwick; and his two friends, the Earl of Pembroke and Lord North. The officiating chaplain Humphrey Tyndall later remarked that the bride wore a "loose gown" (an informal morning dress), which has triggered modern speculation that she was pregnant and that the ceremony happened under pressure from her father. The marriage was, however, in planning between Leicester and his wedding guests for almost a year. While Lettice Devereux may well have been pregnant, there is no further indication as to this. The marriage date coincided with the end of the customary two-years-mourning for a widow.

Leicester—a widower since 1560—had for many years been in hope of marrying Elizabeth herself, "for whose sake he had hitherto forborne marriage", as he confessed to Lord North. He feared Elizabeth's reaction and insisted that his marriage be kept a secret. It did not remain one for long, the French ambassador, Michel de Castelnau, reporting it two months later. When the Queen was told of the marriage the next year, she banished Lettice Dudley permanently from court; she never forgave her cousin, nor could she ever accept the marriage. Even Lady Leicester's movements through London were resented by the Queen, let alone summer visits to Kenilworth by husband and wife.

Lettice Dudley continued to style herself Countess of Essex for several years into her new marriage. She lived very discreetly, often with her relatives at the Knollys family home in Oxfordshire. In February 1580 she was expecting the birth of a child there. For the birth of Leicester's heir, Robert, Lord Denbigh, in June 1581, she moved to Leicester House on the Strand. A further advanced pregnancy was reported in September 1582 by the French ambassador, yet the outcome is again unknown. The next year Lettice Dudley became officially resident at Leicester House, and Elizabeth was once again furious with the Earl "about his marriage, for he opened the same more plainly than ever before". A few weeks later Michel de Castelnau was a guest at Leicester's palatial mansion: "He especially invited me to dine with him and his wife, who has much influence over him and whom he introduces only to those to whom he wishes to show a particular mark of attention."

Robert Dudley had been close to the Knollys family since the early 1550s; several of Lettice's brothers had been in his service, and his marriage only enhanced his relations with her siblings. To his four stepchildren he was a concerned and generous stepfather. The Dudleys' domestic life is partly documented in the Earl's accounts. Lettice Dudley financed her personal expenses and servants out of her revenue as Dowager Countess of Essex, and remained largely excluded from society life.

The three-year-old Lord Denbigh died suddenly on 19 July 1584 at Wanstead. His death shattered the hopes of a dynasty for the House of Dudley. Leicester stayed away from his court duties for a few weeks "to comfort my sorrowful wife for the loss of my little son, whom God has lately taken from us." He also thanked Lord Burghley for—unsuccessfully—pleading with the Queen "on behalf of my poor wife. For truly my Lord, in all reason she is hardly dealt with."

In 1585 Leicester led an English expedition to assist the rebellious United Provinces against Spain. He incurred Elizabeth's wrath when he accepted the title of Governor-General in January 1586. What had especially kindled her fury was a tale that the Countess of Leicester was planning to follow her husband to the Netherlands "with such a train of ladies, and gentlewomen, and such rich coaches, litters, and side-saddles, as Her Majesty had none, and that there should be such a court of ladies, as should far pass Her Majesty's court here." Thomas Dudley, who informed Leicester about these events, stressed that "this information" was "most false". At this same time the Earl was giving his wife authority to handle certain land issues during his absence, implying they had no plans to meet in Holland. William Davison, whom Leicester had sent to explain his doings to the Queen, described a visit to the Countess during the crisis: "I found her greatly troubled with tempestuous news she received from court, but somewhat comforted when she understood how I had proceeded with Her Majesty."

The Earl returned to England in December 1586, but was sent again to the Netherlands in the following June—to the grief of his wife, as the young Earl of Essex remarked in a letter. Leicester eventually resigned his post in December 1587. The Countess was with him when he died unexpectedly, possibly of malaria, on 4 September 1588 at Cornbury Park, Oxfordshire; they had been on their way to Kenilworth and Buxton. The Earl's funeral at Warwick in October 1588 was attended by his widow as well as numerous members of her family circle.

Lettice Dudley was left a wealthy widow. Leicester's will appointed her as executrix and her income from both her husbands' jointures amounted to £3,000 annually, to which came plate and movables worth £6,000. However, her jointure was to suffer greatly from paying off Leicester's debts, which at some £50,000 were so overwhelming that she was advised to decline the responsibility of dealing with her husband's financial legacy.

In March or April 1589, hardly six months after Leicester's death, Lettice married Sir Christopher Blount, a relatively poor Catholic soldier 12 years her junior, who had been the Earl of Leicester's Gentleman of the Horse and a trusted friend of his. The marriage was a great surprise, and the Earl of Essex complained that it was an "unhappy choice". In the face of tittle-tattle that had reached even France, Lady Leicester—she continued to be styled thus—explained her choice with being a defenceless widow; like her marriage to Leicester, the union proved to be a "genuinely happy" one. Some 60 years later, it was claimed in a satirical poem that she had poisoned the Earl of Leicester on his deathbed, thereby forestalling her own murder at his hands, because he had found out about her supposed lover, Sir Christopher Blount.

Lettice's second son, Walter Devereux, died 1591 in France while on military duty, and in subsequent years she was anxious for her elder son's safety. She addressed him "Sweet Robin", longing for his letters and helpless about his moodiness and depression. In 1593, she sold Leicester House to him, after which it became known as Essex House. She moved to Drayton Bassett near Chartley in Staffordshire, which would be her main residence for the rest of her life. Still banished from court, she saw no point in returning to London without being reconciled to Elizabeth. In December 1597, having heard from friends that "Her Majesty is very well prepared to hearken to terms of pacification", she prepared to do "a winter journey" if her son thought "it be to any purpose". "Otherwise a country life is fittest for disgraced persons", she commented. She travelled to London, staying at Essex House from January till March 1598, and seeking a reconciliation with Elizabeth. At last a short meeting was granted, in which the Countess kissed the Queen and "the Queen kissed her", but nothing really changed.

Essex was imprisoned in 1599 after returning from his command in Ireland without licence; his mother came to London to intercede for him with the Queen. She tried to send Elizabeth a present in the form of a gown, which Elizabeth neither accepted nor refused. Her efforts to get sight of her son made matters worse: "Mislike is taken that his mother and friends have been in a house that looks into York Garden where he uses to walk, and have saluted each other out of a window." Both his military incompetence and his "de facto" abandonment of his post were condoned on that occasion, but rather than count his blessings and hold his peace, he became malcontent, chaffed at his failures, and fell into rebellion. During Essex' revolt, trial, and execution in February 1601, Lettice remained at Drayton Basset. The event was a comprehensive personal disaster for her, because she lost not only her son but also her beloved third husband, who was, she wrote, her "best friend". Sir Christopher Blount was executed on 18 March 1601, three weeks after the execution of his stepson, to whom he had been a friend and confidant for many years. Sir Christopher had taken in Mary Cresswell and after he died she was looked after by Lettice. Lettice was alarmed when she discovered that Cresswell was set on becoming a nun. With the aid of her chaplain she close to brainwashed the child until she finally accepted the Protestant faith. Cresswell's life story would in time be well known.

The executions and attainders of Essex and Blount led to a legal dispute over the Countess of Leicester's remaining property. In this context she claimed that Blount, in the process of paying off Leicester's debts, had squandered her jewels and much of her landed wealth. The death of Elizabeth I in 1603 meant some form of rehabilitation for the Countess; the new monarch, James I, not only restored her grandson, the third Earl of Essex, to his father's title and estate, but quickly cancelled the rest of her debts to the Crown, almost £4,000.

Even more than his debts, the Earl of Leicester's will triggered litigation. He had intended his illegitimate son from his early 1570s relationship with Douglas Sheffield, the adolescent Robert Dudley, to inherit Kenilworth after the death of his brother, Ambrose Dudley, 3rd Earl of Warwick. Some of the countess' jointure manors lay in the castle's vicinity, while at the same time they had been assigned to the younger Dudley's inheritance by the overseers of Leicester's will. After Warwick's death in February 1590, lengthy legal proceedings ensued over whether particular parts of Lady Leicester's jointure belonged to the Kenilworth estate or not.

In 1603, Dudley initiated moves to prove that he was the legitimate son of his parents and thus the heir to the earldoms of Warwick and Leicester. If successful, this claim would not only have implied that Lettice Knollys' union with Leicester had been bigamous, but would also have nullified her jointure rights. 

Consequently, in February 1604, she filed a complaint against Dudley in the Star Chamber, accusing him of defamation. She was backed by Sir Robert Sidney, who considered himself the only legitimate heir of his uncles Leicester and Warwick. During the Star Chamber proceedings 56 former servants and friends of the Earl of Leicester testified that he had always regarded Dudley as his illegitimate son. The other side was unable to cite clear evidence and the King's chief minister, Robert Cecil, thought it unwise to rake up the existing property settlement, so the outcome was in favour of Lady Leicester. All the evidence was impounded to preclude a resumption of the case.

Throughout her life, Lettice Knollys cared for her siblings, children, and grandchildren. Until their respective deaths in 1607 and 1619, her daughters Penelope and Dorothy were her closest companions. The young third Earl of Essex, also called Robert, shared much of his life with the old Countess at Chartley and Drayton Bassett. 

Still walking a mile a day at nearly 90, she died in her chair in the morning of 25 December 1634, aged 91. Widely mourned as a symbol of a by-gone age, she wished to be buried "at Warwick by my dear lord and husband the Earl of Leicester with whom I desire to be entombed". Her request was respected and she came to rest in the Beauchamp Chapel of Collegiate Church of St Mary, Warwick, opposite the tomb of her son, young Lord Denbigh.

An episode of the genealogical television series "Who Do You Think You Are?" traced British comedian Josh Widdicombe's ancestry in direct line to Knollys, via his grandmother, a member of the Barings family.



GSK-3

Glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK-3) is a serine/threonine protein kinase that mediates the addition of phosphate molecules onto serine and threonine amino acid residues. First discovered in 1980 as a regulatory kinase for its namesake, glycogen synthase (GS), GSK-3 has since been identified as a protein kinase for over 100 different proteins in a variety of different pathways. In mammals, including humans, GSK-3 exists in two isozymes encoded by two homologous genes GSK-3α (GSK3A) and GSK-3β (GSK3B). GSK-3 has been the subject of much research since it has been implicated in a number of diseases, including type 2 diabetes, Alzheimer's disease, inflammation, cancer, addiction and bipolar disorder.

GSK-3 is a serine/threonine protein kinase that phosphorylate either threonine or serine, and this phosphorylation controls a variety of biological activities, such as glycogen metabolism, cell signaling, cellular transport, and others. GS inhibition by GSK-3β leads to a decrease in glycogen synthesis in the liver and muscles, along with increased blood glucose or hyperglycemia. This is why GSK-3β is associated with the pathogenesis and progression of many diseases, such as diabetes, obesity, cancer, and Alzheimer's disease. It is active in resting cells and is inhibited by several hormones such as insulin, endothelial growth factor, and platelet-derived growth factor. Insulin indirectly inactivates GSK3 via downstream phosphorylation of the specific serine residues Ser21 and Ser9 in GSK-3 isoforms α and β, respectively via the PI3K/Akt pathway.

, GSK-3 is the only type of glycogen synthase kinase named and recognized. The gene symbols for GSK1 and GSK2 have been withdrawn by the HUGO Gene Nomenclature Committee (HGNC), and no new names for these "genes" nor their locations have been specified.

GSK-3 functions by phosphorylating a serine or threonine residue on its target substrate. A positively charged pocket adjacent to the active site binds a "priming" phosphate group attached to a serine or threonine four residues C-terminal of the target phosphorylation site. The active site, at residues 181, 200, 97, and 85, binds the terminal phosphate of ATP and transfers it to the target location on the substrate (see figure 1).

Glycogen synthase is an enzyme that is responsible in glycogen synthesis. It is activated by glucose 6-phosphate (G6P), and inhibited by glycogen synthase kinases (GSK3). Those two mechanisms play an important role in glycogen metabolism.

Phosphorylation of a protein by GSK-3 usually inhibits the activity of its downstream target. GSK-3 is active in a number of central intracellular signaling pathways, including cellular proliferation, migration, glucose regulation, and apoptosis.

GSK-3 was originally discovered in the context of its involvement in regulating glycogen synthase. After being primed by casein kinase 2 (CK2), glycogen synthase gets phosphorylated at a cluster of three C-terminal serine residues, reducing its activity. In addition to its role in regulating glycogen synthase, GSK-3 has been implicated in other aspects of glucose homeostasis, including the phosphorylation of insulin receptor IRS1 and of the gluconeogenic enzymes phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase and glucose 6 phosphatase. However, these interactions have not been confirmed, as these pathways can be inhibited without the up-regulation of GSK-3.

GSK-3 has also been shown to regulate immune and migratory processes. GSK-3 participates in a number of signaling pathways in the innate immune response, including pro-inflammatory cytokine and interleukin production. The inactivation of GSK3B by various protein kinases also affects the adaptive immune response by inducing cytokine production and proliferation in naïve and memory CD4+ T cells. In cellular migration, an integral aspect of inflammatory responses, the inhibition of GSK-3 has been reported to play conflicting roles, as local inhibition at growth cones has been shown to promote motility while global inhibition of cellular GSK-3 has been shown to inhibit cell spreading and migration.

GSK-3 is also integrally tied to pathways of cell proliferation and apoptosis. GSK-3 has been shown to phosphorylate Beta-catenin, thus targeting it for degradation. GSK-3 is therefore a part of the canonical Beta-catenin/Wnt pathway, which signals the cell to divide and proliferate. GSK-3 phosphorylates cyclins D and E, which are important for the transition from G1 to S phase, and causes their degradation. The transcription factors c-myc and c-fos (also S phase promoters ), which are primarily phosphorylated by the dual-specificity tyrosine phosphorylation-regulated kinase, are also phosphorylated by GSK3, causing them to be degraded. GSK-3 also participates in a number of apoptotic signaling pathways by phosphorylating transcription factors that regulate apoptosis. GSK-3 can promote apoptosis by both activating pro-apoptotic factors such as p53 and inactivating survival-promoting factors through phosphorylation. The role of GSK-3 in regulating apoptosis is controversial, however, as some studies have shown that GSK-3β knockout mice are overly sensitized to apoptosis and die in the embryonic stage, while others have shown that overexpression of GSK-3 can induce apoptosis. Overall, GSK-3 appears to both promote and inhibit apoptosis, and this regulation varies depending on the specific molecular and cellular context.

GSK-3 is also involved in nuclear transcriptional activator kappa B (NFκB) signaling pathway, Hedgehog signaling pathway, Notch signaling pathway, and epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Due to its importance across numerous cellular functions, GSK-3 activity is subject to tight regulation.

The speed and efficacy of GSK-3 phosphorylation is regulated by several factors. Phosphorylation of certain GSK-3 residues can increase or decrease its ability to bind substrate. Phosphorylation at tyrosine-216 in GSK-3β or tyrosine-279 in GSK-3α enhances the enzymatic activity of GSK-3, while phosphorylation of autoinhibitory serine-9 in GSK-3β or serine-21 in GSK-3α significantly decreases active site availability (see figure). Further, GSK-3 is unusual among kinases in that it usually requires a "priming kinase" to first phosphorylate a substrate. A phosphorylated serine or threonine residue located four amino acids C-terminal to the target site of phosphorylation allows the substrate to bind a pocket of positive charge formed by arginine and lysine residues.

Depending on the pathway in which it is being utilized, GSK-3 may be further regulated by cellular localization or the formation of protein complexes. The activity of GSK-3 is far greater in the nucleus and mitochondria than in the cytosol in cortical neurons, while the phosphorylation of Beta-catenin by GSK-3 is mediated by the binding of both proteins to Axin, a scaffold protein, allowing Beta-catenin to access the active site of GSK-3. 

Insulin indirectly inactivates GSK3 via downstream phosphorylation of the specific serine residues Ser21 and Ser9 in GSK-3 isoforms α and β, respectively, via the PI3K/Akt pathway (protein kinase B). 

Due to its involvement in a great number of signaling pathways, GSK-3 has been associated with a host of high-profile diseases. GSK-3 inhibitors are currently being tested for therapeutic effects in Alzheimer's disease, type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), some forms of cancer, and bipolar disorder.

It has now been shown that lithium, which is used as a treatment for bipolar disorder, acts as a mood stabilizer by selectively inhibiting GSK-3. The mechanism through which GSK-3 inhibition stabilizes mood is not known, though it is suspected that the inhibition of GSK-3's ability to promote inflammation contributes to the therapeutic effect. Inhibition of GSK-3 also destabilises Rev-ErbA alpha transcriptional repressor, which has a significant role in the circadian clock. Elements of the circadian clock may be connected with predisposition to bipolar mood disorder.

GSK-3 activity has been associated with both pathological features of Alzheimer's disease, namely the buildup of amyloid-β (Aβ) deposits and the formation of neurofibrillary tangles. GSK-3 is thought to directly promote Aβ production and to be tied to the process of the hyperphosphorylation of tau proteins, which leads to the tangles. Due to these roles of GSK-3 in promoting Alzheimer's disease, GSK-3 inhibitors may have positive therapeutic effects on Alzheimer's patients and are currently in the early stages of testing.

In a similar fashion, targeted inhibition of GSK-3 may have therapeutic effects on certain kinds of cancer. Though GSK-3 has been shown to promote apoptosis in some cases, it has also been reported to be a key factor in tumorigenesis in some cancers. Supporting this claim, GSK-3 inhibitors have been shown to induce apoptosis in glioma and pancreatic cancer cells. GSK-3 also seems to be responsible for NFκB aberrant activity in pediatric acute lymphoblastic leukemia and pancreatic cancer cells. In renal cancer cells, GSK-3 inhibitors induce cell cycle arrest, differentiation of the malignant cells, and autophagy. In contrast to the above neoplasms, high expression of inactive pGSK3β-S9 is found in skin, oral, and lung cancers, suggesting tumor suppressive effects of the enzyme in these cancers. In melanoma, the microRNA miR-769 inhibits GSK-3 activity during the tumor development process, also indicating tumor suppressive effects of GSK3.

GSK-3 inhibitors have also shown promise in the treatment of T2DM. Though GSK-3 activity under diabetic conditions can differ radically across different tissue types, studies have shown that introducing competitive inhibitors of GSK-3 can increase glucose tolerance in diabetic mice. GSK-3 inhibitors may also have therapeutic effects on hemorrhagic transformation after acute ischemic stroke. GSK-3 can negatively regulate the insulin signaling pathway by inhibiting IRS1 via phosphorylation of serine-332, rendering the insulin receptor incapable of activating IRS1 and further initiating the canonical PI3K/Akt pathway. The role that inhibition of GSK-3 might play across its other signaling roles is not yet entirely understood.

GSK-3 inhibition also mediates an increase in the transcription of the transcription factor Tbet (Tbx21) and an inhibition of the transcription of the inhibitory co-receptor programmed cell death-1 (PD-1) on T-cells. GSK-3 inhibitors increased in vivo CD8(+) OT-I CTL function and the clearance of viral infections by murine gamma-herpesvirus 68 and lymphocytic choriomeningitis clone 13 as well as anti-PD-1 in immunotherapy.

Glycogen synthase kinase inhibitors are different chemotypes and have variable mechanisms of action; they may be cations, from natural sources, synthetic ATP and non-ATP competitive inhibitors and substrate-competitive inhibitors. GSK3 is a bi-lobar architecture with N-terminal and C-terminal, the N-terminal is responsible for ATP binding and C-terminal which is called as activation loop mediates the kinase activity, Tyrosine located at the C-terminal it essential for full GSK3 activity.

In diabetes, GSK-3β inhibitors increase insulin sensitivity, glycogen synthesis, and glucose metabolism in skeletal muscles, and reduce obesity by affecting the adipogenesis process. GSK-3β is also over expressed in several types of cancers, like colorectal, ovarian, and prostate cancer. GSK-3β inhibitors also aid in the treatment of Alzheimer's disease, stroke, and mood disorders, including bipolar disorder.

Inhibitors of GSK-3 include:





IC=4-80nM:

IC=0.5-1.5μM:





Lithium which is used in the treatment of bipolar disorder was the first natural GSK-3 inhibitor discovered. It inhibits GSK-3 directly by competition with magnesium ions and indirectly by phosphorylation and auto-regulation of serine.
Lithium has been found to have insulin-like effects on glucose metabolism, including stimulation of glycogen synthesis in fat cells, skin, and muscles, increasing glucose uptake, and activation of GS activity. In addition to inhibition of GSK-3, it also inhibits other enzymes involved in the regulation of glucose metabolisms, such as myo-inositol-1-monophosphatase and 1,6 bisphosphatase. Also, it has shown therapeutic benefit in Alzheimer's and other neurodegenerative diseases such as epileptic neurodegeneration.

Naproxen is a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug while cromolyn is an anti-allergic agent which acts as a mast cell stabilizer. Both drugs have demonstrated the anticancer effect in addition to hypoglycemic effect due to inhibition of glycogen synthase kinase-3β (GSK-3β).

To validate the anti-GSK-3β hypothesis of naproxen and cromolyn, docking of the two structures against GSK-3β binding pocket and comparing their fitting with known GSK-3β inhibitor ARA014418 was performed, in addition to measuring the serum glucose, serum insulin, serum C-peptide, weight variation and hepatic glycogen levels for normal and diabetic fasting animal's models to assess their in vitro hypoglycemic effects.

Naproxen and cromolyn were successfully docked into the binding site of GSK-3β (both were fitted into its binding pocket). They exhibited electrostatic, hydrophobic, and hydrogen-bonding interactions with key amino acids within the binding pocket with binding interaction profiles similar to AR-A014418 (the known inhibitor). The negative charges of the carboxylic acid groups in both drugs interact electrostatically with the positively charged guanidine group of Arg141. Moreover, the hydrogen bonding interactions between carboxylic acid moieties of cromolyn and the ammonium groups of Lys183 and Lys60, in addition to π-stacking of the naphthalene ring system of naproxen with the phenolic ring of Tyr134.

Antidiabetic effects of naproxen and cromolyn: In normal animal models, both drugs have showed dose-dependent reduction in blood glucose levels and rise in glycogen levels. In chronic type II diabetic model, glucose levels were also reduced, and glycogen level and insulin levels were elevated in a dose-dependent manner with a reduction in plasma glucose.

Anti-obesity effects of naproxen and cromolyn: Both drugs showed significant anti-obesity effects as they reduce body weight, resistin, and glucose levels in a dose-dependent manner. They were also found to elevate adiponectin, insulin, and C-peptide levels in a dose-dependent manner.

Famotidine is a specific, long-acting H2 antagonist that decreases gastric acid secretion. It is used in the treatment of peptic ulcer disease, GERD, and pathological hypersecretory conditions, like Zollinger–Ellison syndrome. (14,15) H2-receptor antagonists affect hormone metabolism, but their effect on glucose metabolism is not well established. (16) A study has revealed a glucose-lowering effect for famotidine.

The study of famotidine binding to the enzyme has showed that famotidine can be docked within the binding pocket of GSK-3β making significant interactions with key points within the GSK-3β binding pocket. Strong hydrogen bond interactions with the key amino acids PRO-136 and VAL -135 and potential hydrophobic interaction with LEU-188 were similar to those found in the ligand binding to the enzyme (AR-A014418).

Furthermore, famotidine showed high GSK-3β binding affinity and inhibitory activity due to interactions that stabilize the complex, namely hydrogen bonding of guanidine group in famotidine with the sulfahydryl moiety in CYS-199; and electrostatic interactions between the same guanidine group with the carboxyl group in ASP-200, the hydrogen bond between the terminal NH2 group, the OH of the TYR-143, and the hydrophobic interaction of the sulfur atom in the thioether with ILE-62. In vitro studies showed that famotidine inhibits GSK-3β activity and increases liver glycogen reserves in a dose dependent manner. A fourfold increase in the liver glycogen level with the use of the highest dose of famotidine (4.4 mg/kg) was observed. Also, famotidine has been shown to decrease serum glucose levels 30, and 60 minutes after oral glucose load in healthy individuals.

Curcumin, which Is a constituent of turmeric spice, has flavoring and coloring properties. It has two symmetrical forms: enol (the most abundant forms) and ketone.

Curcumin has wide pharmacological activities: anti-inflammatory, anti-microbial, hypoglycemic, anti-oxidant, and wound healing effects. In animal models with Alzheimer disease, it has anti-destructive effect of beta amyloid in the brain, and recently it shows anti-malarial activity.

Curcumin also has chemo preventative and anti-cancer effects., and it has been shown to attenuate oxidative stress and renal dysfunction in diabetic animals with chronic use.

Curcumin's mechanism of action is anti-inflammatory; it inhibits the nuclear transcriptional activator kappa B (NF-KB) that is activated whenever there is inflammatory response.

NF-kB has two regulatory factors, IkB and GSK-3, which suggests curcumin directly binds and inhibits GSK-3B. An in vitro study confirmed GSK-3B inhibition by simulating molecular docking using a silico docking technique. The concentration at which 50% of GK-3B would be inhibited by curcumin is 66.3 nM.

Among its two forms, experimental and theoretical studies show that the enol form is the favored form due to its intra-molecular hydrogen bonding, and an NMR experiment show that enol form exist in a variety of solvents.

Antipsychotic medications are increasingly used for schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, anxiety, and other psychiatric conditions Atypical antipsychotics are more commonly used than first generation antipsychotics because they decrease the risk of extrapyramidal symptoms, such as tardive dyskinesia, and have better efficacy.

Olanzapine and atypical antipsychotics induce weight gain through increasing body fat. It also affects glucose metabolism, and several studies shows that it may worsen diabetes.

A recent study shows that olanzapine inhibits GSK3 activity, suggesting olanzapine permits glycogen synthesis. A study of the effect of olanzapine on mouse blood glucose and glycogen levels showed a significant decrease in blood glucose level and elevation of glycogen level in mice, and the IC50% of olanzapine were 91.0 nm, which is considered a potent inhibitor. The study also illustrates that sub-chronic use of olanzapine results in potent inhibition of GSK3.

Pyrimidine analogues are antimetabolites that interfere with nucleic acid synthesis. Some of them have been shown to fit the ATP-binding pocket of GSK-3β to lower blood glucose levels and improve some neuronal diseases.


Pat Noonan

Patrick John Noonan (born August 2, 1980) is an American soccer coach and former player. He is the head coach of FC Cincinnati in Major League Soccer.

Noonan attended De Smet Jesuit High School, and played college soccer for the Indiana University Hoosiers from 1999 to 2002. He was named an NSCAA first-team All-American his senior and junior seasons, and second-team All-American his sophomore year. His senior year, he also finished as runner-up to Alecko Eskandarian for the Hermann Trophy. He finished his career at Indiana with 48 goals and 31 assists. During his college years, Noonan also played with the Mid-Michigan Bucks in the USL Premier Development League

Upon graduation, Noonan was selected in the first round (9th overall) of the 2003 MLS SuperDraft by New England Revolution. Although he started slowly, Noonan soon resumed his scoring ways, finishing his first season with the Revs with ten goals and seven assists, and runner-up to Damani Ralph for Rookie of the Year. Noonan did even better his sophomore year, scoring eleven goals and registering eight assists, tying with Amado Guevara for the MLS Scoring Champion Award. A late-season slump saw Noonan end 2005 with eight goals and seven assists. Noonan's 2006 campaign was marred by injury and he appeared in only 14 games, netting just one goal. He began in 2007 injured once again and then became a substitute as he regained his fitness. However, he rounded into form and finished the season with 7 goals. Noonan's option for the 2008 season was not picked up by New England and on January 23, 2008, he signed with Norwegian club Aalesunds FK.

On August 6, 2008, Noonan re-signed with MLS and was traded from New England, who still retained his rights, to Columbus Crew in exchange for the Crew's natural first-round selection in the 2009 MLS SuperDraft and allocation money. Additionally, the teams traded spots in the current 2008 allocation standings – with Columbus moving into the 10th spot and New England moving to third – and agreed to considerations regarding 2009 allocation rankings. For Columbus Crew, Noonan won the MLS Supporters' Shield, MLS Cup and Trillium Cup, all of them in 2008.

Noonan was traded to Colorado Rapids in June 2009. After making seventeen league appearances, Noonan was waived by Colorado on March 23, 2010.

After a short trial with Seattle Sounders FC, Noonan signed with the club on March 30, 2010. He remained with Seattle through the 2011 season. At season's end, the club declined his 2012 contract option and he entered the 2011 MLS Re-Entry Draft.

Noonan was selected by Los Angeles Galaxy in stage two of the draft on December 12, 2011. Eleven days later he signed with Los Angeles.

Noonan remained with Los Angeles through the 2012 season. After the conclusion of the 2012 season, LA declined the 2013 option on Noonan's contract and he entered the 2012 MLS Re-Entry Draft. Noonan became a free agent after he went undrafted in both rounds of the draft. On January 11, 2013, LA announced that Noonan had retired as a player and had joined the club as an assistant coach.

Noonan earned his first cap for the United States national team on March 13, 2004, against Haiti. While he has accumulated 15 caps, injuries and inconsistency prevented him from claiming a major role with the national team. However, in early 2008 he started with the U.S. National Team against Sweden and registered an assist in a 2–0 victory. He did not play for the national team after 2008.

After Noonan's retirement as a player, he joined the Galaxy's technical staff as an assistant coach to Bruce Arena. When Arena was announced as returning to be the head coach of the United States national team, he brought his supporting staff from the Galaxy, including Noonan, to work as assistants.

In January 2018, Noonan was hired as an assistant coach alongside Jim Curtin at the Philadelphia Union.

Noonan was named head coach of FC Cincinnati on December 14, 2021. The team had previously finished last in the regular season standings in their prior MLS seasons. Noonan, along with new general manager Chris Albright, oversaw 24 player changes and the hiring of assistants Kenny Arena and Dominic Kinnear.

He led Cincinnati to fifth place in the Eastern Conference as they clinched their first-ever MLS Cup Playoff berth, Noonan's Orange and Blue beat New York Red Bulls on the road 2–1 before falling to the Philadelphia Union, 1–0, in the Eastern Conference Semifinals. 

In the 2023 season, Noonan guided Cincinnati to their first trophy in MLS, finishing top of the league standings, clinching the Supporters' Shield and their second consecutive playoff birth. In the playoffs, Cincinnati made it to the Eastern Conference Finals, falling to the Columbus Crew 3–2. Noonan was named the MLS Coach of the Year on November 21, 2023.

United States

Columbus Crew

New England Revolution

Seattle Sounders FC

Los Angeles Galaxy

FC Cincinnati

Individual


Option contract

An option contract, or simply option, is defined as "a promise which meets the requirements for the formation of a contract and limits the promisor's power to revoke an offer". Option contracts are common in relation to property (see below) and in professional sports.

An option contract is a type of contract that protects an offeree from an offeror's ability to revoke their offer to engage in a contract.

Under the common law, consideration for the option contract is required as it is still a form of contract, cf. Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 87(1). Typically, an offeree can provide consideration for the option contract by paying money for the contract or by providing value in some other form such as by rendering other performance or forbearance. Courts will generally try to find consideration if there are any grounds for doing so. See consideration for more information. The Uniform Commercial Code (UCC) has eliminated a need for consideration for firm offers between merchants in some limited circumstances.

An option is the right to convey a piece of property. The person granting the option is called the "optionor" (or more usually, the "grantor") and the person who has the benefit of the option is called the "optionee" (or more usually, the "beneficiary").

Because options amount to dispositions of future property, in common law countries they are normally subject to the rule against perpetuities and must be exercised within the time limits prescribed by law.

In relation to certain types of asset (principally land), in many countries an option must be registered in order to be binding on a third party.

The option contract provides an important role in unilateral contracts. In unilateral contracts, the promisor seeks acceptance by performance from the promisee. In this scenario, the classical contract view was that a contract was not formed until the performance that the promisor seeks was "completely" performed. This was because the consideration for the contract was the performance of the promisee. Once the promisee performed completely, consideration was satisfied and a contract was formed and only the promisor was bound to his promise.

A problem arose with unilateral contracts because of the late formation of the contract. With classical unilateral contracts, a promisor can revoke his offer for the contract at any point prior to the promisee's complete performance. So, if a promisee provides 99% of the performance sought, the promisor could then revoke without any remedy for the promisee. The promisor had maximum protection and the promisee had maximum risk in this scenario.

The modern view of how option contracts apply now provides some security to the promisee in the above scenario. Essentially, once a promisee begins performance, an option contract is implicitly created between the promisor and the promisee. The promisor impliedly promises "not" to revoke the offer and the promisee impliedly promises to furnish complete performance, but as the name suggests, the promisee still retains the "option" of not completing performance. The consideration for this option contract is discussed in comment d of the above cited section. Basically, the consideration is provided by the promisee's beginning of performance.

Case law differs from jurisdiction to jurisdiction, but an option contract can either be implicitly created instantaneously at the beginning of performance (the Restatement view) or after some "substantial performance". "Cook v. Coldwell Banker/Frank Laiben Realty Co.", 967 S.W.2d 654 (Mo. App. 1998). Case law in England and Wales has established that in exercising an option, a grantee "must comply strictly with the conditions for its exercise".

It has been hypothesized that option contracts could help allow free market roads to be constructed without resorting to eminent domain, as the road company could make option contracts with many landowners, and eventually consummate the purchase of parcels comprising the contiguous route needed to build the road.

It is a general principle of contract law that an offer cannot be assigned by the recipient of the offer to another party. However, an option contract can be sold (unless it provides otherwise), allowing the buyer of the option to step into the shoes of the original offeree and accept the offer to which the option pertains.

In economics, option contracts play an important role in the field of contract theory. In particular, Oliver Hart (1995, p. 90) has shown that option contracts can mitigate the hold-up problem (an underinvestment problem that occurs when the exact level of investment cannot be contractually specified). However, there is a debate in contract theory whether option contracts are still useful when the contractual parties cannot rule out future renegotiations. As has been pointed out by Tirole (1999), this debate is at the center of the discussions about the foundations of the incomplete contracts theory. In a laboratory experiment, Hoppe and Schmitz (2011) have confirmed that non-renegotiable option contracts can indeed solve the hold-up problem. Moreover, it turns out that option contracts are still useful even when renegotiation cannot be ruled out. The latter observation can be explained by Hart and Moore’s (2008) idea that an important role of contracts is to serve as reference points. 


Politics of the United States during World War II

The United States maintained its Constitutional Republic government structure throughout World War II. Certain expediencies were taken within the existing structure of the Federal government, such as conscription and other violations of civil liberties, including the internment and later dispersal of Japanese-Americans. Still, elections were held as scheduled in 1944.

The United States entered World War II with the Administration that had been at the helm of the nation since 1932, that of Franklin Delano Roosevelt. This administration had been preparing for war for a while by the time of the attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941.

President Franklin Delano Roosevelt and Vice President Henry A. Wallace won the election of 1940, and were at the helm of the nation as it prepared for and entered World War II. Roosevelt sought and won an unprecedented fourth term in office in 1944, but this time with Harry S. Truman as his Vice President. Roosevelt, who had been a victim of Guillain-Barré Syndrome early in life, died in April 1945, and Truman assumed the Presidency through the end of the war.



The Joint Chiefs were military officers, as opposed to the above, who were for the most part civilians.


In addition, the following offices reported to the Joint Chiefs of Staff:


Chris Albertson

Christiern Gunnar Albertson (October 18, 1931 – April 24, 2019) was a New York City-based jazz journalist, writer and record producer.

Albertson was born in Reykjavík, Iceland, on October 18, 1931, but his father left the family before he was a year old. Yvonne, his mother, married three more times. He was educated in Iceland, Denmark and England before studying commercial art in Copenhagen.

In 1947, while living in Copenhagen, Albertson listened by chance to a Bessie Smith recording on radio; it led to an abiding interest in jazz and blues music. "We found magic in such names as Kid Ory, King Oliver, Johnny Dodds, Bessie Smith and Ma Rainey," he wrote on his "Stomp Off" blog in 2010.

On his home tape machine, Albertson recorded visiting British New Orleans revivalists Ken Colyer, Chris Barber and Lonnie Donegan in 1953. These recordings were subsequently released on the Danish Storyville Records and British Tempo Records labels.

In 1957, after two years as a disc jockey for Armed Forces Radio at Keflavík Air Base, in Iceland, Albertson migrated to the United States, initially working for radio stations in Philadelphia. At WCAU (a CBS affiliate) and WHAT-FM, a 24-hour jazz station, he conducted interviews, including one with Lester Young, one of only two extant with the tenor saxophonist. He was naturalised as an American citizen in 1963.

In 1960–61, Albertson was employed by Riverside Records' Bill Grauer as a producer. In this capacity, he arranged and recorded the last sessions of blues singer Ida Cox (whom he brought out of retirement) and boogie-woogie pianist Meade Lux Lewis, and supervised the label's 'Living Legends' series of location recordings. The initial albums in this series were made in New Orleans and featured such early jazz musicians as pianist Sweet Emma Barrett, clarinetist Louis Cottrell, Jr., trumpeters Percy Humphrey and Kid Thomas, blues duo Billie and De de Pierce, and trombonist Jim Robinson. He continued the series in Chicago, with performances by Lil Armstrong, Alberta Hunter, Little Brother Montgomery, and Earl Hines.

Albertson subsequently worked as producer for Prestige Records, supervising sessions by, among others, guitarist/singer Lonnie Johnson, whom he had pulled from obscurity while working in Philadelphia. He also founded his own production company, supervising sessions with Howard McGhee, Roy Eldridge, Bud Freeman, Ray Bryant, and Elmer Snowden.

In the mid-1960s, Albertson worked at NYC radio station WNEW, leaving there for Pacifica Radio's NY station WBAI, where he eventually became General Manager. In 1967, he worked for the BBC in London, advising them on how to adapt their radio programs for sale in North America.

In 1971, Albertson co-produced and hosted "The Jazz Set", a weekly television program that was aired from coast to coast by Public Broadcasting Service (PBS) Public television and featured such guests as Charles Mingus, Bill Evans, Randy Weston, Jimmy Heath, and Ray Bryant.

At this time, he was also producing reissues for Columbia Records, including the complete Bessie Smith LP sets. His work on these albums won Albertson 1971 two Grammy awards (one in the Best Album Notes category for "The World's Greatest Blues Singer" and a Grammy Trustees Award), a Billboard Trendsetter Award and the Montreux Jazz Festival's Grand Prix du Disque.

His standard work, "Bessie", a biography of Bessie Smith, first appeared in 1972, with a revised and expanded version published by Yale University Press in 2003. The revised biography was inducted into the Blues Foundation's Blues Hall of Fame in the "Classic of Blues Literature Hall of Fame" category in May 2012. In 2015, HBO premiered a biopic, "Bessie", starring Queen Latifah in the title role, but Albertson's book was not credited as its basis. 

Albertson wrote television documentaries, including "The Story of Jazz" and "My Castle's Rocking" (a bio-documentary on Alberta Hunter), as well as articles and reviews for various publications, including "Saturday Review" and "Down Beat". He was a contributing editor for "Stereo Review" magazine for 28 years.

Albertson was found dead in his Manhattan apartment on April 24, 2019.


Macquarie Fields, New South Wales

Macquarie Fields is a suburb of Sydney, in the state of New South Wales, Australia. Macquarie Fields is located 38 kilometres south-west of the Sydney central business district, in the local government area of the City of Campbelltown and is part of the Macarthur region.

Macquarie Fields is surrounded by bushland. Nearby Macquarie Links, is a high-security housing estate beside an international standard golf course. The suburb has multiple high schools including Macquarie Fields High School and James Meehan High School.

The original inhabitants of the Macquarie Fields area were the Darug people of western Sydney. The rich soil of the area was home to an abundance of plants which in turn attracted animals such as kangaroos and emus, both of which along with this part with yams and other native vegetables and fruit were part of the diet of the Darug. They lived in small huts called gunyahs, made spears, tomahawks and boomerangs for hunting and had an elaborate system of tribal law and rituals with its origins in the Dreamtime. However, following the arrival of the First Fleet in 1788, they were pushed off their land by the British settlers.

Macquarie Fields was named by early landholder James Meehan in honour of the Governor of New South Wales, Lachlan Macquarie. The area was surveyed by Meehan in the early 19th century. Although transported to Australia as a convict for his role in the Irish Rebellion of 1798, Meehan had trained as a surveyor in Ireland and in 1803 was appointed an assistant to NSW Surveyor-General Charles Grimes. In 1806 he was granted a full pardon and in 1810 became Surveyor-General. For his work, he was granted a number of parcels of land including in what is now Macquarie Fields and neighbouring suburbs. He used the rich soil to grow cereal crops, fruit trees and to graze livestock.

The property changed hands a couple of times after Meehan's death and in the 1840s, Samuel Terry built a Regency mansion, Macquarie Fields House, which still stands to this day. It is now listed on the Register of the National Estate. In 1883, then owner William Phillips subdivided the land to create a new town he called Glenwood Estate with grand boulevards and fine buildings. A railway station was added to the line in 1888 but the depression of the 1890s meant the grand town failed to materialize with only a few small houses built on the lots. In the next Great Depression of the 1930s, the area became popular with the homeless who made makeshift huts, not unlike those of the earlier Darug people.

After World War II, the village grew steadily. A public school was opened in 1958 and by 1971, the population reached 3700. In the mid-1970s, a large Housing Commission development was built on the east side of town and given the suburb names of Bunbury (later Guise) and Curran after the local creek. Residents of the privately owned areas of Macquarie Fields were strongly opposed to the new developments being included in their suburb and this continued well into the 1980s. Since that time, local authorities have tried to blend the area into a single suburb. Private housing developments sprung up further around and the weight of population contributed to a larger town centre.

In 2005, riots were sparked by a high-speed police pursuit on 25 February through the Glenquarie housing estate in Macquarie Fields. The chase resulted in the driver, 20-year-old Jesse Kelly, crashing the stolen vehicle into a tree and killing his two passengers, 17-year-old Dylan Raywood and 19-year-old Matthew Robertson. 

Macquarie Fields has a number of heritage-listed sites, including:

According to the 2016 census, 13,714 people live in Macquarie Fields .

Macquarie Fields railway station is on the Main Southern railway line. Transit Systems currently operate a bus depot in Macquarie Fields. 

Macquarie Fields was serviced by four Interline Bus Services bus routes. In September 2023 these were taken over by Transit Systems NSW who was awarded the Sydney Metropolitan Bus Service Contracts Region 2 until 2031. 

The town is home to Macquarie Fields Leisure Centre, which contains an indoor aquatic centre and an outdoor Olympic sized swimming pool. It also encompasses a gymnasium and indoor sports facilities.
There is also a number of sporting fields in the town. Sporting fields include Bensley Road, Hazlet Oval, Monarch Oval and Third Avenue.

Macquarie Fields contains the WorkVentures Connect Centre at Macquarie Fields.


Chicago 18

Chicago 18 is the fifteenth studio album by the American rock band Chicago, released on September 29, 1986. This album is the first without original vocalist Peter Cetera, and the first to feature Jason Scheff on bass guitar and vocals.

With Cetera having been fired by the band in 1985 because he wanted to record a solo album, Chicago eventually hired Scheff to fill Cetera's position as vocalist and bassist. With Scheff and Bill Champlin, who had joined the band in 1981, the most prominent voices in Chicago now belonged to its two newest recruits.

Chicago again hired producer David Foster to create a followup to "Chicago 17".

The band recorded an updated, high-tech remake of their classic "25 or 6 to 4" (#48). Scheff recalled when he asked Foster on the way he should sing the song, the latter responded: "Just like Cetera." The following singles, "Will You Still Love Me?" (#3) and "If She Would Have Been Faithful..." (#17) became hits. Scheff was lead vocalist on all three releases. The album also features a brief instrumental horn riff, Pankow's "Free Flight." 

Despite the success of its predecessor, "Chicago 18" ultimately only went gold, peaking at #35 on the Billboard Top 200 charts.

"Chicago 18" (Full Moon/Warner Bros. 25509) reached gold status and #35 in the US during a chart stay of 45 weeks. It did not chart in the UK.

Notes:




Pratt &amp; Whitney R-1830 Twin Wasp

The Pratt & Whitney R-1830 Twin Wasp is an American air-cooled radial aircraft engine. It displaces and its bore and stroke are both . The design traces its history to 1929 experiments at Pratt & Whitney on twin-row designs. Production began in 1932 and it was widely used during the 1930s.

It was selected as the power plant for both the four-engined Consolidated B-24 Liberator heavy bomber and the twin-engined Douglas DC-3 transport, two of the most-produced aircraft. The production run of 173,618 R-1830 examples makes it the most-produced aviation engine in history.

A further developed version, the R-2000, was produced starting in 1942. The R-2000 was "bored-out" to and had a number of other minor changes to improve fuel economy and allow it to run at higher power ratings on lower-octane fuel. The primary user of the R-2000 was the Douglas DC-4.

Mostly retired today, the R-1830 is still used on Douglas DC-3 and various museum aircraft and warbirds seen at airshows. It is not manufactured anymore, but spares are still available and there is still a market for second-hand engines and parts.






Shindig!

Shindig! was an American musical variety series which aired on ABC from September 16, 1964 to January 8, 1966. The show was hosted by Jimmy O'Neill, a disc jockey in Los Angeles, who also created the show along with his wife Sharon Sheeley, British producer Jack Good, and production executive Art Stolnitz. The original pilot was rejected by ABC and David Sontag, then executive producer of ABC, redeveloped and completely redesigned the show. A new pilot with a new cast of artists was shot starring Sam Cooke. That pilot aired as the premiere episode.

"Shindig!" was conceived as a short-notice replacement for "Hootenanny," a series that had specialized in folk revival music. The folk revival had fizzled in 1964 as the result of the British Invasion, which damaged the ratings for "Hootenanny" and prompted that show's cancellation.

"Shindig!" focused on a broader variety of popular music than its predecessor and first aired for a half-hour every Wednesday evening, but was expanded to an hour in January 1965. In the fall of 1965, the show split into two half-hour telecasts, on Thursday and Saturday nights.

"Shindig!"'s premiere episode was actually the second pilot, and featured Sam Cooke, The Everly Brothers, and The Righteous Brothers. Later shows featured performances that were taped in Britain - A set was used at Twickenham Film Studios, where British acts performed live for the cameras, with the resultant footage flown back to be shown on the program. The first UK episode had The Beatles as the guests. The series later featured other "British invasion" bands and performers including The Who, The Rolling Stones, and Cilla Black. "Shindig!" continued to broadcast episodes with footage shot in London throughout its run. This meant many acts were seen on U.S television before they actually went to America (The Who in particular, who performed a unique early version of "My Generation" live, two months before the single version was recorded).

Many other popular performers of the day played on "Shindig!" including Tina Turner, Lesley Gore, Bo Diddley, Sonny and Cher, The Beach Boys, James Brown, Jackie Wilson, The Supremes, and The Ronettes.

"Shindig!"'s success prompted NBC to air the similar series "Hullabaloo" starting in January 1965 and other producers to launch syndicated rock music shows like "Shivaree" and "Hollywood a Go-Go."

In March 1965, Little Eva performed a live but short version of her hit song "The Loco-Motion". This is the only known video clip of her singing it.

Toward the end of the program's run, The Mamas and the Papas appeared in an episode featuring Barry McGuire. Although serving as his backup singers, the group introduced "California Dreamin'" on that program, which launched its career.

"Shindig!" is one of the few rock music shows of the era to still have all of the episodes available to watch.

In September 1965, the show was moved out of its Wednesday-night time slot (where it gave "The Beverly Hillbillies" its first serious competition in its time period among younger viewers), and split into two half-hours on new days and times (Thursdays and Saturdays at 7:30 P.M. Eastern time). The show faced tough competition from "Daniel Boone" and "The Munsters" on Thursdays along with "Flipper" and "The Jackie Gleason Show" on Saturdays. Additionally, the Saturday edition aired in a time period when many of its potential viewers were going out and, thus, not at home to watch television. By October 1965, the show was having ratings problems ("Time" magazine said "early-season tide [was] running against the teen scene"), and in January 1966, "Shindig!" was cancelled and replaced in its Thursday time slots by "Batman."

"Shindig!" also featured a dance troupe choreographed by David Winters and André Tayir, who accompanied the music acts of the week (Winters later worked on the competing NBC show "Hullabaloo"). One of the regular dancers was Teri Garr, who went on to find success as an actress. Others included Maria Gahva, Lorene Yarnell (later of the mime team Shields and Yarnell) Diane Stuart, Pam Freeman, Gina Trikinis, Marianna Picora, Virginia Justus, Rini Jarmon and Carol Shelyne, who always wore glasses while she danced. Occasionally, a small group of dancers who sang would get a featured spot; this rotating group was billed as The Shindig Girls. The assistant choreographer was Antonia Basilotta, better known as Toni Basil, who later gained fame with her 1980s hit song "Mickey". Both Garr and Basil were dance students of David Winters at the time and worked with him on most of his choreography projects.

The series house band was supposedly known as "The Shin-diggers", but that was actually the name host Jimmy O'Neill used to refer to fans of the show. At first, TV credits identified the musicians simply as the Shindig Band. By early 1965, they'd been renamed Sir Rufus Marion Banks and his Band of Men, but the generic name had returned by the time "Shindig" went off the air. The rhythm section was spun off into a featured group and named the "Shindogs". It included Joey Cooper on bass, Chuck Blackwell on drums, James Burton on lead guitar, Delaney Bramlett on rhythm guitar and Glen D. Hardin on keyboards. Cooper and Bramlett traded off lead vocal duties. The larger band featured Jerry Cole on lead guitar, Russ Titelman on rhythm guitar, Larry Knechtel on bass, Leon Russell on piano, Julius Wechter on percussion and Ritchie Frost on drums. Later, Billy Preston took over keyboards and performed as a singing regular. Glen Campbell was not a regular member of this band but a frequent guest performer. Ray Pohlman was the musical director, and he was also one - as was Campbell, Knechtel, Wechter and Russell - of the collection of first-call pop studio musicians that would later be known as "The Wrecking Crew". In some instances when one of the guitarists was unable to work, Pohlman would bring in Bill Aken to fill in.

The Righteous Brothers, Dick and Dee Dee, Jackie and Gayle, Donna Loren, Willy Nelson (not the famous Country singer Willie Nelson) and Bobby Sherman were regular vocalists on the series. Up until July 1965, when he quit the show, producer Jack Good was also a regular, wearing a bowler hat and improvising comedy routines with Jimmy O'Neill at the close of each episode.

The Blossoms, an all-female vocal group featuring Darlene Love, backed up many of the performers and were occasionally featured in spotlight performances. The Wellingtons were a trio of male singers who performed on their own, and as backup singers. Another male group, The Eligibles, sometimes alternated with The Wellingtons on backup.



In 1991 and 1992, Rhino Entertainment and WEA released a series of "Shindig! Presents" VHS videos featuring highlights from the series.



Giovanni Goria

Giovanni Giuseppe Goria ( ; (30 July 1943 – 21 May 1994) was an Italian politician. He served as the 46th prime minister of Italy from 1987 until 1988.

Goria was born in Asti (Piedmont).

Goria was an accountant by profession. He joined the Christian Democracy in 1960 and entered local politics. He was elected to the chamber of deputies in 1976. He was undersecretary of the budget from 1981 until 1983 and then became treasury minister. He became known for his easygoing style and his adeptness at television appearances.

Following the elections of 1987, in which his party did well, Goria became prime minister (the youngest his country had seen since World War II), as a protégé of party chairman (and prime ministerial successor) Ciriaco De Mita. He was forced to resign in 1988 after the Parliament refused to pass his budget.

Goria was elected to the European Parliament in 1989. He resigned in 1991 to become Italian minister of agriculture. He remained in that position until 1992 when he became finance minister.

He resigned in 1993 during a corruption scandal which ruined his party. Goria himself was charged with corruption. His trial began in early 1994. He was acquitted of one charge, but his trial was still in progress when he died suddenly of lung cancer in his native Asti.

Union Grove

Union Grove can refer to:


Union Springs

Union Springs is the name of two places in the United States of America:

UOW Malaysia

University of Wollongong Malaysia (Formerly known as KDU University College) is a private university in Malaysia, with its campus in Utropolis Glenmarie, Shah Alam. Established in 1983, and a pioneer in Malaysian private education, UOW Malaysia was one of the first private colleges in Malaysia to have its own purpose-built campus. UOW Malaysia offers education programs at the Certificate, Diploma, Degree and Masters levels.

UOW Malaysia is part of the University of Wollongong Australia’s global network, but has a history of providing tertiary education to Malaysia, and the surrounding regions, as it was previously known as KDU college and university colleges. UOW Global Enterprises, a wholly-owned subsidiary of University of Wollongong Australia, in September 2019 acquired the KDU institutions and following a process of transformation integrated them into the University of Wollongong Australia global network of campuses located in Australia, Dubai, Hong Kong, and now here in Malaysia.

Established in 1983, and a pioneer in Malaysian private education, KDU was one of the first private colleges in Malaysia to have its own purpose-built campus in Damansara Jaya. Kolej Damansara Utama (as it was first known) opened for enrolment, offering programs such as the GCE A-Level and the American Credit Transfer program, and welcomed its first batch of students. In 1984, KDU introduced the first overseas twinning program in partnership with Middlesex Polytechnic (Middlesex University).

In 1991, a second branch (KDU Penang University College) was established in Penang to cater to the higher education needs of aspiring youths in the northern region.

In November 2010, KDU College was upgraded to University College status by the Ministry of Higher Education, Malaysia, and began offering specialised homegrown degree programs. The ceremony was officiated by the Minister of Higher Education, Mohamed Khaled Nordin.

In 2016, KDU Penang University College had a groundbreaking ceremony to unveil construction plans for a 10-acre campus in Batu Kawan, Penang. The ceremony was officiated by then Chief Minister of Penang Lim Guan Eng and was accompanied by representatives from Penang Development Corporations (PDC).

Subsequently, in November 2019, the name of the college and university colleges were changed to reflect the stewardship of the University of Wollongong and they are now known as UOW Malaysia. UOW plans to develop the UOW Malaysia campuses at Glenmarie, George Town Penang, and Batu Kawan Penang into universities within the next five to seven years. Both university colleges offer programs from Foundation through to Bachelor’s Degrees and Postgraduate programs. These include programs in Business, Communication, Creative Arts, Computing, Game Development, Engineering, Hospitality, Tourism, Culinary Arts, and Nursing.

In 2023, UOW Malaysia received university status from the Ministry of Higher Education.

UOW Malaysia employs academic staff that meets the requirement of both its partner institutions as well as the Malaysian Qualification Agency's requirement, with PhD and master's degree holders teaching in degree programs and a minimum of a degree to teach in the certificate and diploma programs. 

Programs Offering: 


Gap

Gap or The Gap may refer to various openings, vacant spaces, lacks or pauses:








Ricardo Clark

Ricardo Anthony Clark (born February 10, 1983) is an American retired soccer player who played as a midfielder. He appeared for MetroStars, San Jose Earthquakes, Houston Dynamo and Columbus Crew SC in the United States, Eintracht Frankfurt in Germany, and Stabæk in Norway. Clark also appeared for the United States national team.

A native of Atlanta, Clark played two years in college at Furman before being drafted second overall in the 2003 MLS SuperDraft by MetroStars. After two seasons and nearly 100 appearances, he was traded to San Jose Earthquakes. The franchise moved from San Jose to Houston for the 2006 season, becoming the Houston Dynamo, and Clark followed along. He spent four seasons with the Dynamo, helping the club win two MLS Cups, before departing for Europe. Clark spent three years in Europe, playing for Eintracht Frankfurt and Stabæk, before returning to the United States and the Dynamo midway through the 2012 Major League Soccer season. He spent the next six years in Houston, departing at the end of 2017 with 304 appearances for the Dynamo across his two spells. Clark signed as a free agent with Columbus Crew SC, spending his final two professional seasons with the Crew before retiring following the 2019 season.

At international level, Clark appeared for the United States at the 2003 FIFA World Youth Championship. He earned his first senior cap in October 2005 against Panama, and went on to score three goals in 34 caps for his country. Clark represented the United States at two CONCACAF Gold Cups, helped the U.S. to the final of the 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup, and played at the 2010 FIFA World Cup. He earned his final senior cap in January 2012.

Born in Atlanta, Georgia, Clark attended St. Pius X Catholic High School. He is of Trinidadian descent through his father. He was a two-time state champion and state player of the year with the Golden Lions, winning GHSA titles as a sophomore and senior and State Player of the Year nods as a junior and senior. His senior season, St. Pius X went 22–1 while Clark was named as a Parade All-American. At club level, he won two state titles with AFC Lightning and was named as the MVP of the 2000 Adidas ESP Camp. Clark committed to play college soccer at Furman University, part of a recruiting class ranked fourth in the nation.

Clark played only two collegiate seasons at Furman, making 37 appearances and notching three goals for the Paladins. In just his second collegiate game, he provided an assist to John Barry Nusum as part of a 3–2 victory over Notre Dame. Clark suffered through a foot injury during the second half of his freshman season, finishing the year with 15 appearances. His first goal for Furman had to wait until his sophomore season, during a 4–3 victory in overtime against UNC Greensboro. That goal came on September 21, 2002; Clark also scored on September 27 against Fairfield and October 27 against South Carolina. He finished the season with three goals in 22 appearances, and was named as an NSCAA first team all-American. Clark was also named to the NSCAA all-South Region first team, the College Soccer News all-America first team, and as a Soccer America MVP to conclude the season.

Following his sophomore year at Furman, Clark signed a Project-40 contract with Major League Soccer and entered the 2003 MLS SuperDraft, where he was selected second overall by MetroStars. He stepped immediately into the starting lineup for the Metros, making his professional debut on April 12, 2003, against Columbus Crew. Clark would go on to set a club rookie record, starting the first 27 games of the season, and making 28 total appearances in MLS play. In the midst of that stretch, he had a run of three goals in four games: against Chicago Fire on June 28, D.C. United on July 5, and New England Revolution on July 12. Clark also played a large role for the club in their run to the 2003 U.S. Open Cup Final, where they were defeated 1–0 by Chicago. After appearing 35 times in all competitions with three goals, Clark was named a finalist for the MLS Rookie of the Year Award; he lost out to Damani Ralph of Chicago.

Clark started his second professional season slowly after suffering a preseason injury; he came off the bench in the season opener against Columbus, but had to wait until the end of April against New England to get his first turn in the starting lineup. He scored his only goal of the season in the regular season finale against D.C. United, a 50th minute rocket as part of a 3–2 defeat. For the second straight season, Clark started both playoff matches for the Metros as they were knocked out in the quarterfinals. He scored once in 28 total appearances on the year, bringing his total with the club to four goals in 63 games.

Clark was traded to San Jose Earthquakes on January 14, 2005, in exchange for allocation money and a youth international roster slot. The trade occurred on the same day as the 2005 MLS SuperDraft, meaning that Clark became one of eight players that joined the Earthquakes on the day.

He jumped immediately into the starting lineup in 2005, making his club debut with a start in the season opener against New England Revolution on April 2. Playing out of a defensive midfield role, Clark found the back of the net three times on the season: July 2 away to FC Dallas, August 13 against Colorado Rapids, and September 10 against Chivas USA. He was named as the MLS Player of the Month for July, also earning a nod as the club's player of the month that month. Clark scored his first career playoff goal on October 23, in the first leg of the conference semifinals against LA Galaxy; the Galaxy would win the match, 3–1, and took the series by a 4–2 aggregate scoreline. Clark finished the season with 32 appearances and four goals across all competitions.

Due to San Jose's failure to reach a stadium agreement with AEG, Clark, along with the rest of his Earthquakes teammates, moved to Houston for the 2006 season. He started in the inaugural match for Houston Dynamo, a 5–2 victory over Colorado on April 2. Clark went on to start 31 times during the regular season, scoring twice: the first goal in Texas Derby history on May 6 and the tying goal on June 10 against New York Red Bulls. However, the second half of his season was marred by a couple of bookings. On August 26, Clark received the first red card of his career, coming in a 3–2 defeat against Chivas USA. He then picked up a pair of yellow cards in the playoffs, meaning that he would be suspended for MLS Cup 2006. With Adrian Serioux starting in his place, Houston defeated New England Revolution on penalties to win the first trophy in club history. Clark made 36 appearances on the season, scoring twice, and was named to the MLS Best XI.

Clark began 2007 by making his continental debut in the 2007 CONCACAF Champions' Cup, appearing in three of Houston's four games against Puntarenas and Pachuca. He then missed more than a month of the 2007 season on national team duty, appearing in the 2007 CONCACAF Gold Cup and 2007 Copa América. His play through the first half of the season, including a goal against FC Dallas on June 3, earned him a spot in the 2007 MLS All-Star Game, the second consecutive season that Clark had been selected as an all-star. Following his return from the United States squad, he scored for the second time on the season on September 16, in a 3–1 victory over LA Galaxy. However, Clark's season ended at the end of September. He missed the final two regular season and all playoff matches due to a suspension resulting from a deliberate kick aimed at a prone Carlos Ruiz in a match with FC Dallas on September 30. Clark was sent off, received a nine-game suspension, and was fined $10,000, the most severe punishment in MLS history. In his absence, Houston went on to win MLS Cup 2007, repeating as MLS Cup champions. Clark finished the season with 23 appearances and two goals across all competitions.

Clark's suspension carried over for the first two games of the 2008 season, but he jumped immediately back into the Houston lineup afterwards. He notched two goals in 25 appearances in MLS play, scoring against Chicago Fire on May 17 and Real Salt Lake on August 16. Clark also played a large role in Houston's continental competitions, playing 16 times and scoring once across the three competitions. He played every minute of the Dynamo's four matches in the CONCACAF Champions' Cup, repeated the feat across five games in the North American SuperLiga, and played in seven games of Houston's 2008–09 CONCACAF Champions League campaign. In the group stage of the SuperLiga, Clark scored his first career goal in a continental competition, coming in a 3–1 victory over D.C. United. He also converted during the penalty shootout in the final of that competition against New England, although the Revolution took the title by a 6–5 mark. Clark made a career-high 43 appearances in all competitions in 2008, scoring three times.
Clark missed time during the summer of 2009, earning a call up to the United States for the 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup. He scored his only goal of the season following his return to from South Africa, a strike on August 9 in a 3–2 victory over Chicago. Thanks in part to his international duties, Clark only made 22 appearances in league play. He also saw his playing time in the CONCACAF Champions League decrease, appearing in two of the Dynamo's six games in the competition. Clark did play every minute in the MLS Cup Playoffs, including going 120 minutes against LA Galaxy in the conference finals on November 13. Houston was defeated 2–0 after extra time, and with Clark's contract expiring at the end of the season it would mark his final match of his first stint with the club. He announced following the season that he would pursue opportunities abroad, departing Houston with eight goals in 129 appearances across four seasons with the Dynamo.

During the summer of 2009, following his performance at the Confederations Cup, Clark had received interest from multiple European clubs. Stade Rennais of Ligue 1 and newly-promoted Serie A club Livorno both reported interest in the player, either to sign him during the summer window or once his contract with MLS expired in January. Both moves fell through, leaving Clark with Houston through the end of the season.

Clark, whose contract with MLS expired at the end of the 2009 season, signed a deal with Bundesliga club Eintracht Frankfurt for the remainder of the 2009–10 season with an option to extend the contract at the end of the season. He made his club debut on April 24, 2010, against Mainz 05, playing the full 90 minutes in a 3–3 draw. Clark started each of the last three matches on the season for Eintracht as the club finished 10th in the league. Prior to the season finale against VfL Wolfsburg, and despite the injury he had suffered after arriving in Germany, Clark inked a three-year contract with Frankfurt.

As Eintracht struggled towards relegation in 2010–11, Clark also struggled to become a mainstay in the starting lineup for the club. He made his season debut in a 4–0 victory over Borussia Mönchengladbach in early September, replacing Pirmin Schwegler in the 89th minute. Clark appeared in four of Eintracht's nine victories on the season, and six of their 16 total results, but could not prevent the club from slumping to 17th place and just the fourth relegation in club history. He did make his DFB-Pokal debut in late December, playing the full 120 minutes in a 5–3 penalty kick defeat against Alemannia Aachen that eliminated Eintracht from the competition. Clark finished the season having made just 12 appearances in all competitions for the club.

Clark made his debut appearance in the 2. Bundesliga on July 25, 2011, against FC St. Pauli, going the full 90 minutes and picking up a yellow card in a 1–1 draw. However, he was unable to build on that start and only managed to make the bench three more times through the first half of the season, never again appearing for the club. Clark would be sent on loan to Norwegian club Stabæk in February, on a deal running through the end of July. On July 18, 2012, before that loan had even expired, Eintracht confirmed that Clark's contract had been terminated by mutual consent, effective at the end of his loan spell in Norway. Clark officially departed Eintracht Frankfurt having appeared 16 times in all competitions for the club, and just once during his final season in Germany.

On February 22, 2012, after struggling for playing time with Eintracht, Clark was sent on loan to Stabæk of the Tippeligaen. The Norwegian club confirmed that the loan ran through the end of July. He made his club debut a little more than a month later, playing the full 90 minutes in a scoreless draw against Aalesund on March 25. Clark was a fixture in the Stabæk lineup during his time at the club, finishing his time in Norway by appearing in both legs of a Europa League first qualifying round tie against JJK as Stabæk were defeated 4–3 on aggregate by the Finnish club. He went 79 minutes in the opening leg defeat, but had to be replaced by Adnan Haidar before halftime in the second leg in what would mark his final match for the club. Clark concluded the loan spell having made 15 appearances across all competitions for Stabæk.

Following his release from Eintracht, Clark returned to the United States and signed again with Houston Dynamo, who had retained his Major League Soccer rights when he moved to Germany, on August 2, 2012. He was officially added to the roster on August 8, after Geoff Cameron finalized a move to Premier League side Stoke City. Clark made his second debut for the Dynamo two days later, coming on as a second half substitute in a defeat against New York Red Bulls. His first goal since his return was scored on September 29, a 77th minute strike to hand Houston a 2–0 victory over New England Revolution. Clark started in MLS Cup 2012 against LA Galaxy, but conceded the game-winning penalty as Houston were defeated 3–1. He finished the campaign with one goal in 18 appearances in all competitions.

Clark jumped straight into the 2013 season, scoring in the season opener against D.C. United and earning a nod to the MLS Team of the Week for week one. He notched his second goal on July 6 against Philadelphia Union, providing the winner in a 1–0 game, but then missed almost a month across July and August due to an unspecified illness. Following his return to action, Clark jumped back onto the scoresheet: he snapped a four-match winless run for Houston with the winning goal against Philadelphia on September 14, then tallied the only goal of a victory over Montreal Impact on October 4. In the playoffs, Clark again played a starring role for the Dynamo, scoring his first playoff goal for the club and adding an assist although the Dynamo were denied a third-straight trip to MLS Cup. Clark finished the season with final stats of 36 appearances and five goals; for his efforts, he was named as the Dynamo Player's Player of the Year.

The 2014 season was a disappointing one for Houston, who failed to qualify for the playoffs for only the second time in club history, as well as for Clark, who appeared in only 25 games because of injury. He suffered a concussion on April 23 against New York Red Bulls, and wound up missing eleven matches before returning against Montreal on June 29. After scoring twice prior to his injury, Clark added two more goals following his return. He tallied strikes in back-to-back games against Sporting Kansas City and Montreal, sparking the Dynamo to a six-match unbeaten run. The late effort wasn't enough, however, for the Dynamo to qualify for the playoffs, as they missed out for the first time since 2010. Clark made 25 appearances on the season, scoring four times.

2015 would prove to be the most productive season of Clark's career, as he appeared in 33 matches and scored a career-high nine goals. Four of those goals came through the first half of the season, including a pair in back-to-back games against Montreal and D.C. United in mid-April. He also scored his first career U.S. Open Cup goal, coming two minutes into stoppage time of a fourth round victory over Austin Aztex. Clark continued his tear through the second half of the season, tallying match-winning goals against San Jose on July 10 and Vancouver Whitecaps FC on August 29. Although Houston won points in seven out of the eight games he scored in, the Dynamo fell nine points short of qualifying for the playoffs, missing out for the second straight season. Following the season, Clark was named as the club's Most Valuable Player, Player's Player of the Year, and Humanitarian of the Year. He also earned recognition from the fans as Midfielder of the Year. Clark became a free agent at the end of the season, but re-signed with Houston on December 8.

In his ninth season in Houston, Clark appeared in a career-high 32 league matches; that included his 275th regular season start (against Columbus in April) and his 300th career MLS appearance (against San Jose in August). Clark scored four times on the season, twice against San Jose and twice in the Texas Derby against FC Dallas. The goals against Dallas, in March and June, were his fifth and sixth in the Derby, tying Brian Ching for the most in the history of the series. Clark appeared 33 times in all competitions, augmenting his four goals with a career-high four assists.

Ahead of the 2017 season, Clark was named as the sixth club captain in Dynamo history, taking over from DaMarcus Beasley when Wilmer Cabrera was named as the head coach. Clark did not score a goal in any competition in 2017, the first time in his MLS career that he did not tally a league goal. He missed time early in the season because of tightness in his left adductor, sitting out two matches in late April due to the injury. On May 20, Clark made his professional debut in his hometown of Atlanta, entering the 4–1 defeat against Atlanta United as a substitute. The Dynamo returned to the playoffs for the first time in four seasons, with Clark appearing twice as part of the club's run to the Western Conference finals. He finished the season having appeared 30 times in all competitions. On December 5, Houston declined the option on Clark's contract, making him a free agent and ending his eleven-year affiliation with the organization. He departed the Dynamo after 175 appearances and 23 goals through his second stint with the club, bringing his all-time mark in Houston to 304 appearances and 31 goals.

On February 2, 2018, Clark joined his fourth MLS club, signing as a free agent with Columbus Crew SC. At 34 years old at the time of his signing, he became the oldest player on the Columbus roster.

Prior to the season, Clark was named as part of the leadership council for Crew SC, joining Federico Higuaín, Hector Jiménez, Jonathan Mensah, Zack Steffen, and Josh Williams. The six collectively served as vice-captains behind captain Wil Trapp. Clark made his Columbus debut as a late substitute on March 10, replacing Lalas Abubakar six minutes into stoppage time of a 3–2 victory against Montreal Impact. He was on the field for less than a minute before the final whistle. On his second appearance, and first start, Clark scored his first goal for the club. From a Higuaín corner kick, he powered home the winning goal in a 3–1 victory over D.C. United. Clark played sparingly across the remainder of the season, finishing the season with one goal in 13 appearances. The club declined his contract option on November 26, but stated that they would "remain in contract dialogue" with Clark. On January 17, 2019, the two sides agreed to terms and he re-signed with Crew SC for the 2019 season.

Clark officially retired from playing professional soccer on February 12, 2020. He signed a ceremonial one day contract with Houston Dynamo for the announcement.

Clark received his first taste of international soccer with the United States U18 national team, earning six caps and scoring three goals during his two eligible years at that level. He was a key member of the squad that won the 2001 International Tournament of Lisbon, where he started all three matches.

Clark was bumped up to the United States U20 national team at the start of 2002, earning his first cap at that level on January 10 as part of a 1–0 victory over Canada. He was named in the squad for the 2002 C.O.T.I.F. XIX Torneig Internacional, helping the Americans to their best-ever finish; they were defeated by Brazil in the final. Clark closed out 2002 at the CONCACAF U20 qualifying tournament, helping the United States qualify for the 2003 FIFA World Youth Championship. After appearing 28 times for the U20s in 2002, Clark went on to play 19 more games in 2003, including another appearance in L'Alcúdia. His final caps at U20 level came in the United Arab Emirates at the World Youth Championship, where Clark played all five games for the Americans. His 47th and final appearance for the U20s came in a quarterfinal defeat against Argentina on December 12.

While also playing for the U20s, Clark earned his first cap for the United States U23 national team in May 2003; he played the full 90 minutes against Mexico as part of a 3–1 American victory. He only appeared one other time for the U23s, in an Olympic qualifier against St. Kitts and Nevis on November 15.

Clark received his first senior cap for the United States on October 12, 2005, in a World Cup qualifier against Panama. He replaced Kyle Martino in the 68th minute of a 2–0 American victory. Clark was not named to the squad for the 2006 FIFA World Cup, and thus did not earn another cap for more than a year. He returned to the team after Bob Bradley was named as the new head coach, making his first start for the U.S. in a friendly victory over Denmark on January 20, 2007. That summer, Clark was named to two American squads: the 2007 CONCACAF Gold Cup in the United States and the 2007 Copa América in Venezuela. He appeared four times in the Gold Cup, coming off the bench in all three knockout stage matches; in the final against Mexico, he replaced Pablo Mastroeni at halftime as part of the American comeback victory. At the Copa América, Clark appeared in all three matches as the United States was knocked out of the competition in the group stage. Against Paraguay on July 2, he scored his first international goal, a 40th minute strike that would turn out to be the only goal from open play scored by the United States on the tournament.

More than three years after earning his first World Cup qualifying cap, Clark earned his second; he started against Trinidad and Tobago on September 10, 2008, in a qualifier for the 2010 FIFA World Cup. He played in just two of the six Third Round qualifiers for the United States, but found a larger role in the Hexagonal, appearing in four of the ten American matches in the final round. On September 10, 2009, Clark scored his first World Cup qualifying goal, and just his second for the United States. Away to Trinidad and Tobago, Clark's 62nd minute strike was the only score of a 1–0 victory, and guaranteed that the United States could finish no worse than fourth in the Hexagonal. He then went the distance against Honduras on October 10, as the U.S. clinched a spot in the World Cup with a 3–2 victory.

In the midst of that World Cup qualifying campaign, Clark was selected to the American squad for the 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup. He appeared in two group stage matches for the U.S., missing only the 3–0 defeat against Brazil. Clark went the distance in the semifinal victory over Spain, helping the United States to their first-ever Confederations Cup final. Against Brazil in the final, he played 88 minutes before being replaced by Conor Casey as the Americans chased the game; they finished as runners-up after a 3–2 defeat to the Seleção.

Clark was named as part of the 30-man preliminary squad for the 2010 FIFA World Cup. Coach Bob Bradley named Clark as part of the 23-man squad that would take part in South Africa. He was one of nine midfielders selected to the team. After appearing in two tune-up matches prior to the tournament, Clark made his World Cup debut on June 12 with a start against England in the group stage. He also started in the Round of 16, a match that saw the United States defeated by Ghana after an extra time goal by Asamoah Gyan. Clark came in for criticism following the match, as he had committed the turnover that led to Ghana's opening goal in the fifth minute, picked up a yellow card in the seventh minute, and was substituted in the 31st minute.

Clark only appeared three more times for the United States following the World Cup. In Jürgen Klinsmann's debut as head coach, Clark was an 84th minute substitute against Mexico, replacing José Francisco Torres. He scored his third and final international goal on January 22, 2012, a header seven minutes into second-half stoppage time to beat Venezuela. Four days later, Clark made what would turn out to be his final appearance for the United States, playing 67 minutes in a 1–0 victory over Panama. Clark earned 34 caps for the United States, scoring three goals across his eight years with the national team.

On March 11, 2021, the Vancouver Whitecaps FC announced that they hired Clark as an assistant coach for the first team.

United States

San Jose Earthquakes

Houston Dynamo



Hurwitz's automorphisms theorem

In mathematics, Hurwitz's automorphisms theorem bounds the order of the group of automorphisms, via orientation-preserving conformal mappings, of a compact Riemann surface of genus "g" > 1, stating that the number of such automorphisms cannot exceed 84("g" − 1). A group for which the maximum is achieved is called a Hurwitz group, and the corresponding Riemann surface a Hurwitz surface. Because compact Riemann surfaces are synonymous with non-singular complex projective algebraic curves, a Hurwitz surface can also be called a Hurwitz curve. The theorem is named after Adolf Hurwitz, who proved it in .

Hurwitz's bound also holds for algebraic curves over a field of characteristic 0, and over fields of positive characteristic "p">0 for groups whose order is coprime to "p", but can fail over fields of positive characteristic "p">0 when "p" divides the group order. For example, the double cover of the projective line "y" = "x" −"x" branched at all points defined over the prime field has genus "g"=("p"−1)/2 but is acted on by the group SL("p") of order "p"−"p".

One of the fundamental themes in differential geometry is a trichotomy between the Riemannian manifolds of positive, zero, and negative curvature "K". It manifests itself in many diverse situations and on several levels. In the context of compact Riemann surfaces "X", via the Riemann uniformization theorem, this can be seen as a distinction between the surfaces of different topologies:

While in the first two cases the surface "X" admits infinitely many conformal automorphisms (in fact, the conformal automorphism group is a complex Lie group of dimension three for a sphere and of dimension one for a torus), a hyperbolic Riemann surface only admits a discrete set of automorphisms. Hurwitz's theorem claims that in fact more is true: it provides a uniform bound on the order of the automorphism group as a function of the genus and characterizes those Riemann surfaces for which the bound is sharp.

Theorem: Let formula_1 be a smooth connected Riemann surface of genus formula_2. Then its automorphism group formula_3 has size at most formula_4.

"Proof:" Assume for now that formula_5 is finite (this will be proved at the end).

Now call the righthand side formula_25 and since formula_26 we must have formula_27. Rearranging the equation we find:
In conclusion, formula_55.

To show that formula_7 is finite, note that formula_7 acts on the cohomology formula_59 preserving the Hodge decomposition and the lattice formula_60.
This is a contradiction, and so formula_74 is infinite. Since formula_74 is a closed complex sub variety of positive dimension and formula_1 is a smooth connected curve (i.e. formula_79), we must have formula_80. Thus formula_81 is the identity, and we conclude that formula_71 is injective and formula_83 is finite.
Q.E.D.

Corollary of the proof: A Riemann surface formula_1 of genus formula_2 has formula_4 automorphisms if and only if formula_1 is a branched cover formula_88 with three ramification points, of indices "2","3" and "7".

By the uniformization theorem, any hyperbolic surface "X" – i.e., the Gaussian curvature of "X" is equal to negative one at every point – is covered by the hyperbolic plane. The conformal mappings of the surface correspond to orientation-preserving automorphisms of the hyperbolic plane. By the Gauss–Bonnet theorem, the area of the surface is

In order to make the automorphism group "G" of "X" as large as possible, we want the area of its fundamental domain "D" for this action to be as small as possible. If the fundamental domain is a triangle with the vertex angles π/p, π/q and π/r, defining a tiling of the hyperbolic plane, then "p", "q", and "r" are integers greater than one, and the area is 

Thus we are asking for integers which make the expression

strictly positive and as small as possible. This minimal value is 1/42, and

gives a unique triple of such integers. This would indicate that the order |"G"| of the automorphism group is bounded by

However, a more delicate reasoning shows that this is an overestimate by the factor of two, because the group "G" can contain orientation-reversing transformations. For the orientation-preserving conformal automorphisms the bound is 84("g" − 1).

To obtain an example of a Hurwitz group, let us start with a (2,3,7)-tiling of the hyperbolic plane. Its full symmetry group is the full (2,3,7) triangle group generated by the reflections across the sides of a single fundamental triangle with the angles π/2, π/3 and π/7. Since a reflection flips the triangle and changes the orientation, we can join the triangles in pairs and obtain an orientation-preserving tiling polygon.
A Hurwitz surface is obtained by 'closing up' a part of this infinite tiling of the hyperbolic plane to a compact Riemann surface of genus "g". This will necessarily involve exactly 84("g" − 1) double triangle tiles.

The following two regular tilings have the desired symmetry group; the rotational group corresponds to rotation about an edge, a vertex, and a face, while the full symmetry group would also include a reflection. The polygons in the tiling are not fundamental domains – the tiling by (2,3,7) triangles refines both of these and is not regular.

Wythoff constructions yields further uniform tilings, yielding eight uniform tilings, including the two regular ones given here. These all descend to Hurwitz surfaces, yielding tilings of the surfaces (triangulation, tiling by heptagons, etc.).

From the arguments above it can be inferred that a Hurwitz group "G" is characterized by the property that it is a finite quotient of the group with two generators "a" and "b" and three relations

thus "G" is a finite group generated by two elements of orders two and three, whose product is of order seven. More precisely, any Hurwitz surface, that is, a hyperbolic surface that realizes the maximum order of the automorphism group for the surfaces of a given genus, can be obtained by the construction given. 
This is the last part of the theorem of Hurwitz.

The smallest Hurwitz group is the projective special linear group PSL(2,7), of order 168, and the corresponding curve is the Klein quartic curve. This group is also isomorphic to PSL(3,2).

Next is the Macbeath curve, with automorphism group PSL(2,8) of order 504. Many more finite simple groups are Hurwitz groups; for instance all but 64 of the alternating groups are Hurwitz groups, the largest non-Hurwitz example being of degree 167. The smallest alternating group that is a Hurwitz group is A.

Most projective special linear groups of large rank are Hurwitz groups, . For lower ranks, fewer such groups are Hurwitz. For "n" the order of "p" modulo 7, one has that PSL(2,"q") is Hurwitz if and only if either "q"=7 or "q" = "p". Indeed, PSL(3,"q") is Hurwitz if and only if "q" = 2, PSL(4,"q") is never Hurwitz, and PSL(5,"q") is Hurwitz if and only if "q" = 7 or "q" = "p", .

Similarly, many groups of Lie type are Hurwitz. The finite classical groups of large rank are Hurwitz, . The exceptional Lie groups of type G2 and the Ree groups of type 2G2 are nearly always Hurwitz, . Other families of exceptional and twisted Lie groups of low rank are shown to be Hurwitz in .

There are 12 sporadic groups that can be generated as Hurwitz groups: the Janko groups J, J and J, the Fischer groups Fi and Fi', the Rudvalis group, the Held group, the Thompson group, the Harada–Norton group, the third Conway group Co, the Lyons group, and the Monster, .

The largest |Aut("X")| can get for a Riemann surface "X" of genus "g" is shown below, for 2≤"g"≤10, along with a surface "X" with |Aut("X")| maximal. 

In this range, there only exists a Hurwitz curve in genus "g"=3 and "g"=7.

The concept of a Hurwitz surface can be generalized in several ways to a definition that has examples in all but a few genera. Perhaps the most natural is a "maximally symmetric" surface: One that cannot be continuously modified through equally symmetric surfaces to a surface whose symmetry properly contains that of the original surface. This is possible for all orientable compact genera (see above section "Automorphism groups in low genus").



Sankey tank

Sankey tank, a manmade lake or tank, is situated in the western part of Bangalore in the middle of the neighbourhoods of Malleshwaram, Vyalikaval and Sadashivanagar. The lake covers an area of about . At its widest, the tank has a width of .

Sankey tank was constructed by Col. Richard Hieram Sankey (RE) of the Madras Sappers Regiment, in 1882, to meet the water supply demands of Bangalore. The tank was also known as "Gandhadhakotikere", as the Government Sandalwood Depot used to be located near the lake.

Sankey reservoir was constructed in 1882. It was linked to the Miller's tank and Dharmambudhi tank and was built as a safeguard against water shortages, such as that experienced in the Great Famine of 1876–78. The quality of water was not very good and when Governor of Madras visited Bangalore in July 1888. A local wit commented, "The men who are thrown off their horses and killed on the spot at Bangalore are the only ones that are allowed by doctors not to have died from drinking bad water".

The threats posed to the survival of the lake, which were also identified by the local people (morning joggers) using the lake, refer to:

The tank was converted into a park by the Bengaluru Water Supply and Sewage Board (BWSSB) and the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) with funds provided by the Government of Karnataka. In addition, the following were also implemented.

In 2004, local builders’ proposal to construct a multistory building in the Sankey tank bed was challenged by petitioners in the Karnataka Lok Adalat (Peoples Court, an adjunct of the High Court). But the Court was informed by the Bangalore Mahanagar Palike (BMP) that it had not sanctioned any plan for the proposed building and that it would take immediate action to prevent any such steps by the developer taken without a no-objection certificate from the Ministry of Environment and Forests.

The Lok Adalat ordered the Forest Department to repossess of land belonging to it from the real estate developers who had set out to build an apartment block there. The Lake Development Authority also recommended that no construction or development activity should be allowed within a distance of from lakes in order to ensure that the water bodies in the city are not encroached and their conservation and protection are not stalled. The Karnataka State Pollution Control Board (KSPCB) informed the court that the proposal of Abhishek Builders and Mantri Developers to build an 18–floor luxury apartment block near the Sankey Tank has been turned down as gross violations were noted under the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act and the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act.


Chicago 19

Chicago 19 is the sixteenth studio album by American rock band Chicago, released on June 20, 1988. After recording "Chicago 18" with David Foster, the band worked primarily with producers Ron Nevison and Chas Sandford for this album. Their Full Moon Records imprint moved to Reprise Records. This is the final album to feature the band's original drummer Danny Seraphine, who was dismissed from the group in 1990.

With a reception similar to its predecessor, "Chicago 19" became a success on the album chart, going platinum and yielding several hit singles. The album includes "Look Away" (No. 1), "I Don't Wanna Live Without Your Love" (No. 3), and "You're Not Alone" (No. 10). A remixed version of Jason Scheff's "What Kind of Man Would I Be?" (No. 5) would also be successful in late 1989 as part of the follow-up "Greatest Hits 1982-1989" release. The album relied heavily on outside writers with five of its ten compositions. The first two singles were either written or co-written by Diane Warren, and the third by British-born songwriter Jimmy Scott.

After the tour for "Chicago 19", original drummer Danny Seraphine was fired from the band for undisclosed reasons. Session drummer Tris Imboden then joined the band, in time to record "Explain It to My Heart" (the last song recorded for the album) on "Twenty 1".

"Chicago 19" (Full Moon/Reprise 25714) reached #37 in the US during a chart stay of 42 weeks. It did not chart in the UK.

An alternate version of "Come in from the Night" exists called "Hide Behind the Window". A cover version of Otis Redding's "I Can't Turn You Loose" was intended for "Chicago 19" and was performed live in July 1988. "Dancing in The Streets" was omitted, and performed in 1989 in Houston, Texas as part of an encore; Wilson Pickett's "In the Midnight Hour" was also performed at the same show.




The album makes extensive use of the then popular Roland D-50 synthesizer presets. For example: "I Don't Wanna Live Without Your Love" with "Pressure Me Strings" and "Look Away" with PCM E-Piano.

Singles - "Billboard" (U.S.)


Special Council of the NKVD

Within the administration of the Soviet Union, the Special Council of the USSR NKVD () was created by the same decree of Sovnarkom of July 10, 1934 that introduced the NKVD itself. The decree endowed the Special Council with the right to apply punishments "by administrative means", i.e., without trial. In other words, the term "by administrative means" actually refers to extrajudicial punishment.

The following types of punishment were put at the disposal of the Special Council by this decree: banishment (высылка) (from the place of residence), exile (ссылка) (to remote regions), sentencing to corrective labor camp (исправительно-трудовой лагерь) for up to five years, and deportation (высылка) from the USSR.

In 1937, during the Great Purge, the Special Council was allowed to sentence to imprisonment for up to eight years. The abolition of many NKVD troikas in November 1938 saw the Special Council take over some of their functions.
In November 1941, after the beginning of the war against Germany, the Special Council was allowed to sentence to imprisonment for up to 25 years or to death. After the 1945 end of the war the Special Council lost the right to pass death-sentences; the maximum available punishment was 25 years of imprisonment.

When the NKVD was renamed in 1946, the Special Council remained within the corresponding organization, e.g., as Special Council of the MGB, etc.

After the death of Joseph Stalin in March 1953, the Presidiumof the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union abolished the Special Council in September 1953.


List of Indian independence activists

The Indian independence movement consisted of efforts by individuals and organizations from a wide spectrum of society to obtain political independence from the British, French and Portuguese rule through the use of many methods. This is a list of individuals who notably campaigned against or are considered to have campaigned against colonial rule on the Indian sub-continent.

Post-independence, the term "freedom fighter" was officially recognized by the Indian government for those who took part in the movement; people in this category (which can also include dependent family members) receive pensions and other benefits such as Special Railway Counters.

.ga

.ga is the country code top-level domain (ccTLD) for Gabon.

Between 1998 and 2004 it was administered by the "Office des Postes et Télécommunications de la République Gabonaise" and then transferred to "Gabon Telecom". "Gabon Telecom" in 2013 formed a partnership with international domain registrar Freenom to offer registrations of this domain for free.

Since 2013, the "Agence Nationale des Infrastructures Numériques et des Fréquences" (ANINF) of Gabon is responsible for the .ga domain.

In 2023, ANINF terminated their contract with Freenom because it found Freenom's service unsatisfactory. ANINF stated that upwards of seven million .ga domains would be deleted, as "the previous operator has not provided the data that concern them." The migration was carried out from 4 June to 7 June 2023. With this migration, free domain registration was removed.

The technical operation is handled by AFNIC and domains are sold through accredited registrars.

Kim Dotcom attempted to use me.ga as an alternative domain for the Megaupload service. It was suspended by Communications Minister Blaise Louembe who stated "Gabon cannot serve as a platform or screen for committing acts aimed at violating copyrights, nor be used by unscrupulous people."

Second-level domain names that end in .ga are:


Pazhassi Raja

Kerala Varma Pazhassi Raja () (3 January 1753 – 30 November 1805), also known as Cotiote Rajah and Pychy Rajah, was the "de facto" head of the Kottayam Kingdom in the Malabar region of Kerala between 1774 and 1805. His struggles with the British East India Company is known as the Cotiote War. Pazhassi's rebellion against the British is often touted as one of the earliest acts of freedom fight in India. He earned the epithet ""Kerala Simham"" ("Lion of Kerala") on account of his martial exploits.

Pazhassi Raja was a member of the western branch of the Kottayam royal clan. When Hyder Ali of the Kingdom of Mysore occupied Malabar in 1773, the Raja of Kottayam found political asylum in Kallara near Vaikom in Kottayam district of Kerala. Pazhassi Raja, the fourth prince in line for succession to the throne during this period, became one of the "de facto" heads of state, surpassing several older royal contenders. He fought a war of resistance against the Mysorean army from 1774 to 1793. On account of his refusal to flee and due to his effective resistance to Mysoreans, he gained firm support of his subjects.

In 1792, after the Third Anglo-Mysore War, the East India Company imposed control in Kottayam in violation of an earlier agreement of 1790 which had recognised its independence. Vira Varma, to whom Raja was a nephew, was appointed by the East India Company authorities as the Raja of Kottayam. To meet revenue targets fixed by Company authorities, Vira Varma ordered an exorbitant tax to be collected from the peasantry and this move was met in 1793 by a mass resistance led by Pazhassi Raja, who had always been opposed to the Company's rule. In 1796, the Company made an attempt to arrest Pazhassi Raja, but he evaded capture and instead fought back using guerilla warfare. After a string of serious setbacks, the Company sued for peace in 1797. The conflict was renewed in 1800 over a dispute on Wayanad and after a five-year-long war of insurgency, Pazhassi Raja was killed on 30 November 1805 in a gunfight at Mavila Thodu (small body of water), in the present-day Kerala-Karnataka border.

Pazhassi Raja was born in the Padinjare Kovilakam (Western Branch) of Purannattukara Swarupam, the royal lineage of Kottayam. This branch was located at Pazhassi which lay south west of Mattannur. Kerala Varma got the name Pazhassi Raja as he was a native of Pazhassi. The early British East India Company documents wrote "Pazhassi Raja" as "Pychy Rajah", while the name "Cotiote Raja" comes from the anglicizing of "Kottayam" to "Cotiote". Kottayam covers what is today the Thalassery taluk of the Kannur District and Wayanad district, along with the Gudalur taluk of Nilgiris district.

As a royal clan, Purannattukara Swarupam had three branches: a western branch (Padinjare Kovilakam) at Pazhassi, near Mattannur, an eastern branch (Kizhakke Kovilakam) at Manatana, near Peravoor, and a southern branch (Tekke Kovilakam) at Kottayampoil, near Koothuparamba.

Pazhassi Raja's warfare with Mysore troops can be divided into two phases based on the rulers of the kingdom of Mysore. First phase lasted from 1773 to 1782 during which time, the Mysore ruler was Hyder Ali. The second phase extended from 1784 to 1793 and during this phase he fought the troops of Tipu Sultan, son and successor of Hyder Ali.

In 1773, Hyder Ali marched into Malabar for the second time, for non-payment of tributes from the Rajas (kings) of Malabar as agreed after war in 1768. Most of the "Rajas" of Malabar, along with many "Naduvazhis" or vassals fled to Travancore. Yet numerous princes and younger noblemen refused to flee and organized partisan bands who waged guerrilla warfare on the Mysore army from the forests and mountains that covered much of Malabar. Pazhassi Raja was one among them.

In 1774, at the age of 21, Pazhassi Raja took over the throne to replace his uncle who had fled to Travancore. He vowed to resist Hyder Ali's troops, and stayed in Kottayam, where he gathered a force and began guerrilla battles against the troops of Mysore as he had neither guns nor troops enough to face them in an open battle. He set up a large number of bases in the nearly impenetrable forested mountains of Puralimala and Wynad and repeatedly inflicted severe minor losses on the Mysore army in Kottayam as well as in Wayanad. Pazhassi Raja's troops were recruited from several castes and tribes- that includes Nair forces Nambiars, Thiyyas, Kurichiyas and Mullukurumas

Once the true Raja of Kottayam had fled, three royals rose to power in Kottayam. The nephew of the escaped Raja named Vira Varma and his nephews, Ravi Varma and Pazhassi Raja now took over the reins of government. Vira Varma was skilled in political intrigue and manipulation whereas Ravi Varma was too incompetent to play any serious political role and hence his role only was nominal. Pazhassi Raja become the most powerful figure in Kottayam, much to the chagrin of his uncle Vira Varma. Hence Vira Varma played a series of power games aiming to check the growing clout of his nephew. So the relation between Vira Varma and Pazhassi Raja was one of enmity right from the onset.

The military situation was grim for "Pazhassi Raja" and his troops – in 1774, Coorgs had joined hands with Hyder Ali on the promise of being gifted Wynad and a large Coorg army camped in Wynad to help Mysore troops. In 1776, Hyder Ali re-installed the Hindu Raja in Chirakkal and the latter joined Mysore war effort to crush Pazhassi Raja. This triple alliance which lasted till 1780 reached nowhere near defeating the Kottayam army.

During his long war with the Mysore and then the East India Company, Pazhassi Raja increased his sphere of influence significantly eastwards as far as the outskirts of Mysore. His men regularly looted enemy treasuries and sandalwood from southern Karnataka and his enemies could do little to check these raids. This enabled him to lay claim on a great chunk of the Mysore district – as far as Nanjangod in the east. Also, Pazhassi Raja and his men frequently raided the domains of neighbouring Rajas in northern Malabar and Coorg to harass the enemy regiments posted there and he was often supported by local population of those territories. Along with this, he had close ties with Ravi Varma and Krishna Varma, who were princes of Calicut and popular rebel leaders of southern Malabar.

Thalasseri or Tellicherry in the late 18th century was a harbour-fort which was held by the East India Company as a factory. The value of Tellicherry as a naval base meant that her capture could seriously impact the situation of the Bombay Marine on the west coast. Also rebels in North Malabar bought arms and ammunition from the East India Company in Tellicherry. So if Hyder could capture this fort, he could, at a stroke, cripple both the rebels in North Malabar as well as Company rule in India at a regional basis.

So in 1778, Hyder's vassal, the Raja of Chirakkal, besieged Thalasseri and enforced an economic blockade under order from Hyder himself. The East India Company factories at Talassery armed Pazhassi Raja's men to enable them to recover Kottayam from the Mysorean occupation army. This move by the Company ensured that the Chirakkal army was now at risk of being struck in the rear by Pazhassi Raja's force. The Chirakkal troops began to retreat, but Pazhassi chased and devastated the Chirakkal army, and then marched to Kottayam where he obliterated the Mysorean occupation and overran all of western Kottayam. But at this critical moment when the Mysorean army in Malabar could have been destroyed by a joint action on the part of the Company and the Rajas, while their factories at Talassery were instructed by the Governor not to upset the nominal peace with Hyder.

Thus the EIC decision not to exploit the victory at Thalasseri was exploited by Mysore. The Chirakkal army reinforced by a Mysorean contingent under Balwant Rao marched into Kottayam. Pazhassi's men, though secretly supplied with arms and ammunition by the Company, could not hold or defeat this huge host and soon the Kottayam army was forced to disperse after a fight. Then the Mysore-Chirakkal army captured Kadathanad and installed a puppet Raja who joined hands with Mysore. In 1779, a huge Mysore-Chirakkal-Kadathanad army besieged Thalasseri. Pazhassi Raja sent a force of 2000 Nairs to aid the EIC defence of Thalassery, and this enabled the factories to hold on successfully.

By the end of 1779, Sardar Khan, the Mysorean general was sent to Thalasseri to bring the siege speedily to a successful conclusion. Sardar Khan came with a force of 10,000 troops and 30 heavy guns. Sardar Khan knew that it was Pazhassi Raja's help that enabled the East India Company to resist him and so he opened negotiations with Pazhassi – his offer was the restoration of Mysore occupied territories of Kottayam if Pazhassi would ally himself with Mysore and pay an immediate tribute of 500,000 rupees. It was well beyond the capacity of Kottayam to raise so huge a sum in so short a time. But Pazhassi did his best to pay Sardar Khan [probably in the hope that the latter would make concessions] and 60,000 rupees was paid to the latter. But Khan was not satisfied and rejected Pazhassi's request that his possessions in Malabar be restored. This greedy and tactless approach of Sardar Khan's made sure that there was little chance for Mysore to capture Thalasseri. The Kottayam army became far stronger with their major victory in 1779 at Kalpetta (Wynad) where the whole Coorg army of 2,000 was surrounded and decimated by Pazhassi Raja's troops. The destruction of the Coorg army in Wynad enabled Raja to throw a whole new army into the contest at Thalasseri.

In 1780, Pazhassi Raja proposed a plan to the East India Company to break the Mysorean siege of Thalassery: he and his men would strike the enemy in the rear from the east as the EIC came out of the fort and struck the Mysorean line in front. Both armies would effect a junction that would split the enemy into two. The Mysorean and allied troops could then be routed easily. But it was only in 1781 that the Company understood the value of this plan and their Bombay authorities agreed to it. An operation was carried out as per Pazhassi's plan; it ended with the destruction of the Mysorean forces. What followed was a rebellion in Kottayam by the Nayar militia led by Pazhassi Raja. Soon, the Mysoreans were ousted.

By 1782, Kottayam was once more a free land. But by the Treaty of Mangalore (1784) after the Second Anglo-Mysore War, the Company administration recognised Tipu Sultan's sphere of authority in Malabar. Thus with its only valuable ally lost, Kottayam was ready to become a vassal state of Mysore. Once more, as Sardar Khan did in 1779, Mysore exacted an exorbitant rate of tribute. Although Ravi Varma, the elder brother of Pazhassi Raja agreed to pay 65,000 rupees per year, Mysore demanded 81,000 rupees. The hiked rate of tribute meant greater hardship for the peasantry (largely Thiyyar) who had suffered from years of foreign occupation. So Pazhassi Raja took up this issue and decided to launch a mass resistance struggle once more.

What angered Pazhassi Raja even more was that his brother Ravi Varma who paid a visit to Tipu Sultan in 1786 for peace talks was forced to sign a treaty which ceded Wayanad to Tipu Sultan. Pazhassi Raja decided not to let Tipu enjoy Wayanad in peace and kept up a guerrilla warfare that constantly harassed Mysore troops in Wayanad and its neighbourhood. War in Wayanad lasted for seven years – till 1793 – when the last of the Mysorean garrisons were expelled from the soil of Wayanad.

By the end of 1788, Pazhassi Raja's hatred of Tipu had shot up on account of the latter's policy of forcible conversion. So he strengthened his ties with the East India Company on one hand and with fellow rebel chiefs and princes in Malabar on the other. Tipu sent an army under a French general named Lally with a genocidal mission—the extermination of the Nair caste from Kottayam to Palakkad – as Tipu was determined to end the menace of Nair rebels in Malabar who had foiled all attempts of him and his late father Hyder Ali to subjugate and exploit Malabar.

The senior Rajah of Kottayam fled to Travancore fearing the Sultan. But before that, he handed over charge of government to Pazhassi Raja and asked him to save the country from Mysore's onslaught. Given below is the observation made by historian Rajayyan about Pazhassi Raja's resistance to Tipu Sultan after the exodus of Rajas from Malabar in 1788:

But in 1790, Tipu abandoned the war in Malabar as the war in Deccan drew his attention. Pazhassi Raja joined the East India Company with a force of 1500 Nairs to capture the Mysorean stronghold in Katirur (near Talassery). After Katirur, Pazhassi Raja and his troops moved south-east and captured the Kuttiyadi fort from Tipu's men. Thus once more, the whole of Kottayam was under the control of Pazhassi Raja. In 1790, the Company recognised Pazhassi Raja as the head of Kottayam instead of the original Raja who was in refuge at Travancore. Raja agreed to pay 25,000 rupees as tribute to the Company. But his struggle with the Mysore troops continued in Wayanad till 1793 when he freed that land also.

But by the Treaty of Seringapatam (1792) signed between the EIC and Tipu after the latter failed in Third Anglo-Mysore War, Malabar was ceded to the EIC. The East India Company then began to work for the establishment of their supremacy in Malabar. This was where the Company administration and Pazhassi Raja had opposite opinions – Pazhassi Raja helped the East India Company not because he was ready to accept Company rule but because he wanted his country Kottayam to be an independent land.

Pazhassi Raja was disturbed when he heard about the terms which the Company put forward to the Rajas of Malabar in 1792, because the EIC had signed a cowl with him in 1790 which promised to respect the independence of Kottayam. The summary of the East India Company terms in 1792 were as follows:

These terms converted monarchs to mere agents of the East India Company. Rajas were now stripped of their right to rule as they willed; they also lost control over their economies.

Kottayam was represented by Vira Varma, uncle of Pazhassi Raja during talks with the East India Company in 1792. Vira Varma concluded a treaty with Company = by which he accepted all terms and conditions put forward by them.

Pazhassi Raja resisted the East India Companyfrom 1793 onwards till his death in 1805. He fought two wars to resist Company intervention in the domestic affairs of his kingdom. From 1793–1797 he fought over the question of the management of Kottayam and from 1800–1805 over the issue of who was to be master of Wynad. The East India Company called their wars with Pazhassi Rajah as Cotiote War.

Pazhassi Raja was not on good terms with his uncle Vira Varma, Raja of Kurumbranad. In 1793, foxy Vira Varma who had surrendered Kottayam to the EIC back in 1792, convinced Company commissioners to let him collect tax in Kottayam. He calculated that a good collection might please the EIC and that they would let him seize all of Kottayam. The Company had by this time adopted a hostile approach to Pazhassi Raja who had consistently refused to accept Company suzerainty and hence they made the obedient Vira Varma head of Kottayam Pazhassi Raja was angry at this move. He felt betrayed. After all, he was the only Raja in Northern Malabar to have helped the East India Company consistently in the war with Mysore.

Vira Varma Raja, on the one hand, undertook to collect tax in Kottayam directly, but on the other hand, he encouraged Pazhassi Raja to oppose the Company's domination. Moreover, the tax imposed by the Company was beyond the peasants' capacity to pay. They resisted attempts to collect these taxes by the agents of the East India Company, and Pazhassi Raja took up their cause.

In 1793 Pazhassi Raja made sure that no tax was collected in Kottayam by the EIC – as a mark of his protest. He also threatened that if Company officials did not give up their enumeration of pepper vines, he would have the vines destroyed. Local Company authorities, however, debated with Raja and soon both discovered Vira Varma's deceptions. The East India Company put forward a solution acceptable to the Raja by which 20 percent of gross revenue would go to Raja and another 20 percent would go for temple expenses. No tax would be imposed on temple property in the immediate future.

In 1793 Tipu's Vakils protested to the Company that Pazhassi Raja, who was an EIC subsidiary, had overrun most of Wayanad. Soon the Raja was supreme in the Wayanad Plateau.

But the Governor General unwisely revoked the agreement in 1794 and gave Kottayam to Kurumbranad Raja on a five-year lease. The Raja was very angry at this decision and decided to retaliate by ruling his country as per customary law. The year before the lease was concluded the Raja had provided asylum to a Nayar noble, Narangoli Nambiar of the Iruvazinad royal clan, who had been declared an outlaw by the East India Company for the murder of three men who had killed his kinsman. The Raja's kind treatment of Nambiar irritated the EIC. The EIC also became angry that the Raja had executed by impalement two robbers as per customary law. The Company planned to arrest Raja 'for murder' but gave up the idea as the Raja had a bodyguard of 500 well-armed Wayanad Nayars.

In 1795, after a year, Vira Varma Raja got Kottayam on lease but was not able to collect tax there due to the efforts of his nephew Raja. So East India Company troops arrived in Kottayam to help Vira Varma's tax collectors, but Pazhassi Raja's men resisted them with success.

In 1796 orders were issued from Bombay to collect tax arrears for 2 years in Kottayam. For the Company administration, no more pretexts were needed to arrest Raja. 300 men under Lieutenant James Gordon marched from Talassery and seized Raja's fortified house at Pazhassi-but Raja fled four days earlier to Manattana (near Kottiyur). Gordon sacked the palace where traditional treasure of Raja was kept. Raja was angry at Gordon's actions and sent a letter to the Supervisor at Thalassery.

Raja was also angry that one of his former generals, named Pazhayamviden Chandu, had become an agent of Kurumbranad Raja and what angered him even more was that this turncoat had the audacity to boss him with Vira Varma's and EIC blessings. Raja shifted his HQ to Purali Range and then into Wayanad. Raja then blocked all Company communications between Wayanad and Low Malabar through Kuttiyadi Pass. The EIC retaliated by cutting all communications between Raja and Low Malabar. But as they did not have enough troops to chase him they waited for reinforcements.

The East India Company commandant was Colonel Dow, who Raja knew well from the Siege of Thalassery. Raja thought that this old friend might help him mediate with the Company administration. Raja offered to give up the struggle provided he was pardoned and his treasure and house restored. The Colonel and Raja being old soldiers hated needless bloodshed, so he forwarded Raja's request to the Commissioners, who though they were bitterly opposed to Raja's independent style, agreed to the Colonel's request as there was a risk that Raja might ally with Tipu.

So Northern Superintendent ordered the restoration of the Raja's house [but not treasure], and the Raja's pardon was confirmed by the Bombay and Supreme Governments. But the orders of government were communicated to the Raja via Vira Varma – which meant that uncle Raja took care not to report to his nephew that the Company had agreed to his requests. Uncle Raja had a vested interest in the war between the Company and his nephew Pazhassi Raja.

Vira Varma also removed Kaitheri Ambu, a favourite noble and general of Raja, from home administration of Kottayam. Ambu along with followers went to Kannavam [also spelled "Kannavath" and "Kannoth"], where he planned and executed a mass resistance with people's support, which made sure that Vira Varma could make no tax collection in Kottayam. But Ambu acted clearly on guidance of Raja, who felt the expulsion of Ambu was another of his uncle's conspiracies to undermine him.

Raja feared that the East India Company planned to seize him [not knowing that their truce terms were kept blocked from him by his uncle] and retreated into the depths of Wayanad. Company troop build-up in Wayanad also amplified his doubts. However, Raja was still eager to avoid a war and came to meet the Northern Superintendent with a bodyguard of 1500 armed Nayars. Vira Varma Raja was also ordered to be present. Pazhassi Raja's main demand was that Kottayam must be under his rule, a demand to which his uncle was not ready to accede.

The EIC Commissioners' attitude also was arrogant; they were already prejudiced against Raja and were therefore blind towards Raja's logical argument that Vira Varma had no business in Kottayam. As talks broke down, the Commissioners' issued a proclamation in Kottayam that if those Kottayam men in service of Raja did not desert him and come home, they would be declared enemies and their properties confiscated. But this proclamation had little effect in Kottayam where resistance to Company-Kurumbranad rule became stronger.

The East India Company, to their horror, found out that a large number of Vira Varma's troops had deserted to join ranks of insurgents and Vira Varma himself was not much interested to help the Company; after all his aim was to create a flare-up between his nephew and the EIC for sake of pure self-interest.

Raja then visited the Mysorean commandant at Karkankotta in 1796 and in 1797 held an audience with his old enemy Tipu in Mysore, who posted 6000 men at Karkankotta to aid Raja in case of war and to supply ammunition to rebels. He also began to collect troops and armaments. War was imminent. 1200 troops and artillery under a Major General was sent by the Bombay Government to deal with Pazhassi. The Company also began to set up outposts in Kottayam and sent more troops to Wayanad.

In early 1797, the Nayar militia uprose all over Kottayam and Company outposts were trapped in a true state of siege. Partisan bands became active all over Kottayam and harassed reinforcements and supply convoys. The case was similar in Wayanad where East India Company troops that moved out of the safety of their garrisons risked being harried by Kurichia bowmen. The EIC suffered a good deal of loss in terms of men, ammunition and stores in these ambuscades.

This event was the most important in the whole war. In 1797, Colonel Dow & force marches into Wayanad. His plan was to block Periya Pass and then crush a large rebel force in Kannoth once their retreat is blocked.

Reinforcements under Lieutenant Mealy were to reach Dow at Periya, but on way they were severely harassed by a force of Nayars and Kurichias and suffered a casualty of 105 men. So instead of Periya they retreated to their original base.

Dow's troops suffered chronic shortage of supplies and so Dow applied for reinforcements and re-supplies to be sent under Major Anderson of Bowles' regiment. But as Mappila guides of Anderson deserted at last moment. That caused a delay in journey of Anderson-a delay that had fatal consequence for the EIC.

Dow then received news that Tipu had sent sepoys to aid Raja as Tipu considered the Company entry into Wayanad a violation of Seringapatam Pact. Dow decided that he will go to Talassery to consult authorities there and to plan a greater operation to deal with troops of Raja and Tipu simultaneously in Wayanad. He left with a small band of men but was ambushed on way by Raja's men aided by Mysorean sepoys but Dow escaped unhurt.

The day after he left, an EIC force of 1100 under Major Cameroon in Periya decided to descend into Kottayam via Periya Pass as their supplies have exhausted.

But what they did not know was that Raja who learned of the true state of the Company expeditionary force laid a trap for them-he ordered troops lay concealed in camouflaged stockades built on both sides of the pass. Once the whole Company force entered the narrow pass, hidden troops were to pounce on their enemy who must be caught unawares.

Plan worked well and what followed was great slaughter of the Company force. Had it not been for the arrival of Major Anderson's force the following day, hardly any would have survived due to lack of medical care. Most of the enemy were killed and all their guns, ammunition, baggage and cattle were plundered along with Union colours. Senior Company officers like Major Cameroon, Lieutenant Nugent, Lieutenant Madge, and Lieutenant Rudderman were killed in action.

Around this time, Commissioners took a decision on the advice of Swaminatha Pattar, a Tamil Brahmin who was the minister of Zamorin that sowed the eventual downfall of Pazhassi Raja. They decided to raise an irregular force of local traitors to harass Pazhassi Raja. This force was a forerunner of the Kolkar, who became hated because of their support of the Company and cruelty to resisters and people.

But for time being, Raja was in a strong position. On account of the disasters suffered by their army, Bombay Government sent a Committee of Government composed of men of highest ranks-Commander-In-Chief Lieutenant-General Stuart and Governor Jonathan Duncan. They decided to make peace as they were anxious that guerrilla warfare in a mountainous and forested terrain could last long and that Raja might join forces with Tipu or French. They also decided that Kurumbranad Raja Vira Varma should be ousted from administration of Kottayam. Rajas of Chirakkal and Parappanad acted as mediators in negotiation between Raja and the East India Company and a peace pact was signed between Pazhassi and the Company in 1797.

The Treaty of 1797 agreed on following points:

A pardon and restoration of property was also extended to Narangoli Nambiar of Iruvazinad.

Thus Raja's efforts of four years ended in a political victory. Peace dawned after four years of antagonism and war.

Tipu Sultan in his letter to French government notes with glee that East India Company had lost 1,000 European soldiers and 3,000 native sepoys in four years of war between the Presidency armies and Kottayam army.

Despite the peace treaty of 1797, real peace did not emerge between Pazhassi Raja and the East India Company. Skirmishes continued across Kottayam. The main reason for this was that the Company did not attempt to end its efforts to annex Kottayam and collect tax. But this was successfully foiled by partisans of Pazhassi Raja headed by Kaitheri Ambu. Pazhassi Raja also went ahead with his policy of defiance of East India Company directions, continued with his military enlargement program and even shifted his seat of power to Mananthavadi in Wayanad - all of which were deemed as "injurious to interests of Company in Kottayam" by Colonel Dow, the Company representative in Kottayam. But since Raja clearly had the upper hand since the victory of 1797, the East India Company was powerless to put an end to his activities.

After the fall of Tipu, Wayanad fell to the East India Company. They sent a Mysore Commission to seize Wayanad and planned to annex it to either Canara or Coimbatore. But as Wayanad was a traditional possession of Kottayam Raja and that Pazhassi is in control of this region since 1793, Pazhassi correctly saw move was an encroachment on his country's ancient provinces. Raja retaliated by collecting a large force of Nayars which was now supplemented by Mappilas and Pathans, latter being ex-soldiers of Tipu who became unemployed after Tipu's death.

The Company administration at Madras appointed Major General Arthur Wellesley as the Presidency army commandant of Mysore, Canara & Malabar.

He planned a double-pronged move from Malabar Coast and Mysore into Wayanad and began preparations for that end. Raja observed Major General-latter had brought reinforcements and building roads in Wayanad and outposts across rebel country. In response, Raja also recruited numerous men which so alarmed Wellesley that latter even wanted to kidnap kith and kin of rebels so as to check Raja's recruitment.

Raja learned that Wellesley had left to Deccan on a military mission-Raja who understood that Major General's absence is a great chance swiftly made his move. He marched across Kuttiyadi Pass and below he made a junction with Unni Mootha Mooppan, a Walluvanad Mappila leader & his men and soon several great nobles like Kampuratt Nambiar of Iruvazhinad, Peruvayal Nambiar and Kannavath Sankaran Nambiar also joined Raja with their men.

By monsoon of 1800, rebels who controlled all of country-side of Kottayam threatened to overwhelm Company outposts in Kottayam. Wellesley sent a large force under Colonel Sartorius to recapture rebel-held Kottayam. But the plan could not be carried out as there were not enough troops in Malabar. Wellesley advised Commissioners to stop all communications with Wayanad so as to starve Raja of supplies. But the shortage of troops also meant this plan too remained on paper. By the time, Wellesley decided to smash Raja by a double drive from Malabar Coast and Mysore into Wayanad, Manjeri Athan Gurikkal an Ernad Mappila leader along with his followers agreed to support of Raja.

By 1801, a large East India Company force of over 10,000 men swarmed all over Kottayam and Wayanad and they blocked all passes that linked Wayanad with Malabar. Before so large numbers, rebels thought wise to go under-ground for time being. Raja also found that he could no longer contact his supporters in Southern Wayanad and Southern Malabar. Raja became a wanderer in forests but even then, to surprise of the East India Company, he ruled out compromise it seems he understood that there was no alternative to full freedom.

Raja had six close aides and 25 musketeers in his wanderings. First, he went north via Payyavur along montane forests of eastern Chirakkal to rally support. But the EIC were on his trail but failed to catch him. Raja then visited his secret bases in Kottayam and then moved into Kadathanad and into jungles of Kurumbranad. The East India Company were angered that where ever he went, nobles supported him in secret and decided to punish them for their help to rebel Raja.

As a part of their policies to quell the rebellion, Peruvayal Nambiar who was arrested was hanged. The East India Company also threatened to issue a penalty and confiscation of property for all those rebels who failed to surrender in six weeks time. But a pardon was also issued for surrendered rebels. But none of these threats and temptations worked and Raja was still at large. But some of his chief supporters were arrested of whom Kannavath Sankaran Nambiar was most famous. Kannavath Sankaran Nambiar and his son were hanged too and their property was confiscated.

Following execution of Kannavath Nambiar, a deceptive calm descended on North Malabar-calm before the storm. Collector Major MacLeod believed that war was over and went ahead with his charged duties. He immediately declared total disarmament of Malabar and threatened those who kept arms with the death penalty. He also doubled the rate of tax and ordered a reassessment of tax of whole Malabar in a mere forty days.

All these 'reforms' paid back in 1803 when Malabar was on verge of revolt as people quickly became incensed. MacLeod tried to calm this with corrective measure-He cancelled all his 'reforms' and old system was reinstated. But it was too late for Wayanad where Raja's men were prepared for a rebellion.

The first major event was the capture of Panamaram Fort. Edachena Kungan Nair planned the operation and was helped by 150 Kurichia bowmen under Talakkal Chandu. Fort had 70 men under Captain Dickenson and there was a large force of 360 men under Major Drummond only a few miles away in Pulinjali. So if Major came to help Captain in time Kurichia force would be overwhelmed by gun-fire and numbers. But Kungan and Chandu decided to take risk.

The whole garrison was slaughtered in the surprise attack led by the two generals and they lost only 5 dead and 10 wounded. Dickenson himself was killed. Rebels got 112 muskets, six boxes of ammunition and 6000 rupees. They also destroyed the whole fort.(The remains of the fort can be seen now near Panamaram High School).

Wellesley was enraged at this rebel audacity and dispatched 500 men to retaliate. But by then rebel victory had roused all of Wayanad and Kottayam. Edachena Kungan, the hero of Panamaram success, went to Pulpally shrine and issued a proclamation to people to join Raja's war. 3000 men volunteered. They were posted at Valliyurkav at Mananthavadi, Motimjarra [?], and Edappally and 100 of them under the brother of Kungan posted themselves at Periya Pass and 25 men were posted at Kottiyur Pass. Rebel outposts were set up en route from Dindimal to Valliyurkav. The rebel army was mostly composed of archers and swordsmen, but some had muskets.

Edachena Kungan Nair led an attack on a Company detachment headed from Mysore to Mananthavadi. The harassment began once this force entered Wayanad till it reached a stream between Manathavadi and Bhavully river. There they were blocked by a rebel force entrenched on the opposite side of the stream. But to ill luck of rebels, a reinforcement which had caught up with blocked Company army outflanked the rebel entrenchment and took a large number of prisoners of war.

Besides, East India Company reinforcements arrived in Wayanad from all directions. But they could find rebels nowhere.

The rebels now concentrated in Kottayam. In 1802, they raided a supplies convoy near Kottiyur. The Company administration were frustrated by Kottayam people's total lack of co-operation. To add to their trouble, in 1803, a rebel force took to field in Kurumbranad* & Payyormala* and people were sympathetic to rebels. Kungan marched towards Pazhassi to wipe out the Company outpost there but had to retreat, though they suffered serious losses. Soon rebellion spread into Chirakkal where armed bands of partisans launched operations and often fought against the Presidency troops openly. Raja's army by end of 1803 was ranging as far as Kannur and Thalasseri. An estimated 3350 partisans of Pazhassi Raja took part in this operation that extended south as far as Ernad.

In March 1803, a rebel force marched as far as Calicut and captured Sub-Jail where they killed all guards and seized their firearms and ammunition. They also released prisoners, many of whom joined ranks of the rebel army. This was too much for MacLeod and he resigned immediately after this event.

In 1803, Wellesley left for Europe, after three years of inconclusive war with Pazhassi Raja, later destined to become Duke of Wellington, vanquisher of Napoleon at Waterloo.

In 1803, the East India Company had 8,147 soldiers to fight Pazhassi Raja. But as the situation was slipping out of control, the EIC military command in Malabar requested for another 5,000 men. This reinforcement arrived in early 1804 and thus increasing their total force to 13,000 men.

In 1804, a large Presidency army arrived and 1200 Kolkar were also ready for action. Most importantly Thomas Hervey Baber, a civil servant was appointed as Sub-Collector. It was he who crushed Pazhassi's Revolt forever. It is indeed ironic that what a military genius like Wellesley could not attain, was achieved by Baber – said to be just a 'civil servant.' Baber had both a personal motive – to avenge the death of his friend Major Cameron, the first husband of his wife Helen Somerville Fearon at the hand of Pazhassi Raja on 9 January 1797 at Periya Pass. Baber became a civil servant to protect the interests of a small but influential group of merchants that included his in-laws – the Inglis and Money families of Bombay. It is noteworthy that Baber's son Henry Fearon Baber married the Granddaughter of George Harris, 1st Baron Srirangapattam and the nemesis of Tipu Sultan.

In 1804, a huge rising led by Kalyat Nambiar [a powerful Chirakkal noble but Raja's sympathiser] and Raja's men in largely forested eastern Chirakkal was defeated by the Company. If there was large and long revolt warfare in Chirakkal, it would have immensely profited Raja. Though there was a lot of supporters of Raja in Chirakkal, as revolt collapsed fast as rebels opted for open confrontation instead of time-honoured guerrilla warfare. Another cause for the failure of revolt was treacherous Kolkar also served their White pay-masters well.

So once more rebel force had retreated to Wayanad. They were hotly chased by East India Company who had 2000 Sepoys and 1000 allied Kolkars. A reward of 3000 pagodas was offered for Raja along with 1000 Pagodas for Edachena Kungan and bounties were put on heads of 10 other associates of Raja.

But rebels, mostly Kurumbas, struck at Churikunji [?] in Wayanad. Though they had to withdraw, they had devastated their enemy. That year, a party of Kolkar nearly caught Raja but he escaped thanks to timely warning of a Kurumba guard.

But monsoon and brutal climate of Wayanad soon aided Raja. Of 1300 Kolkar only 170 were not sick by October. Raja and Edachena Kungan organised a large force of Kurichias and Kurumbas at Pulpally shrine and positioned them to as far as Kurichiyat. Also, the effort of Kungan to rally Nayar nobles of Wayanad to support Raja's war-effort had also succeeded.

The EIC for past couple of years did not have to suffer the loss on a scale of Periya in 1797, but matters were not easy for the Company at all. Even in Kottayam which had become quiet might explode once more and a large rebel force with Raja as the head was still at large. But one must remember that the whole revolt is a one-man show as Wellesley himself remarked once-“"We are not fighting 1000 men [Raja's army] ... but one man ... Kerala Varma".”-Raja's end would mean end of revolt.

T.H. Baber went to Mysore to direct operations himself and began a large search for informants and traitors. The East India Company themselves admitted that they did not get a lot of informants as locals were devoted to Raja, but some of those few informants proved devastating to revolt-one of them a Chetti, found out where Raja had camped and informed Baber who took to field with 100 Kolkar and 50 Sepoys.

There is one school of thought that blames Pazhayamviden Chandu as solely responsible for fall of Raja and end of his revolt. Pazhayamviden worked with the East India Company administration as an "adviser" like Pallore Eman, but in reality, spied for Raja. But in autumn of 1805 Pazhayamviden decided to betray all military secrets of his master for a large sum of money.

In light of the above points, it will not be far-fetched to believe that Chetti who guided Company troops to Raja's hideout mentioned by Baber in his letter could be a servant or agent of Pazhayamviden Chandu.

On 30 November 1805, Raja and retainers were camped close to Karnataka on the shore of a stream named Mavila or Mavila Tod [not far from Pulpally]. Raja and party were caught by surprise and an intense but short fight followed. Six rebels were killed. One of the earliest rebels to be killed was Pazhassi Raja.

But evidently, wounded Raja did live long enough for a few more minutes to raise his loaded gun and then tell Canara Menon, an East India Company minor official, not to come too close to his dying body and pollute it. Raja's contempt and sarcasm for a man who chose to serve unclean foreigner are evident. But it also showed his uncompromising stand towards collaborators and foreign invaders.

The precise nature of Raja's death is controversial. Folklore insists that he committed suicide by swallowing a diamond ring to avoid capture after he was wounded but Baber says he was killed by a clerk named Canara Menon. W. J. Wilson, who wrote on the history of the Madras Regiment, credits Captain Clafam and his six sepoys for killing. This third version is more likely as Baber was not on good terms with military authority throughout the war. He is alleged to have credited Menon so as to deny credit to Clafam and his superior Colonel Hill.

Kunjani, the wife of Raja who was taken the prisoner, committed suicide in captivity at Kappanaveedu, near Thalassery. As reprisal on his family, property was confiscated and the palace at Pazhassi was demolished and replaced with a highway. The sorry state of his family aroused sympathy in local Thiyyas, who were loyal followers and built a new house for his family.


Pazhassi Raja had no selfish motive of personal power. Kurup (1988) describes him as an altruistic personality who upheld interests of his subjects and country over his personal interest. He believed that he was duty-bound to protect his subjects from exploitation and oppression. Frenz (2008) also supports this view and opines that Raja was committed to the welfare of his people and freedom of his country. She notes that Pazhassi Raja opted for fight the East India Company when it became clear to him that the Company administration would not respect the independence of his country and welfare of his subjects. She noted that Raja considered it a personal failure as a leader if he failed to uphold sovereignty of his kingdom.

Criticism leveled against Raja for allying with the East India Company during his wars with Hyder Ali and Tipu Sultan is not rational in light of an analysis of contemporary South Indian history. Raja allied with Company initially not because he was their vassal, but because the Kingdom of Mysore was an enemy of both. Before 1792, Malabar suffered from rapacity of Mysore rule and East India Company were only a merchant power who had not yet harmed people of Malabar. So it was understandable that many leaders of Malabar – Pazhassi Raja included – allied with the Company to fight Mysore rulers like Hyder Ali and Tipu Sultan.

Swaminatha Iyer, a Company agent had noted as early as 1797 that extreme popularity of Raja was on account of the fact that he remained in his country with his subjects during Mysore invasions and shared with them the trials and tribulations and also due to his extreme generosity to this peasantry. It was on account of love and support from his subjects that Raja could evade and fight the East India Company for a decade even when he had a bounty on his head.

After his fellow Rajas in Malabar submitted to East India Company after 1798, Raja himself knew well that he will be defeated and killed in the long run if he chose to continue to fight against the East India Company. But yet he refused to compromise. In a letter to Kalyat Kuttieman, he revealed his intent to resist the Company's authority to the end.

He took initiative to rebuild his country which was devastated by Mysore invasions. As part of this, he borrowed money from Tellicherry Factory and gave financial help to his peasants to resume agriculture along with distribution of seeds and cattle. This was in contrast to rest of Rajas of Malabar who squeezed peasants. This was one reason why his popularity with masses remained high.

Raja is also credited with the spread of agriculture in Wynad. He started a program that encouraged tribesmen in Wynad to adopt settled agriculture. As part of this program, he instructed his vassals in Wynad to distribute cattle and seeds to tribesmen in Wynad.

Pazhassi Raja was assisted by eighty chieftains during his wars and some were entrusted with administrative responsibilities also. Most prominent of them are Chengoteri Chathu, Pallur Eman, Kaitheri Ambu, Kannavath Nambiar, Thalakkal Chandu, Sankaran Moopan and Edachena Kunkan.

In his decades-long war to oust invaders, Rajah developed an elaborate system of cantonments and forts in the jungly and mountainous part of his country.

Four of them are most important – granite fort on Purali range [modern Muzhakunnu] which was built by his ancestor Harischandra Perumal over a thousand years ago. He had another granite fort at Manatana. In Wayanad, he had a great fort in Mananthavady which was reported to have ability to house his whole army of 6000 men. He also had a stronghold in Todikulam near Kannavam which belonged to his supporter Kannavath Sankaran.

Of all his strongholds, none survive today. Only ruins of Purali fort survive today. It is today a heap of granite boulders. Only a tank still survives today. A nearby black-stone cave where Raja once lived can still be found.


Pazhassi Raja appears in numerous folk songs in North Malabar, in which his resistance to the East India Company is the primary subject.

Notes

Citations

Bibliography

.wf

.wf is the Internet country code top-level domain (ccTLD) for the Wallis and Futuna Islands. This top-level domain is run by the AFNIC and registrations are open to all.



.ye

.ye is the Internet country code top-level domain (ccTLD) for the Republic of Yemen.

In 2015, when the Houthis took over the Yemeni capital, the rebel forces also took over the main internet provider and distributor of the .ye domain, which remains under their control. In response, the Aden-based Yemeni government created its own domain extension, .adennet. According to DomainTools, 1152 .ye domain names were registered as of 2018.

In order to register a .YE domain, you must have a company registered in Yemen. However, some registrars provide a local presence service for non-Yemeni clients. Domain names also need to be hosted in the Republic of Yemen.

There are eight Second Level Domains:

A second top domain will be used for the Republic of Yemen, intended for domain names in the local language. The string اليمن ("al-Yaman") was registered and approved for this purpose in March 2011, but it was not activated and lower level domains were not granted at that time.


.yt

.yt is the Internet country code top-level domain (ccTLD) for Mayotte, a part of the registry for France. The official registry address nic.yt redirects to the French registry site, AFNIC. Registrations, which had been suspended, resumed in December 2011.



.zw

.zw is the internet country code top-level domain (ccTLD) for Zimbabwe.

Although no registry Web site is shown in the IANA whois listing, at least .co.zw registrations are presently being taken by the Zimbabwe Internet Service Providers Association, whose charter claims that one of the purposes of the organization's founding was to oversee the .zw domain.

.ac.zw registrations are being taken by the University of Zimbabwe. Applications are handled by this institution's Computer Centre. As with the general norm, .ac.zw registrations are for academic institutions.

.org.zw registrations are taken by the country's fixed telecommunications provider, TelOne. These are intended for use by NGOs, and similar organisations but any restrictions are not clear.

TelOne is also listed as the administrative and technical contact of the domain.


.zm

.zm is the Internet country code top-level domain (ccTLD) for Zambia. Registrants of .zm domains must "have a presence in Zambia".

Registrants are required to register domains at the third level under an existing second-level domain (SLD). There are eleven second-level domains:


The designations above are assumed based on observed practices and standard conventions, as ZICTA (the ccTLD registry) do not maintain online documentation codifying this. Most entities will generally register either a .co.zm or .org.zm domain, if they choose to use the ccTLD rather than a generic top-level domain.

The one documented exception to the requirement to register at the third level is that "registered ISPs" may register at the second level—e.g., zamnet.zm. However, there are several undocumented variances to this rule—e.g., the Bank of Zambia's domain is boz.zm, and the regulator (ZICTA) operates under zicta.zm.

ISPs are required to be registered with ZICTA, and only registered ISPs may be accredited as registrars. ZICTA lists ISPs on their website.


Leviathan (disambiguation)

Leviathan is a Biblical sea monster.

Leviathan may also refer to:












.qa

.qa is the Internet country code top-level domain (ccTLD) for State of Qatar.

As of September 2011, members of the general public can register Qatar Internet domain names (.qa) that are available through accredited registrars. Prior to the making the .QA domain available to the public, QDR held a “sunrise” period for the domains which enabled trademark holders and government entities to register for the Qatar-specific domain names.

As of 2014, thirteen registrars have been accredited by Qatar Domains Registry to offer the domain names. These registrars are Qtel, W3infotech, IP Mirror, Ascio, MarkMonitor, Marcaria, EPAG Domainservices, Safenames, Thexyz, CPS-Datensysteme, DomainMonster, and InternetX.

Qatar Domains Registry, regulated by the Communications Regulatory Authority, manages Qatar's country code top-level domains (ccTLD), which includes domains which are offered through accredited registrars and other closed domains related to Qatari institutions which means you must register your domain name directly from the Qatar Domains Registry. Qatar is among the first countries in the world to be able to offer domain names in Arabic, قطر. domain represents Qatar's Arabic language online identity.

Qatar domains available through approved registrars are: .qa, .com.qa, .net.qa, .name.qa and Arabic قطر. the latter of which is represented as codice_1 in Punycode.

The domains that are registered directly from the Qatar Domains Registry are : .gov.qa, .mil.qa, .org.qa, .edu.qa and .sch.qa.



Bear River (Michigan)

Bear River is a small clear slow-moving river in the U.S. state of Michigan. long, it is the largest tributary of Little Traverse Bay in the northwest of the lower peninsula. Traverse Bay is on Lake Michigan. The river is formed as the outflow of Walloon Lake on the boundary between Charlevoix County and Emmet County, draining from the southeast end of the lake at near the community of Walloon Lake in Melrose Township. M-75 has its northern terminus in a junction with US 131 nearby.

The river flows east for about before turning north through Bear Creek Township, angling northwest to empty into Little Traverse Bay in Petoskey at . Petoskey was at first known as "Bear River" until being renamed in 1873. The Bear River itself has also been known as "Bear Creek" and "Ellis Creek".

The river has excellent fishing and provides opportunities for peaceful canoeing or kayaking. The river is great for smelt fishing. For most of its path in Emmet County, River Road and the Tuscola and Saginaw Bay Railway parallel the river on its west banks.


Including Walloon Lake, the Bear River system drains all or portions of the following cities and townships:


United Nations Operation in Somalia II

The United Nations Operation in Somalia II (UNOSOM II) was the second phase of the United Nations intervention in Somalia and took place from March 1993 until March 1995, following the outbreak of the Somali Civil War in 1991. UNOSOM II carried on from the transitory United States-controlled (UN-sanctioned) Unified Task Force (UNITAF), which had been preceded by UNOSOM I. Notably, UNOSOM II embarked on a nation-building mission, diverging from its predecessors. As delineated in UNSCR 814, the operation's objectives were to aid in relief provision and economic rehabilitation, foster political reconciliation, and re-establish political and civil administrations across Somalia.

UNOSOM II was a substantial multinational initiative, uniting over 22,000 troops from 27 nations. This operation marked the largest multilateral force ever assembled for peacekeeping, and at that time, it was the costliest UN operation. Notably, it was the first UN mission authorized from the start to use military force proactively, beyond self-defense.

Four months into its mandate in June 1993, UNOSOM II transformed into a military campaign as it found itself entangled in armed conflict with Somali factions, predominantly against the Somali National Alliance (SNA) led by Gen. Mohammed Farah Aidid. As the intervention progressed, military operations against the SNA took focus, relegating the task of political reconciliation, institution-building and humanitarian aid to a peripheral role. Three months into the conflict, the US military would implement Operation Gothic Serpent to assist UNOSOM II against the SNA with special forces. Soon after, the infamous Battle of Mogadishu took place, signifying the end of the hunt for Aidid and military operations in Somalia. The United States withdrew six months after the battle, and the remaining UN forces departed from Somalia in early 1995, concluding the operation.

UNOSOM II faced heavy criticism for alleged human rights abuses, violations of international law, and the use of excessive force, attracting scrutiny from a wide range of humanitarian organizations, academics and journalists. Furthermore, the operation was widely criticized for an overemphasis on military operations, diverging from its original humanitarian intent."" The humanitarian impact and number of lives saved is disputed.

Following the failure of the monitoring mission created as UNOSOM by the United Nations, the United States offered to lead a substantial intervention force, made up chiefly of American personnel. This was accepted by the UN and made possible through United Nations Security Council Resolution 794, authorizing the use of "all necessary means to establish as soon as possible a secure environment for humanitarian relief operations in Somalia". The Security Council urged the Secretary-General and member states to make arrangements for the unified command and control of the military forces that would be involved.

On the evening of 4 December 1992, U.S. President George H. W. Bush addressed the nation, informing them that U.S. troops would be sent to Somalia. The U.S. contribution would be known as Operation Restore Hope, which joined a multinational force and became known as the United Task Force (UNITAF). The operations of UNOSOM I were suspended. UNITAF was authorized under Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter. The United States designed the UNITAF mission to be a transitional action under U.S. control, structured into four phases. Initially, troops were deployed to secure key harbor and airport sites in Mogadishu and Baledogle, forming the operation's base. The security zone was then extended to encompass the surrounding regions of southern Somalia, a step completed ahead of schedule due to favorable conditions and support from Non-governmental Organizations (NGOs). The third phase involved further southern expansion of the security zone into Kismayo and Bardera while ensuring secure routes for humanitarian operations. Finally, in the last phase the U.S. transferred operations to the United Nations and withdrew most UNITAF forces.

On 3 March 1993, the Secretary-General submitted to the Security Council his recommendations for effecting the transition from UNITAF to UNOSOM II. He noted that despite the size of the UNITAF mission, a secure environment was not yet established. There was still no effective functioning government or local security/police force. The Secretary-General concluded that, should the Security Council determine that the time had come for the transition from UNITAF to UNOSOM II, the latter should be endowed with enforcement powers under Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter to establish a secure environment throughout Somalia. UNOSOM II would therefore seek to complete the task begun by UNITAF. The new mandate would also empower UNOSOM II to assist in rebuilding their economic, political and social life, so as to recreate a Somali State. Most notably it would also mandate the disarmament of Somali militias.

While Somalia was not reincorporated into a UN trusteeship as it had been in the 1950s, UNOSOM II was entrusted with the power to make decisions on behalf of the Somali people. This significant shift in mandate incited numerous allegations of UN colonialism. The United Nations, by invoking Chapter VII, essentially transformed the scope of its operations in Somalia, a move that would become a major point of contention in the near future. According to UNOSOM II advisor John Drysdale the majority of Somali political leaders rejected the notion of UN administering any aspect of Somalia, though some prominent figures such as Gen. Mohamed Abshir called for the return of trusteeship. The shift raised suspicions among a wide spectrum of Somalis, inciting concerns about the UN's possible attempts to reestablish a trusteeship. Aidid's faction was particularly vocal about these apprehensions, but was not alone. A variety of other Somali factions, including that of Aidid's main adversary, Ali Mahdi, also expressed similar concerns.

During March 1993, several weeks before UNOSOM II was created, the first UN sponsored Somali peace conference was being held in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. The "Conference on National Reconciliation" consisted of the majority of Somalis factions and leaders. UN Special Representative Lansana Kouyate of Guinea warned the delegates of the national reconciliation conference that the UN was going to invoke it's Chapter VI powers across the entirety of Somalia unless they came to an agreement by 25 March 1993. The conference finalized an agreement 24 hours past the deadline. On 26 March 1993 UNOSOM II, was established by the Security Council in Resolution 814, though did not formally take over operations in Somalia until UNITAF was dissolved just over a month later on 4 May 1993. 

UNOSOM II was the first UN mission authorized from the start to use military force proactively, beyond self-defense. John Drysdale notes that by invoking Chapter VII, the UNOSOM II Force Commander could operate with near impunity depending on their interpretation of "Article 42" of Chapter VII. "Article 42" offered no rules of engagement, in effect gave UNOSOM II forces the power to make arbitrary detentions and offer no right to habeas corpus for Somalis. In Drysdale's view UNITAF had avoided armed conflict with Somali factions due to the careful rules of engagement created by the head of the operation, US Marine Lt. Gen. Robert B. Johnston. Johnston's approach, which focused above all on winning the Somali's public confidence, was lost during the transfer to the far more aggressive UNOSOM II mandate.

UNOSOM II would be composed of four main divisions. They would be officially led and coordinated in Somalia by the representative of the UN Secretary-General, retired US Admiral Jonathan Howe. The four divisions were tasked with:


UNOSOM II had a strength of 30,000 personnel, including 22,000 troops and 8,000 logistic and civilian staff from Algeria, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Belgium, Botswana, Canada, Denmark, Egypt, Fiji, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Kuwait, Jordan, Malaysia, Morocco, Nepal, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Philippines, Spain, South Korea, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Sweden, Switzerland, Tunisia, Turkey, the United Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom, the United States and Zimbabwe. The United States military provided 1,167 troops and numerous helicopter gunships for a Quick Reaction Force, which would remain completely under US operational control.Despite UNOSOM II being composed of a coalition of twenty-seven countries, most of the decision makers and many of the staff were Americans, giving the United States significant control over much of the operation. It was observed that very few nations involved had any representation in the UN military command structure. Due to this, many states providing troops to the operation insisted on maintaining command structures with their own respective governments, which would result in numerous future inter-UNOSOM II disputes between contingents. UNOSOM II Force Commander Cevik Bir openly admitted that the critical posts in his headquarters were filled by Americans by May 1993. In addition to this the representative of the UN Secretary-General in Somalia, retired US Admiral Jonathan Howe, staffed the UNOSOM II headquarters with twenty-eight US officers in key positions. Months into the operation, following the 5 June 1993 killings of the Pakistanis and the passing of UNSCR 837, the US would effectively take complete lead of the mission. In the months following US officers would operate with minimal consultations with UN headquarters in New York. Marine Lt. Gen. Robert B. Johnston, head of UNITAF, would state that although in his view UNITAF had been success US efforts and losses would be in vain if UNOSOM II was also not successful.

UNOSOM II would divide Somalia into five distinct zones. Northwest, Northeast, Central, South and Mogadishu.

A federalist government based on 18 autonomous regions was agreed upon by the leaders of Somalia's various armed factions. It was the objective of UNOSOM II to support this new system and initiate nation-building in Somalia. This included disarming the various factions, helping the people to set up a representative government, and restoring infrastructure.

Major disagreements between the UN and the Somali National Alliance began soon after the establishment of UNOSOM II, centering on the perceived true nature of the operations political mandate. In May 1993, relations between the SNA and UNOSOM would rapidly deteriorate following two significant events.

During the March Addis Ababa conference, the Somali National Front (SNF), a pro-Barre faction opposing Aidid, smuggled weapons into strategic port city of Kismayo. Although the city was nominally controlled by the SNA and UNITAF forces, Gen. Hersi Morgan of the SNF ousted the Somali National Alliance forces led by Col. Omar Jess.On 7 May 1993, three days after UNOSOM II took control of Kismayo from UNITAF, the SNA made an attempt to retake the city. During the assault the Belgian peacekeepers stationed in the town intervened, considering the assault to take Kismayo an attack on their positions and consequently repelled the SNA forces. The fall of Kismayo to Gen. Morgan infuriated the Somali National Alliance. To the SNA the incident was viewed as blatant U.N. partiality, as UNITAF had failed to prevent Morgan from seizing the city and UNOSOM had then fought SNA forces who had tried to retake it. Following the loss of Kismayo, Aidid began to deeply mistrust the United States and the UN mission.

In early May, Gen. Aidid and Col. Abdullahi Yusuf of the Somali Salvation Democratic Front (SSDF) agreed to convene a peace conference for central Somalia. In light of recent conflict between the two, the initiative was seen a major step towards halting the Somali Civil War. Gen. Aidid, having initiated the talks with Col. Yusuf, considered himself the conference chair, setting the agenda. Beginning 9 May, elder delegations from their respective clans, Habr Gidr and Majerteen, met. While Aidid and Yusuf aimed for a central Somalia-focused conference, they clashed with UNOSOM, which aimed to include other regions and replace Aidid's chairmanship with ex-President Abdullah Osman, a staunch critic of Aidid. As the conference began, Aidid sought assistance from UNOSOM ambassador Lansana Kouyate, who proposed air transport for delegates and a 14-day accommodation. However, he was called back to New York and replaced by April Glaspie, following which UNOSOM retracted its offer. Aidid resorted to private aircraft to transport delegates. Following the aircraft incident, Aidid would publicly rebuke the United Nations on Radio Mogadishu for interference in Somali internal affairs.

Aidid invited Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia, Adm. Johnathan Howe to open the conference, which was refused. The differences between Aidid and the UN proved to be to great, and the conference proceeded without the United Nations participation. On the 2 June 1993 the conference between Gen. Aidid and Col. Abdullahi Yusuf successfully concluded. Admiral Howe would be invited to witness the peace agreement, but again declined. The Galkacyo peace accord successfully ended large scale conflict in the Galgadud and Mudug regions of Somalia.

The contention between the Somali National Alliance and UNOSOM from this point forward would begin to manifest in anti-UNOSOM propaganda broadcast from SNA controlled Radio Mogadishu.

UNOSOM II would have a highly contentious relationship with Somaliland, eventually resulting in the United Nations being expelled from the region. Most notably during a visit to Hargeisa, Leonard Kamungo, the head of the Political Affairs division for UNOSOM II, engaged in discussions with the President of Somaliland, Muhammad Haji Ibrahim Egal. Kamungo warned Egal that he held the authority to deploy UNOSOM military forces in Somaliland without requiring local consent, if he deemed it necessary. This remark incensed Egal who retorted by threatening that Hargeisa "would become the United Nations' Dien Bien Phu." In response, Egal gave Kamungo a 24-hour ultimatum to depart from Somaliland. UNOSOM would later be entirely expelled from the territory on Egals orders.

Radio Mogadishu was a highly popular broadcast station with the residents of the city, and was a vital piece of SNA infrastructure that had been captured following a vicious battle with Ali Mahdi's forces. Following the Kismayo and Galkayo incidents that station began to air anti-UNOSOM propaganda, incensing high ranking UN personnel. It was feared that the broadcasts would shift the attitudes of the Somali public towards the United Nations operation, leading UNOSOM officials to resolve to close the station. In mid-May, the Pakistani contingent was asked to draw up a plan to shut down the station. The Pakistanis did not possess the technical expertise required for such an operation and requested that the US supply experts.

Importantly, Radio Mogadishu had also been an "Authorized Weapons Store Site" (AWSS), subject to UNOSOM inspection. It was decided the American special forces technicians would accompany a Pakistani weapons inspection team to the site in order to determine how to disable the station. Gen. Aidid and the upper echelons of the Somali National Alliance, had been made aware of the discussions to seize or destroy the station.

According to the 1994 United Nations Inquiry:"Opinions differ, even among UNOSOM officials, on whether the weapons inspections of 5 June 1993 was genuine or was merely a cover-up for reconnaissance and subsequent seizure of Radio Mogadishu."On the morning of Saturday June 5, 1993 an element of the Pakistani force in Somalia had been tasked with the inspection of site "AWSS 5", which happened to be located at Aidid controlled Radio Mogadishu. The station was popular across the city, even among those who did not like Aidid or the Habr Gidr clan and concern that UNOSOM was coming to shut it down infuriated many citizens of Mogadishu. The fighting would results in 24 Pakistanis and dozens of Somalis killed. UNOSOM believed forces associated with Aidid were behind the attack. The 1994 UN Inquiry would conclude that in absence of a "...more convincing explanation," it believed the Somali National Alliance was most likely behind the attack. Despite this, the commission noted that no evidence existed to back previous UNOSOM assertions that the attack had been pre-planned or pre-meditated by the SNA, and further noted that the incident had likely been a spontaneous reaction.

The next day, the UN responded with Resolution 837, reaffirming that the secretary-general had the authorization to "take all necessary measures against those responsible for the armed attacks and to establish the effective authority of UNOSOM II throughout Somalia." This was essentially a declaration of war on Aidid and the Somali National Alliance, leading to numerous armed confrontations between the two parties. Although UNOSOM II had fewer war-fighting resources than UNITAF, it adopted a more ambitious and aggressive stance. Nevertheless, several UNOSOM contingents expressed opposition to the aggressive military posture. They viewed an offensive as politically misguided and militarily untenable. As the conflict dragged on, these contingents began advocating for a diplomatic resolution. International observers notably criticized the UN's decision to initiate a military offensive as 'incomprehensible', given the dynamics of Somali society. Professor Ioan M. Lewis asserted that the UN made an unwise choice to resort to military force, which led to substantial Somali casualties, rather than attempting to politically isolate Aidid and launch an independent legal inquiry. The UN offensive that followed UNSCR 837 had significant negative repercussions for UNOSOM II as it incited hostility from across a wide spectrum of Somali society, extending to those Somali who had been most favorable of the intervention.

On 12 June 1993 US troops began a military offensive around Mogadishu. On 17 June, a warrant with a $25,000 reward was issued by Admiral Jonathan Howe for information leading to the arrest of Aidid, but he was never captured. That same day, Aidid's compound and Radio Mogadishu were directly targeted by US AC-130 gunships. Over the following weeks, strikes were carried out all over Mogadishu with AC-130s and attack helicopters. UNOSOM began to greatly increase its firepower in Mogadishu and started making deliberate shows of force with Italian and American helicopters over the city. The US Quick Reaction Force, which had been split up into several different hot spots in Somalia, was entirely recalled to Mogadishu. BBC East Africa correspondent Mark Doyle described the war between the Somali National Alliance and UNOSOM forces as seen by journalists in Mogadishu:"Typical daylight hours in south Mogadishu thunder to the sound of American helicopter gunships criss-crossing the skies at low level; militia with small arms or rocket-propelled grenade launchers (RPGs) take aim at what they see as an offensive provocation. It's not unusual, from the main hotel in south Mogadishu, to view open battles, with U.S. helicopters firing 20-millimeter cannons at apparent militia ground positions. From other vantage points, full-scale battles have been observed pitting Turkish tanks, Pakistani APCs, and American Humvees against the militia. All this has taken place in a heavily built-up urban environment, with the inevitable heavy casualties. By night, the macabre events continue. Loud explosions are common as militia mortars are aimed at the UN compound or the fortified, UN-controlled airport. UN forces' flares light up the sky in an often futile attempt to pinpoint their enemy. Slow dull tracer fire streaks across the blackness from the militias' weapons. The crack-crack-crack and flash-flash-flash of cannons fired from U.S. helicopter gunships can be seen spitting at apparent militia emplacements."
In the week after the offensive, US officers and intelligence experts contended that Aidid's command and control capability over his SNA fighters had been significantly weakened, and the organization's morale had taken a substantial hit. They also believed that the intensive American aerial bombardment had decimated most of the Somali National Alliance's arsenal. American officials involved in the war estimated that the SNA had no more than 300 loyal fighters, motivated merely by cash or Khat handouts. However, interviews conducted by the Washington Post with Somali insurgents painted a contrasting picture: a highly motivated and committed military force whose morale seemed to strengthen as the conflict intensified. Months into the conflict, US and UN officials would concede that they had, "...greatly underestimated their enemy,"

Following the passing of UNSCR 837, the hunt for Aidid characterized much of the UNOSOM II intervention. The increasing tempo of military operations being carried out in Mogadishu caused civilian casualties and began to seriously affect the relationship between UN troops and the Somali people. UNOSOM forces began to be increasingly perceived as foreign interlopers and imperialists, particularly after incidents such as the 13 June mass shooting, when UN troops fired upon a demonstration with a machine gun killing 20 Somalis, many women and children, and a US helicopter attack on Digfer Hospital on 17 June. The Times reported that in the month following the offensive at least 200 civilians had been directly killed by foreign troops. Many Mogadishu residents were deeply disturbed by the effects of heavy weaponry utilized by UN forces in Mogadishu, such as AC-130s, helicopter gunships, wire-guided TOW missiles and rockets. Airstrikes in particular heavily affected Somali civilians and sparked hostility. Each major armed confrontation with UN forces was noted to have the deleterious effect of increasing Aidid's stature with the Somali public. In the view of Professor Mats Berdal of the Department of War Studies at King's College, the conduct of US armed forces during the conflict demonstrated that the US military was not attuned to the requirements of low-level military operations that Somalia required at the time. He would argue that, "[There is] a distinctive mindset and approach to low-intensity operations which had been shaped by the American experience during and after Vietnam, and by a deeply entrenched belief in the efficacy of technology and firepower as a means of minimizing one’s own casualties. It is an approach that was inappropriate to the particular circumstances of Somalia."The UNOSOM offensive had significant negative political consequences for the intervention as it alienated the Somali people, strengthened political support for Aidid, and led to growing criticism of the operation internationally. As a result numerous UNOSOM II contingents began to increasingly push for a more conciliatory and diplomatic approach with the SNA. Relief agencies and humanitarian organizations publicly distanced themselves from the UN offensive. The backlash from Somali political and military factions against the offensive was so profound that even groups previously ambivalent or antagonistic towards Aidid began to perceive the UN and US forces as foreign oppressors. The escalating UNOSOM offensive resulted in the operation forfeiting potential support from other Somali factions. Former Under-Secretary-General of the United Nations, Ramesh Thakur, stated that, "The scale, intensity, and frequency of the use of force by UNOSOM after June 1993 bore little resemblance to the rhetoric and expectations of when it was established, nor any recognizable relationship by then to a peacekeeping operation as defined in the UN lexicon."

British academic Alex de Waal observed that UNOSOM's war against the insurgency set an important legal precedent, as UN forces effectively declared immunity from the laws of war. Following a US helicopter attack on Digfer Hospital, de Waal confronted UN commanders in Mogadishu asking if the operation considered itself bound by the Geneva Conventions. A UN official had responded in regard to the attack that, "The normal rules of engagement do not apply in this nation." During this time, UNOSOM forces tried to disarm residents in parts of Mogadishu. Dutch journalist Linda Polman reported that US troops shelled the homes of Somalis who resisted surrendering their weapons, resulting in significant civilian casualties.

On 12 July 1993, a house where a meeting of clan elders was taking place was attacked by US AH-1 Cobra helicopters in what became known to the Somalis as Bloody Monday. UNOSOM claimed that they had launched a successful raid on a Somali National Alliance command and control center where hardliners had been gathered, an account that is widely disputed by Somalis, foreign journalists and human rights organizations. Johnathan Howe alleged that evidence to back UN claims could not be provided because the cameras recording the raid had jammed. The Red Cross claimed that 54 Somalis had been killed, including several notable religious elders. According to Dr. Sebastian Kaempf, the Abdi House raid represented the single most important event during UNOSOM II, as the consequences of the attack proved disastrous for UNOSOM interests in Somalia. Black Hawk Down author Mark Bowden noted 12 July had been a serious mistake and had the effect of firmly uniting a large portion of Mogadishu behind Aidid"." Notable groups and organizations such as the Vatican, the Organisation of African Unity, World Vision, Doctors Without Borders, Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International called for UNOSOM to review it policies and course.

The raid exposed deep rifts and created dissension amongst the UNOSOM II coalition, which consequently began fraying the cohesion and unity of the operation. The head of the UNOSOM II Justice Division would criticize the raid in a memo to head of UNOSOM, US Admiral Johnathan Howe. Further criticism of the raid came from numerous contributing states such as Ireland, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, Zimbabwe, but most notably the Italian contingent, who threatened to pull out of the whole operation a few days later citing concerns that the escalation was indicative that relief role of UNOSOM II had been overtaken by an American-led campaign against Mohammed Farah Aidid. The Italians, who had ruled Somalia as a colonial territory for half a century, believed that the unprecedented attack threatened to widen the civil war and turn the Somalis against the entire UN peacekeeping force. A Pakistani officer in Mogadishu noted that the clash between the Americans and Italians was destroying the cohesion of UNOSOM II, and that a review of strategy was desperately needed. American envoy to Somalia, Robert B. Oakley, stated that after the raid countries such as Italy, France, and Zimbabwe, as well as other UNOSOM contingents, ceased their participation in operations against Aidid upon receiving orders from their respective governments. This decision weakened the United Nations' already fragile command authority. Additionally, many humanitarian efforts came to a halt, and numerous non-governmental organizations expressed their disapproval of both the United Nations and the United States. Intense diplomatic efforts were consequently made in order to avert a major split in UNOSOM II.

The strike also caused an outcry among UN civilian staffers and disenchantment over the direction of UNOSOM II for employees of the humanitarian section. At least nine UN civilian employees in Mogadishu working for the humanitarian sector either resigned or walked away from their posts in protest, including the top UNOSOM Justice Division official in Somalia, Ann Wright. Many of those who stayed would comment to reporters that the United Nations had relinquished its moral authority in its war against Aidid.

The dissension in the U.N. ranks with the Italians and others over what had occurred on July 12, 1993, led to a significant lull in UNOSOM operations in Mogadishu until the August 8, 1993 killings of American soldiers. The raid would lead to a significant increase in attacks on UNOSOM II troops and American forces in Mogadishu being deliberately targeted by Somali factions for the first times. That month night patrols in Mogadishu were halted entirely due to the city becoming to dangerous for foreign troops.

Somali militias and volunteers increasingly began targeting UNOSOM II and US forces, causing further casualties. Following the 12 July 1993 raid, firefights between the SNA and UNOSOM began occurring almost daily. By September 1993, the Pan-Arab newspaper Al-Hayat reported that several Somali Islamic factions, which had previously remained neutral in the war, had now tacitly allied with the SNA. When the conflict had begun in June 1993 Islamic factions had divided over whether not to fight foreign troops because Aidid had previously been a major threat to them. As civilian casualties began mounting in July and August numerous Islamic factions began to launch attacks on UNOSOM forces in Mogadishu after sunset. Independent sources in Mogadishu, corroborated by Al-Hayat, indicated that the majority of night military operations throughout 1993 were coordinated by a variety of Somali Islamic groups within the city. Notably, Al-Itihaad al-Islamiya, a prominent Somali Islamist militant organization that had previously been in conflict with Aidid's forces in 1992, also began engaging in the insurgency against the American and UN forces. While Aidid did not overtly claim responsibility for these night operations, Al-Hayat noted that he sought to project the appearance of being the orchestrator for propaganda purposes.

As American casualties started to mount in Somalia, domestic backlash in the United States grew. Bipartisan support from the US senate began to build for a withdrawal. By August 1993, it was evident to the Clinton administration that a strategy shift was necessary to retain domestic support for US involvement in Somalia. This shift was signalled by Defense Secretary Les Aspin in his 27 August speech, advocating for a decreased military focus in UNOSOM II and urging the UN and the OAU to resume negotiations with all parties. Both the US Secretary of State and the National Security Advisor pushed for a shift towards diplomacy. Certain US officials advocated for a more aggressive response, among them was Ambassador Robert R. Gosende from the State Department. Gosende had written a cable recommending the deployment of thousands of additional troops and urged the abandonment of all diplomatic engagements with the SNA. Contrarily, General Joseph P. Hoar, who was at the helm of CENTCOM, expressed sharp disagreement with Gosende's approach. In a confidential memo, General Hoar articulated his belief that if more American troops were needed, then control of Mogadishu was already lost.

On 8 August, SNA forces detonated a remote controlled bomb against a U.S. military vehicle and killed American soldiers for the first time. Two weeks later, another bomb injured seven. In response, President Bill Clinton approved the proposal to deploy a special task force composed of 400 US Army Rangers and Delta-force Commandos. Despite growing reservations about the effectiveness of UNOSOM military operations against the Somali National Alliance, the immediate concern of protecting US forces led to the decision to deploy elite forces. In August elite unit, named Task Force Ranger, consisting of 441 elite US troops was flown into Mogadishu and began a manhunt for Aidid in what became known as Operation Gothic Serpent.

On 15 September 1993, US Major Gen. David C. Meade conveyed in a confidential memo to his superiors that the campaign against the insurgency was faltering, both tactically and potentially operationally. He cautioned that persisting in the conflict risked catastrophe. On October 3, 1993, Task Force Ranger raided a hotel in Mogadishu to capture high ranking SNA personnel. What ensued was the longest, bloodiest and deadliest battle for US and UNOSOM II troops in Somalia. In what later became known as the Battle of Mogadishu, eighteen US soldiers were killed. Images of their dead bodies being dragged through the streets were broadcast on internationally, infuriating the American public.

On 6 October 1993, U.S. President Bill Clinton would personally order General Joseph P. Hoar to cease all combat operations against Somali National Alliance, except in self defence. General Hoar would proceed to relay the stand down order to Generals William F. Garrison of Task Force Ranger and Thomas M. Montgomery of the American Quick Reaction Force. The following day on 7 October, Clinton publicly announced a major change in course in the mission. Substantial U.S. forces would be sent to Somalia as short term reinforcements, but all American forces would be withdrawn from the country by the end of March 1994. He would firmly defend American policy in Somalia but admitted that it had been a mistake for American forces to be drawn into the decision "to personalize the conflict" to Aidid. He would go on to reappoint the former U.S. Special Envoy for Somalia Robert B. Oakley to signal the administrations return to focusing on political reconciliation.

The Somali National Alliance perceived the cessation of the military operation as a decisive victory. The stand down order given to U.S. forces in Somalia led other UNOSOM II contingents to effectively avoid any confrontation with the SNA. This led to the majority of patrols in Mogadishu to cease and numerous checkpoints in SNA controlled territory to be abandoned. For the remainder of the operation UNOSOM troops withdrew into entrenched positions and practically disappeared from Mogadishu streets. The Somali National Alliance and other factions would retake full position of territory in the city that they had previously conceded.The next month on 16 November 1993, the United Nations Security Council instructed Secretary-General Boutros-Ghali to suspend arrest actions and declared the release of all Somali National Alliance prisoners of war. The following day Mohamed Farah Aidid announced that the decision had proved that the SNA had achieved a victory over the UN. After the cessation of hostilities between the SNA and UNOSOM, Acting Special Representative Lansana Kouyate (replacing Adm. Johnathan Howe) successfully launched an initiative to normalize relations in March 1994. Numerous points of contention between the respective organizations were discussed at length and understandings were reached, facilitating the normalization of the relationship between the UN and the SNA. That same year the UNOSOM II began withdrawing. The withdrawal of UNOSOM forces weakened Aidids prominence within the SNA, as the war had served to unify the alliance around a common foreign enemy.

All US forces in Somalia completely withdrew on March 3, 1994. All European contingents also decided to withdraw at this time, leaving behind almost exclusively Third World forces to man UNOSOM II. Though it was widely feared the less equipped contingents would come under attack from Somali militia following the Western withdrawal, the period was mostly uneventful. Local hostility forced the remaining UNOSOM staff in Somalia to travel by helicopter, even for distances as short as a kilometre. This was in stark contrast to the intervention's onset when the UN personnel could travel via bus shuttle system.

On November 4, 1994, after peacemaking efforts by the remaining 1,900 UNOSOM II troops failed, the United Nations Security Council (UNSC) voted unanimously to withdraw all forces in Resolution 954. Subsequently, on November 16, the UNSC authorized Resolution 955, placing new emphasis on peacemaking and reconstruction and returning to a less reactive role. The withdrawal of the remaining UN military and police troops from Somalia was completed on March 28, 1995, thereby ending UNOSOM II's mandate.

UNOSOM II forces would suffer at total of 385 casualties, including over 130 deaths. US forces would suffer a total of 196 casualties during the operation, including 26 deaths. 7 Nigerian soldiers would be killed during a skirmish with the SNA in September 1993. Estimates of total UNOSOM II personnel killed vary from 134 to 154 killed across the entire operation. 110 are attributed to combat related fatalities. The vast majority, approximately 80, would be killed during 1993.

Although the operation's casualties have been surpassed by the more recent MINUSMA operation in Mali, UNOSOM II was among the deadliest missions in UN history for peacekeepers. It stands out for having the highest number of deaths resulting from hostile actions compared to both earlier and subsequent operations.

6,000 to 10,000 Somalis had been estimated to have been widely estimated to have been killed or wounded during the operation, many as a result of fire from helicopter gunships. According to American foreign correspondent Scott Peterson, Aidid personally told him a total of 13,000 Somalis had been killed by UNOSOM forces. In the view of Peterson, it was unlikely Somali deaths during the UNOSOM II surpassed 2,000. Peterson asserts that nearly two-thirds of the Somali casualties were women and children. According to SNA personnel, an estimated 900 fighters died in the war with UNOSOM, the most significant loss being during the Battle of Mogadishu.

The month following the Battle of Mogadishu, the United States urged the United Nations to establish the commission to determine who was responsible for the clashes between UNOSOM II peacekeepers and Aidid's SNA forces. A three-man UN inquiry commission headed by Matthew Nglube, former chief justice of Zambia, Gen. Emmanuel Erskine of Ghana and Gen. Gustav Hagglund of Finland was set up by the Security Council. On 30 November 1993 the commission landed in Mogadishu.

The report charged the Gen. Aidid with launching the 5 June 1993, attack which initiated the conflict between the SNA and UNOSOM. Notably, it also heavily criticized U.N. peacekeeping officials for embarking on a campaign of forceful disarmament of Somali factions, an effort that antagonized the Aidid's forces and sharpened tensions. The commission questioned the merit of the aggressive UNOSOM peacekeeping strategy and argued that the U.N. should not have abandoned its neutral role in Somalia. The inquiry criticized the United States for operating under a separate military command and leading raids against Aidid that were not coordinated with UNOSOM officers. The commission condemned the use of American combat helicopters over the heavily populated neighborhoods of Mogadishu and criticized tactics as "incompatible with basic tenets of peacekeeping". The report recommended financial reparations for Somali civilians who became victims of the fighting.

UNOSOM II was widely criticized for placing too much emphasis on military operations. Over 90% of the operations $1.6 billion budget was used for military or security purposes. In July 1993, UN relief head Jan Eliasson publicly admonished UNOSOM II for spending 10 times as much on military operations in Somalia than it did on aid. At the time he would caution that the original objective of sending troops to Somalia was being forgotten. Due to the war with the Somali National Alliance and the insurgency, UNOSOM II would end up spending far more than the allocated $1.6 billion.

Ramesh Thakur, a former Under-Secretary-General of the United Nations, pointed out that the extent, intensity, and frequency of military force used by UNOSOM II after 5 June 1993, did not align with the principles and definition of a peacekeeping operation as defined by the United Nations. The day after the Battle of Mogadishu, after being asked by journalists on national news if Malaysia disagreed with any UNOSOM policies, Defence Minister Najib Razak would comment: "We find there is too much emphasis on military action, like it was an obsession." This would lead to accusations from some Somalia observers that UNOSOM was helping build up the myth of Aidid by depicting him as the only Somali capable of defying a foreign military presence.

UNOSOM II forces were criticized for various instances of human rights abuses, violations of international law and excessive force by a wide range of academics, foreign correspondents and humanitarian organizations."" Doctors Without Borders, Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International would all criticize UNOSOM II on these grounds. Africa Rights Watch and Doctors Without Borders would both publish detailed reports of abuses by UN forces during the summer of 1993. While conceding UN troops were in a difficult position, the Africa Rights Watch report would conclude that abuses and atrocities carried out by UNOSOM II force stemmed from the highest echelons of the command structure and were not cases of undisciplined actions by individual soldiers."" According to de Waal, on several occasions UNOSOM forces in Mogadishu violated the Geneva Conventions. Among the forces responsible for human rights abuses were the United States, Italy, France, Nigeria and numerous other UNOSOM contingents.

Some of the most widely criticized events that occurred from 5 June to 3–4 October 1993 include:

The UN's response to these events were characterized by a marked lack of transparency and accountability. Despite possessing internal advice from its own legal and political staff in Somalia, UNOSOM would reportedly disregard their input and criticism. Amnesty International would describe the UN's internal investigatory mechanisms for dealing with human rights violations by its troops in Somalia as highly inadequate and inconsistent with the UN's own standards. In the vast majority of incidents, no UN forces were ever reprimanded or punished.

Former Under-Secretary-General Ramesh Thakur would further point out that UNOSOM II consistently undermined its authority by deceiving and misleading journalists. He noted that The Times correspondents in Mogadishu could recall numerous occasions where UNOSOM officials had lied to reporters. BBC journalist Mark Doyle would note that reporters in Mogadishu often treated the versions of events purported by UNOSOM with as much skepticism as the version of events purported by Aidid. Doyle would claim that information given out by UN officials was sometimes deliberately misleading; and often UNOSOM would only give details of military operations if the reporters already possessed their own leads. Reuters Mogadishu correspondent Aidan Hartley would later claim that UN officials, "...toed a line of propaganda that was palpably absurd to reporters who went around and saw what was happening."

In one incident noted by both Aidan Hartley and Ramesh Thakur, an American AH-1 Cobra helicopter launched a missile strike into Mogadishu in front of a large crowd of Somalis and foreign correspondents. Witnesses watched and filmed the TOW missile leave the helicopter and spiral into a tea shop, killing a Somali woman. A press conference was held after, during which the UNOSOM spokesman flatly denied the eyewitness accounts and claimed that no helicopters had launched any attack. Following the denial, a TV cameraman got up and played the tape he had filmed of the helicopter firing the missile. UNOSOM would only admit responsibility after footage of the attack was later broadcast globally. In another significant incident, Pakistani UNOSOM troops opened fire with a machine gun onto a crowd of protesters. Thousands of Somalis citizens and dozens foreign journalists had witnessed the troops open fire, unprovoked, from a rooftop emplacement resulting in the deaths of dozens of civilians, including women and children. UNOSOM would claim that Somali National Alliance militia had used the crowd as human shields to fire on the Pakistanis, who then shot back in self defence. According to The Washington Post, the UNOSOM account of the shooting was disputed by virtually all witnesses.

According to American war correspondent Scott Peterson, US forces had censored images of mortars firing from UN bases directly into the city of Mogadishu by confiscating the pictures and arresting the photojournalist who had taken the image. In another incident, Associated Press photographer Peter Northall was photographing an American UH-60 Black Hawk purposely "rotor washing" a market in the city, only to then be directly targeted and assaulted with six percussion grenades from the helicopter. UNOSOM II press spokesman, US Maj. David Stockwell, would defend the incident stating that Northall posed "a threat to himself".

UNOSOM II is widely regarded as unsuccessful in achieving its main objectives and having ended in failure, largely due to the decision to withdraw without completing its goals following the Battle of Mogadishu in October 1993. According to Alex de Waal, the failure of the operation can only be understood, "...in the context of the routine brutality and impunity of many of the military contingents, which antagonized Somalis who would have otherwise been supportive." A 1995 Amnesty International report would conclude that the operation had demonstrated a poor record of promoting and protecting human rights, which would consequently severely impede its ability to function.

UNOSOM II’s complete departure in early 1995 did not result in the eruption of violence that was widely predicted, though the civil war continued to simmer with occasional clashes between factions. The withdrawal led to the formation of local administrations gaining momentum throughout Somalia, such as localized Islamic Courts and regional administrations like Puntland, resulting in period of relative stability and economic growth until the early 2000's. Somali political science professor Hussein Adam notes, "With the collapse of UNOSOM-sponsored institutions, more authentic entities, including authoritative local leaders, have emerged. With the distorting effect of UNOSOM no longer present, the process of both political and economic transformation has been facilitated. In certain places, including northern Mogadishu, alternative institutions have emerged without any external support."

In the view of Walter Clarke, a high ranking US official involved in Operation Restore Hope, and Jeffrey Herbst, Associate Professor at Princeton University, """The intervention in Somalia was not an abject failure; an estimated 100,000 lives were saved. But its mismanagement should be an object lesson for peacekeepers...on other such missions." The figure of Somalis saved following the large scale military intervention in December 1992 is disputed by various other academics and organizations. According to an assessment by the Washington based independent NGO Refugee Policy Group, only 10,000 to 25,000 lives of the approximately 100,000 rescued by international assistance had been saved by the UNITAF and UNOSOM II interventions, though de Waal argues the true figure of lives saved may have been even lower.

Charles W. Maynes, an American diplomat and editor of Foreign Policy, reported that according to private estimates by CIA officials, U.S. troops alone may have been responsible for between 7,000 and 10,000 Somali casualties. Mohamed Sahnoun, former Special Representative of the Secretary General to Somalia claimed 6,000 to 10,000 Somalis had been killed in the war with UNOSOM forces. This has led to debates about the net impact of UNOSOM II.

In Somali culture, the era has become the subject of numerous plays and poetry. As noted by Dr. Ana Ljubinkovic, these works often take the form of sophisticated dramas, showcasing a critical perspective of UNOSOM's perceived arrogance and misjudgments.



.vc

.vc is the Internet country code top-level domain (ccTLD) for Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. 

Registration is open worldwide, and it has been used for a variety of sites not necessarily related to that location; it can also be seen as standing for "Venture Capital", "Ventura County", "Version Control", "Video Conferencing", or other things, like an informal, but common, abbreviation of "você" (, in Portuguese). In this way, ".com.vc" could be understood in Portuguese like ".with.you" would be in English. .vc is sometimes mistaken for being the ccTLD of the Vatican City State, which is .va.

On October 31, 2000, the .vc registry operations contract was awarded to Tucows by the government of St. Vincent and the Grenadines. Tucows serviced .vc through their wholly-owned subsidiary Liberty RMS. On March 25, 2002, Afilias acquired Liberty RMS from Tucows, and the binding registry operations contract for the .vc ccTLD was assigned to Afilias by Tucows. Afilias is the current .VC ccTLD registry operator. Names under the domain began to be registered by the public on July 9, 2002 and began resolving the following month.


.ve

.ve is the Internet country code top-level domain (ccTLD) for Venezuela.

On 3 March 2009 the ISO 3166-1 code for Venezuela changed to reflect the VE used for the ccTLD.

Registrations are allowed without restrictions, only at the third level:

The following second-level domains allow restricted third-level domain registrations:
Internationalized domain names are available using the following Spanish characteres: á, é, í, ó, ú, ü, and ñ.

A number of second-level domain names are in place, i.e., cha.ve, internet.ve, ipv6.ve, nic.ve


Sterling Forest, New York

Sterling Forest, New York is a hamlet in the Town of Warwick, Orange County. It is served by an active United States post office of the same name. It is situated on the eastern shore of Greenwood Lake, at the New Jersey state line. Part of the hamlet extends into West Milford Township, Passaic County, New Jersey. The hamlet grew up around the terminal station of the Montclair and Greenwood Lake Railway, later called the New York and Greenwood Lake Railway, and later the Greenwood Lake division of the Erie Railroad. The railroad reached this point around 1875, with the station located at the state line in New Jersey. The depot complex originally contained the Sterling Forest, New Jersey post office. The post office was moved to the New York side of the line in 1926, where it continues to operate. Rail service ceased in 1935.

The coming of the railroad was preceded by the construction of a large commercial ice house by the Ringwood Company around 1864. The Sterling Forest ice house was later operated by the Mountain Ice Company of Hoboken, New Jersey. It ceased operation and was eventually torn down in 1945.

At one time, the hamlet also boasted two hotels (one in New Jersey), a general store, lumber yard, two bars (in addition to those in the hotels) and a Roman Catholic church (in New Jersey). Today, the only businesses that remain are one bar/restaurant, and a marina (on the site of the depot).

In the 1930s and 1940s, Yankee great Babe Ruth often rented a cabin in the hamlet for the summer, and was known to play baseball with the local neighborhood children at a small ballfield located there.

It was the site of the first American rocket airplane flight that carried mail from the New York side of the state line to the New Jersey side on February 23, 1936.

Often confused with Sterling Forest, New York is the old Sterling Forest Gardens property and the adjacent Sterling Forest State Park, both located several miles away in the Town of Tuxedo, New York. The property is now the site of the New York Renaissance Faire, an annual Renaissance fair. Adding to the confusion, there is another fair called The Sterling Renaissance Festival which is located north of Syracuse, NY.


.vg

.vg is the Internet country code top-level domain (ccTLD) for the British Virgin Islands. Because it allows registration at the second level, and does not require the registrant to be associated with the British Virgin Islands, it has also been used by piracy related websites such as The Pirate Bay, and video gaming related blogs and websites.

In March 2013 domain name registrars such as GoDaddy stopped accepting new registrations for .vg, .gd, and .tc domain names. This is the result of a dispute over the ownership and control of AdamsNames Ltd., which had been the accredited registry by the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) for those top level domains. A former partner of AdamsNames Ltd. created a new company, Meridian TLD, which claimed to be the new accredited registry.

On 10 April 2014, the zone was re-delegated by IANA to KSregistry. The sponsoring organization was re-delegated to The Telecommunications Regulatory Commission of Virgin Islands (TRC). All changes that were made in the .vg zone after 8 March 2013 were lost as Meridian TLD did not cooperate by giving the zone file to KSregistry. After the re-delegation there was a one-month window where KSregistry-accredited registrars would be able to update, renew, or delete domain names from 15 April 2014, 10:00 UTC to 11 May 2014, 23:59 UTC. After 12 May 2014, 10:00 UTC, KSregistry would allow new domains to be registered.



Little Traverse Bay

Little Traverse Bay ( ) is a small open bay of Lake Michigan. Extending about into the Lower Peninsula of Michigan, much of the head of the land surrounding Little Traverse Bay, and has become part of the urban areas of Petoskey and Harbor Springs. Little Traverse Bay primarily lies within Emmet County, although a small portion lies within Charlevoix County. 

Harbor Springs, a settlement on the bay, originated as "L'arbre de Croche," (Crooked Tree) a French Jesuit mission village to serve the Odawa people bands in the area. After the British took over the territory, the village was renamed in English. The federally recognized Little Traverse Bay Bands of Odawa Indians have their headquarters here. They have land here, and additional land and a gaming casino in Petoskey.

The Little Traverse Light marks the entrance at Harbor Springs to the smaller harbor within the bay.

After the Odawa bands in northern Michigan were persuaded to cede considerable lands to the United States, the Little Traverse Bay region was developed by Illinois land developers and resort founders, such as lawyers Henry Stryker III and Henry Brigham McClure, and the Capps family of Jacksonville, Illinois and woolen mills fame. The Stryker, Capps, and McClure families were interconnected with the Jacob Bunn industrial dynasty of Chicago and Springfield, Illinois.

The bay has also been used as a refuge by Great Lakes freighters during severe weather.


The bay has significant publicly accessible parkland on the waterfront, including in the cities of Petoskey and Harbor Springs, and in Petoskey State Park.

Little Traverse Bay is popular during the summer for boating, sailing and swimming by the numerous vacation communities on the bay, including Bay View, Wequetonsing, and Harbor Point. Many of these communities also provide sailing and swimming lessons.

The bay is the location of the annual Ugotta Regatta, hosted by the Little Traverse Yacht Club in Harbor Springs. Participants are often boat owners and crews who have sailed in the Chicago Yacht Club Race to Mackinac and Port Huron to Mackinac Boat Race, each held on one of the two weekends before.

.vi

.vi is the Internet country code top-level domain (ccTLD) for the U.S. Virgin Islands.

Registration is available in .vi or one of its second-level TLDs. Current prices are $75 for registration for residents of the U.S. Virgin Islands and $300 for foreign registrants. The second-level TLDs cost $75 or $200 respectively. There are premium domain names with different prices. Renewal fees are significantly lower and there is also a price for most contact or nameserver updates.

The only restriction for registration is that the domain has at least 2 active nameservers.

Third level registrations are available in .co.vi, .org.vi, .com.vi and .net.vi. There are no further restrictions in these zones.

Domains can be bought directly from the registry or from official registrars. The registry does not publish a list of official registrars.

A domain transfer between registrars is possible via Auth-Code.

Second level domains (of more than 2 characters) were only allowed for Virgin Island companies or residents until 2014, when COBEX allowed foreign entities to register .vi domains.



Prasada

Prasāda (, Sanskrit: प्रसाद), "prasadam" or "prasad" is a religious offering in Hinduism. Most often "Prasada" is vegetarian food especially cooked for devotees after praise and thanksgiving to a god. "Mahaprasada" (also called "bhandarā"), is the consecrated food offered to the deity in a Hindu temple which is then distributed and partaken by all the devotees regardless of any orientation.

"Prasada" is closely linked to the term "naivedya", also spelt "naivedhya", "naibedya" or naived(h)yam. The food offered to the deity is called "naivedya", while the sacred food sanctified and returned by the deity as a blessing is called "prasada".

"Prasāda" is derived from the verb "prasād" which consists of the verb सद् ("sad" - to sit, dwell) which is prefixed with प्र ("pra" - before, afore, in front) and used as finite verb प्रसीदति ("prasīdati" - dwells, presides, pleases or favours etc.). It denotes anything, typically food, that is first offered to a deity or saint and then distributed in His or Her name to their followers or others as a good sign.

'Prasāda' is sometimes translated as gift or grace.

The "prasada" is to be consumed by attendees as a holy offering. The offerings may include cooked food, fruits and confectionery sweets. Vegetarian food is usually offered and later distributed to the devotees who are present in the temple. Sometimes this vegetarian offering will exclude prohibited items such as garlic, onion, mushroom, etc.

Non-vegetarian is prohibited in some of the temples. Hindu goddesses like Chandi, Kali and Hindu gods like Bhairava, Mahakala are given meat offerings of animals like roosters, goats, fish, buffalo which are slaughtered in the temple precincts.

Offering of food items forms part of the "upachara" or services to a Hindu deity in many Hindu traditions but is not universal. The "murti" (icon) is revered as a living entity who is offered food, fruits, and betelnut among others. 
Temples usually have stricter worship routines that include offering naivedya multiple times a day. Most temples allow only trained pujaris to cook the "naivedya". The "naivedya" offered directly to the deity is considered as "prasada", the deity having "enjoyed" it. This can be considered to be a symbolic rather than a literal offering.

Offerings of food in home shrines are relatively simpler than the Hindu temples. A common practice is to mix the "prasada" back into the remaining food before partaking it.

Tasting during preparation or eating the "naivedya" food before offering it to the god is strictly forbidden. The food is first placed before a deity and specific prayers are offered with accompanying rituals. Afterwards, the food is considered as having been blessed by the god, and has officially become the sanctified "prasada".

In its material sense, "prasada" is created by a process of giving and receiving between a human devotee and the god. For example, a devotee makes an offering of a material substance such as flowers, fruits, or sweets. The deity then 'enjoys' or tastes a bit of the offering. This now-divinely invested substance is called "prasada" and is received by the devotee to be ingested, worn, etc. It may be the same material that was originally offered or material offered by others and then re-distributed to other devotees. In many temples, several kinds of "prasada" (e.g., nuts, sweets) are distributed to the devotees. 

Offering food and subsequently receiving "prasada" is central to the practice of "puja." Any food that is offered either physically to the image of the god or silently in prayer is considered "prasada".

In Sikhism, karah parshad is served to the congregation after prayer and reading of scripture. Parshad represents the same values as langar in that it is served indiscriminately.

Kurukshetra Prasadam (Channa laddu) in 48 kos parikrama of Kurukshetra, Tirupati Laddu and Mathura peda in the Braj Parikrama are geo-specialty prasada.


.vn

.vn is the country code top-level domain (ccTLD) for Vietnam.

The domain name registry for .vn is the Vietnam Internet Network Information Center (VNNIC).
In 2003, the company Dot VN, Inc. signed an agreement with the VNNIC allowing it to market the .vn domain name abroad. 
Nowadays, a .vn domain name can be registered from all over the world via a worldwide .vn accredited registrar system.

The number of national domain name ".vn" surpassed 500,000 domains, ranked first in Southeast Asia & ASEAN and ranked TOP 10 in the Asia-Pacific region in terms of number of domain names maintained in use.

.vn domain names with 1 or 2 characters are registered through an auction.

There are 43 1-character .vn domain names, including: 36 domain names with a plain ASCII character (a, b, c, .. .x, y, z, 0, 1, 2, 3, .. 7, 8, 9.vn) and 7 domain names with a Vietnam-specific character (â, ă, đ, ê, ô, ơ, ư.vn). There are 1296 2-character domain names with a combination of ASCII characters (a0, a1, a2, ..., z7, z8, z9.vn).


The .vn domain name may be registered as a ccTLD or country code second-level domain (ccSLD). Below is a list of ccSLDs under the .vn domain name.


Fort McClary

Fort McClary is a former defensive fortification of the United States military located along the southern coast at Kittery Point, Maine at the mouth of the Piscataqua River. It was used throughout the 19th century to protect approaches to the harbor of Portsmouth, New Hampshire and the Portsmouth Naval Shipyard in Kittery. The property and its surviving structures are now owned and operated by the State of Maine as Fort McClary State Historic Site, including a blockhouse dating from 1844.

Coastal defenses on the site date to the late 17th century when shipbuilder William Pepperell (father of William Pepperrell) acquired the property and erected crude defense works in 1689. Prior to that, the village was protected by Fort William and Mary at New Castle. The Province of Massachusetts Bay voted in 1715 to erect a permanent breastwork of six guns for the defense of the Piscataqua River, during the lead-up to Father Rale's War. Some sources state that it was intended to protect Maine (then part of Massachusetts) from "unreasonable duties" (taxes) that the governor of New Hampshire was attempting to impose on nearby citizens of other colonies. The fort was also used to collect duties from Massachusetts citizens for its own upkeep. This fortification was transferred to the United States government in 1803, known as Fort William, but none of its features are known to survive.

The Pepperrells remained loyal to the British in 1775, so their property was confiscated by local Patriot forces, including the fort. In 1776, ammunition was provided for the fort's 9-pounder and 12-pounder cannon, and the New Hampshire militia manned the fort until 1779.

Fort McClary was officially established in 1808 as part of the second system of US fortifications. It was named for New Hampshire native Major Andrew McClary, an American officer killed in the 1775 Battle of Bunker Hill. It consisted of a semi-elliptical lower battery of 9 or 10 guns and a shot furnace, and an upper battery near the present blockhouse whose armament does not appear in references. The fort was used throughout the 19th century, most notably during the War of 1812, but it saw no action.

The fort was further expanded in the 1840s, probably a consequence of tensions with Great Britain over the disputed border between Maine and New Brunswick which culminated in the bloodless Aroostook War and the 1842 Webster-Ashburton Treaty. The blockhouse was built in 1844 near the former upper battery; this was the last blockhouse built at a fort in Maine, and probably one of the last in a US coastal fort. The fort saw active use during the American Civil War, at which time it achieved much of its present structure due to a rebuilding under the third system that was never completed. The fort was manned near the start of the war by the Maine Coast Guard and the Kittery Artillery company, and in 1864 was also manned by the Maine State Guard. Its Civil War garrison notably included Vice President Hannibal Hamlin, who enlisted in Company A of the Maine State Guard as a private and served as a cook in the fort. Some subsequent citations erroneously confuse his unit with the Maine Coast Guard — including a plaque at the fort. 

The fort saw little action during the Civil War. A major rebuilding and expansion began in 1863 as part of the third system of fortifications, and the intent was to create a large five-sided fort with one or two tiers of cannon all around. However, only the seawalls were completed on the two seaward fronts, along with one of the landward cannon bastions with a granite magazine. The seawall was defended by a small caponier with rifle ports. Based on war experience, masonry forts were assessed as vulnerable to rifled cannon, and funding was withdrawn from all masonry fort projects in 1867, leaving Fort McClary with few cannon positions. A large number of granite blocks remain at the fort to this day.

In the 1870s, the lower battery was rebuilt with three temporary gun positions for 10-inch Parrott rifles, but funding was again cut off with few other improvements. In the 1890s, nine 15-inch Rodman smoothbore guns and seven carriages were stored at the fort, to be mounted in case of war. Three of the Rodmans were mounted as an emergency measure in the Spanish–American War of 1898. The fort was superseded by the construction of Fort Foster (Kittery, Maine) and new batteries at Fort Constitution under the Endicott Program by 1901. By the 1910s, most of the fort had fallen into disrepair and it was officially decommissioned in 1918. The State of Maine acquired most of the property from the federal government in 1924, after which it was managed as a park. Several of the dilapidated structures were demolished in the following decades. Parts of the fort were used by civilian defense forces during World War II. In 1969, it was placed on the National Register of Historic Places. The blockhouse and other structures were renovated in 1987, and the blockhouse serves as a museum.




.vu

.vu is the Internet country code top-level domain (ccTLD) for Vanuatu. Initially delegated to Telecom Vanuatu Ltd, it was redelegated to the Telecommunications Radiocommunications and Broadcasting Regulator in 2019.

While .vu domains were initially given away for free to any person requesting one, they are now being sold commercially as is common practice for other top-level domains.


Nashotah House

Nashotah House is an Anglican seminary in Nashotah, Wisconsin. The seminary opened in 1842 and received its official charter in 1847. The institution is independent and generally regarded as one of the more theologically conservative seminaries in the Episcopal Church (United States). It is also officially recognized by the Anglican Church in North America. Its campus was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 2017.
Nashotah House was founded by three young deacons of the Episcopal Church: James Lloyd Breck, William Adams, and John Henry Hobart, Jr., who were all recent graduates of the General Theological Seminary in New York City, at the bidding of Bishop Jackson Kemper. Gustaf Unonius was the first graduate.

Nashotah House was, from the beginning, a center for High Church thought and discipline. Breck, the first dean, was highly committed to the principles of the Oxford Movement. Later, noted professors such as James DeKoven would bring Anglo-Catholic worship and practice to the seminary. This began with the daily celebration of the Eucharist as well as the use of vestments, candles, and incense.

Nashotah House considers itself to be within the orthodox Anglo-Catholic tradition. Overall, the faculty support traditional theology and conceptions of Christian doctrine in opposition to liberal theologies. Graduates themselves come from a variety of jurisdictions both inside and outside of the Episcopal Church. Nashotah House sees its mission to form priests and church leaders from all over the Anglican Communion.

In February 2014, Bishop Edward L. Salmon, Jr. invited Bishop Katharine Jefferts Schori, the Presiding Bishop of the Episcopal Church, to preach at the school. The decision was condemned by the seminary's largely conservative supporters who cited Schori's tactics of suing parishes that left the ECUSA over doctrinal matters, as well as what they considered her heretical views. In response, two bishops who were members of the Nashotah House Board of Trustees resigned or distanced themselves from the school.

Nashotah House offers degree and certificate programs aimed at training clergy and lay leaders for ministries in the Anglican Communion:


It also offers a one-year certificate program in Anglican studies, geared toward students who have received an M.Div. from a non-Anglican institution and wish to be ordained within the Anglican tradition. The Master of Pastoral Ministry and the Master of Ministry degree may be earned through a combination of residential and online study. 

The DMin, STM, MDiv, MPM, MTS, MM and MSM degrees are accredited by the Association of Theological Schools in the United States and Canada.

The property of the Nashotah House Theological Seminary covers 365 acres (148 ha) of land.

The main buildings of the seminary include, from oldest:

There are also apartments for both single and married students, and several houses for the dean and other faculty, as well as maintenance facilities.

Construction has been completed on a substantial addition to the refectory. The newly dubbed Adams Hall includes a large meeting hall and additional classrooms.

Nashotah began as a community inspired by traditional monastic life of prayer, work, and study. James Lloyd Breck's vision was to create a center for Christian formation in the (then) wilderness that would also be movement to propagate other communities for the purpose of evangelizing the frontier. Today, much of this vision remains intact and students still live a Benedictine cycle of prayer, work, and study. The life of the Seminary seeks to form the character of priests and leaders into the image of Christ. Various students have been involved in mission work around the Anglican Communion as well.

"Seminarians are invited to participate in an ascetic, disciplined, prayerful season of spiritual growth in Christ" in which they "practice the Benedictine Rule of daily prayer, labor, and study." All students have work crew assignments - cleaning bathrooms, mowing lawns, sweeping floors and taking other chores. Daily routine includes Morning Prayer, Mass, breakfast, classes, lunch, and Solemn Evensong. Always anticipated on the campus is the annual
St. Laurence Cup, a flag football game played against students from Sacred Heart School of Theology and St. Francis Seminary (Wisconsin). The formerly annual Lavabo Bowl game was played against Seabury-Western Theological Seminary which stopped granting residential Master of Divinity degrees in 2010 after ceasing to accept new M.Div. seminarians in 2008

Nashotah House is the only seminary affiliated with the Episcopal Church that does not admit students who have entered into same-sex marriages.




Clackamas people

The Clackamas Indians are a band of Chinook of Native Americans who historically lived along the Clackamas River in the Willamette Valley, Oregon. 

Today, Clackamas people are enrolled in the Confederated Tribes of the Grand Ronde Community of Oregon.

In 1806, Lewis and Clark estimated their population to be 1,800. At the time the tribe lived in 12 villages located from the lower Columbia River to an area what is now called Oregon City. They resided towards the east side of the Willamette River. In February 1841, Reverend François Norbert Blanchet and Reverend Alvin F. Waller converted Clackamas Chief Popoh.

The Clackamas signed a treaty in the fall of 1851, which Oregon Superintendent Anson Dart failed to ratify. They signed another treaty on January 10, 1855, which was ratified on March 3, 1855. The Clackamas were promised $2,500 worth of resources, but the United States only paid a fifth of what was owed.

The tribe subsisted on fish and root vegetables. They constructed large cedar platforms to dip their nets in over Willamette Falls to harvest salmon. Claskamas women dried and smoked salmon. They combined dried, smoked salmon with mixtures of berries and nuts. They preserved food in woven baskets for winter. The Clackamas Indians traded salmon with other tribes. They also harvested and traded "wapato", broad-leafed arrowhead or "Indian potato" ("Sagittaria latifolia" and "Sagittaria cuneata").

Adult Clackamas historically wore leather leggings and tunics. They made skirts and bedding from cedar bark. An indication of high status in the tribe was intricate beadwork, quillwork, feather, and shell decorations. Certain shells served as currency. 

Like others of the Chinookan peoples, Clackamas practiced head flattening. From infancy, one's head was compressed between boards thus sloping the forehead backward. This was a way to indicate that a person was free rather than a slave.

The Clackamas were expert woodworkers as they crafted canoes and plank lodges. They traveled along rivers with canoes and transported trade goods and people. A typical canoe was 20 to 30 feet long. With deep knowledge of the Clackamas river systems, the Clackamas people were hired by pioneers as guides to navigate the river systems.

The Willamette Meteorite is culturally significant to Clackamas people. The meteorite is called "Tomanowos", which translates to "the visitor of heaven". The meteorite was believed to be given from the Sky People and is the unity between sky, earth, and water. Other tribes around the area thought that the meteorite possessed magical powers.

By 1855, the 88 surviving members of the tribe were relocated to Grand Ronde, Oregon, first to the Grand Ronde Indian Reservation. They eventually blended in the general population of the Grand Ronde.

Soosap, likely born in 1841, is considered to be the last full-blooded tribal member. His mother was full-blooded Clackamas, his father was Klickitat. Soosap lived off the Grand Ronde reservation in Oregon City, where he was a day laborer. His English name was Joseph Andrews as non-Native people couldn't pronounce his Native name. He was also a known baseball player in the Pacific Northwest.


Other Chinookans of the lower Columbia River:


Clackamas

The word Clackamas may refer to:



Hawaii Route 63

Route 63 is a state highway on the island of Oahu in Honolulu County, Hawaii, United States, that is one of three main highways passing through the Koolau mountain.

The highway passes through the Wilson Tunnel, and takes commuters from the towns of Kāneohe and Kailua on the windward (northeast) side of the island, through Kalihi Valley into Honolulu on the leeward (south) side of the island. The other trans-Koolau highways are Pali Highway and Interstate H-3. There is a runaway truck ramp on the highway.

Likelike Highway (pronounced LEE-kay-LEE-kay) is named after Hawaiian Princess Miriam Likelike, sister of King David Kalākaua.


Reid

Reid is a surname of Scottish origin. It means "red".




.ua

.ua is the Internet country code top-level domain (ccTLD) for Ukraine. To register at the second-level (example) domainname.ua, possession of the exact trademark (matching the domain name) is required. It is not required for third-level domains (.com.ua, .net.ua, etc.).


As of March 2017, around 10.78% of all the .ua domains were served via secured HTTPS protocol, with the Let's Encrypt Authority X3 being the most popular SSL certificate. Nginx is the most popular web server, serving 68.97% of the .ua domains, followed by Apache serving 17.75% of the total .ua domains.

To remove the risk of cyber squatting, registration of second-level domains directly below .ua is restricted to owners of registered trade marks, who may register a domain name similar to that of the trade mark in question. However, third-level domains can be registered beneath some of the following:


There are also second-level domains which are region-specific. These are less popular than the above list (making domain names more available) but they are sometimes restricted to organisations exclusively from within the region.





Braddon

Braddon may refer to several people and places:





.ug

.ug is the Internet country code top-level domain (ccTLD) for Uganda.

Registrations were traditionally made under these second-level subdomains:


In 2014, Ugandan Members of Parliament called for an investigation after a revelation that a private firm, Infinity Computers and Communication Company (i3c, formerly known as Computer Frontiers), owned Uganda's top-level Internet domain. During a Finance Committee the MPs pressed ICT minister John Nasasira to explain how the private company came to own the domain, which could endanger national security.

The MPs resolved to contact the registrar of companies to furnish them with the details of the proprietors of i3c and asked the minister to explain the circumstances under which the company took over the domain.

Unlike countries like China which put restrictions on the domain purchasing process, Uganda ccTLD managers don't put any restriction on who can register domain names.


.uy

.uy is the Internet country code top-level domain (ccTLD) for Uruguay. Domain names can be registered at second-level or at third-level. , second level .uy registrations are possible.


The "Servicio Central de Informática" (SeCIU, Central Computing Service) of the University of the Republic is the responsible authority to manage and register domains under <samp>.uy</samp> and its subdomains since April 1990, delegated by IANA through InterNIC. The domains under <samp>.com.uy</samp> are managed and registered by Antel via its website dominiosuy (nic.com.uy) instead. Domains directly under <samp>.uy</samp> can be registered directly at SeCIU or after the registrar entities it authorized, being Antel and other private companies.


.uz

.uz is the Internet country code top-level domain (ccTLD) for Uzbekistan. Registry services were formerly operated by Euracom GmBH, but were later redelegated to UZINFOCOM. Registrations are taken directly at the second level, but the former registry also advertised the availability of registrations at the third level beneath co.uz and com.uz, and some domain names under other second-level names such as org.uz also exist.

In Latvia, .uz is used as short-link address — ej.uz, which means "go to".

.uz has an A record and had a HTTP server since at least 1997.
The table of second-level domains of the .uz domain zone, terms of use, requirements, regulated users, domain categories.
The top-level domain .UZ was first created and delegated on April 29, 1995 by the IANA-based University of the Informatics Institute of Southern California to an individual named Alex Vostrikov from Tashkent. From 1995 to 2001, the domain "UZ" was registered free of charge for anyone. In 2001, the rights to administer the domain were transferred to a representative in Uzbekistan, Tomas LLC, under the management of Euracom Equipment GmBH. After the appeal of the Uzbek Agency of Post and Telecommunications in December 2002, ICANN and IANA decided to re-delegate the right to manage the ccTLD to the UZINFOCOM Center (now the Single Integrator UZINFOCOM), which is currently the administrator of the ccTLD "UZ".

On April 29, 2020, the national domain UZ celebrated its 25th anniversary

On April 28, 2021, the top-level domain .UZ was signed using DNSSEC technology

Initially, the domain name "UZ" was issued free of charge until 2001. Then the registrar LLC "Tomas" took $89 per year for domain registration, with its subsequent reduction. In 2002, the price was reduced to $78, and from January 2003 - to $50 per year, and until 2005 it was $40. At the moment, the average price for domain registration in the "UZ" zone is 25,000 soums. The decline in prices began thanks to the emergence of six more official registrars since 2005.
Currently, almost 92000 active domains are registered in the domain zone.

In September 2019, to protect domain owners from cybersquatting, the Redemption Period service was introduced, thanks to which the former domain owners, after the expiration of the registration period, have the right to redeem the expired domain in their own name.

Domain registration is carried out in accordance with the "Regulations on the procedure for registration and use of domain names in the UZ domain" by legal entities that have acquired the right to work in the UZ domain.

Currently, there are 25 accredited registrars of the "UZ" domain in Uzbekistan, 8 of them are state unitary enterprises "Computerization Center" under regional khakimiyats (administrations).

Registrars register domains for a period of 1 to 10 years.


Hurler

Hurler or Hurlers may refer to:


Deakin

Deakin may refer to: 






Heaven Tonight

Heaven Tonight is Cheap Trick's third studio album, produced by Tom Werman and released in 1978. The album was remastered and released with bonus tracks on Sony's Epic/Legacy imprint in 1998. The album cover features lead singer Robin Zander and bassist Tom Petersson on the front, with guitarist Rick Nielsen and drummer Bun E. Carlos on the back.

"Heaven Tonight" is considered Cheap Trick's best album by many fans and critics. While their debut album "Cheap Trick" showed the band's darker, rawer side and "In Color" explored a lighter, more pop-oriented persona, "Heaven Tonight" combined both elements to produce a hook-filled pop-rock album with an attitude. Popular songs from this album include the anthemic "Surrender", "Auf Wiedersehen", the title track, and a cover of the Move's "California Man".

"Heaven Tonight" is also known as the first album ever recorded with a 12-string electric bass.

This was the second Cheap Trick album to feature Robin Zander and Tom Petersson on the front cover and Bun E. Carlos and Rick Nielsen on the back. While the front cover has Zander and Petersson standing in front of a nondescript background, the back cover portion (part of a continuous, wrap-around shot on the original LP) reveals that they are standing inside a public restroom where Nielsen is brushing his teeth and Carlos is fixing his tie in the mirror. Nielsen has a cassette copy of the band's previous album, "In Color" sticking out of his back pocket. At the suggestion of the record company, the album was originally to be called "American Standard"; the cover photography was intended to play upon the secondary association with the well-known manufacturer of plumbing fixtures. The band were less pleased with the idea and opted for the release title, but the cover design remained.

"Surrender" was the only song from this album released on the original version of the 1979 live album "Cheap Trick at Budokan". On the 1998 reissue "At Budokan: The Complete Concert", three additional songs from this album were included - "Auf Wiedersehen", "High Roller" and "California Man".

"Oh Claire" is a one-minute live jam with "Oh, konnichi wa" as the only lyrics. The title is a pun on Eau Claire, Wisconsin, where the band used to play frequently in their pre-stardom days. Cheap Trick wrote a similarly titled song, "O Claire," for their 2006 album "Rockford". "How Are You" contains, in its second verse, the extract of "The Lord's Prayer", sped up 10 times and inserted between the lyrics 'you lie, you lie.' For the Epic Legacy release (1998), the original version of this track was replaced by a studio outtake with tabla drums and acoustic guitar instead of the electric version - no mention of this was made on the CD sleeve.

"The Globe and Mail" wrote that "Cheap Trick traces its ancestry from Led Zeppelin and do as well, especially on "Heaven Tonight", as any band towing that particularly outdated line can do," opining that "furious sounds proceed, none of which seem to match for energy the noises coming from the underground."




Surrender

Open-design movement

The open-design movement involves the development of physical products, machines and systems through use of publicly shared design information. This includes the making of both free and open-source software (FOSS) as well as open-source hardware. The process is generally facilitated by the Internet and often performed without monetary compensation. The goals and philosophy of the movement are identical to that of the open-source movement, but are implemented for the development of physical products rather than software. Open design is a form of co-creation, where the final product is designed by the users, rather than an external stakeholder such as a private company.

Sharing of manufacturing information can be traced back to the 18th and 19th century. Aggressive patenting put an end to that period of extensive knowledge sharing.
More recently, principles of open design have been related to the free and open-source software movements. In 1997 Eric S. Raymond, Tim O'Reilly and Larry Augustin established "open source" as an alternative expression to "free software", and in 1997 Bruce Perens published "The Open Source Definition". In late 1998, Dr. Sepehr Kiani (a PhD in mechanical engineering from MIT) realized that designers could benefit from open source policies, and in early 1999 he convinced Dr. Ryan Vallance and Dr. Samir Nayfeh of the potential benefits of open design in machine design applications. Together they established the Open Design Foundation (ODF) as a non-profit corporation, and set out to develop an Open Design Definition.

The idea of open design was taken up, either simultaneously or subsequently, by several other groups and individuals. The principles of open design are closely similar to those of open-source hardware design, which emerged in March 1998 when Reinoud Lamberts of the Delft University of Technology proposed on his "Open Design Circuits" website the creation of a hardware design community in the spirit of free software.

Ronen Kadushin coined the title "Open Design" in his 2004 Master's thesis, and the term was later formalized in the 2010 Open Design Manifesto.

The open-design movement currently unites two trends. On one hand, people apply their skills and time on projects for the common good, perhaps where funding or commercial interest is lacking, for developing countries or to help spread ecological or cheaper technologies. On the other hand, open design may provide a framework for developing advanced projects and technologies that might be beyond the resource of any single company or country and involve people who, without the copyleft mechanism, might not collaborate otherwise. There is now also a third trend, where these two methods come together to use high-tech open-source (e.g. 3D printing) but customized local solutions for sustainable development. Open Design holds great potential in driving future innovation as recent research has proven that stakeholder users working together produce more innovative designs than designers consulting users through more traditional means. The open-design movement may arguably organize production by prioritising socio-ecological well-being over corporate profits, over-production and excess consumption.

The open-design movement is currently fairly nascent but holds great potential for the future. In some respects design and engineering are even more suited to open collaborative development than the increasingly common open-source software projects, because with 3D models and photographs the concept can often be understood visually. It is not even necessary that the project members speak the same languages to usefully collaborate.

However, there are certain barriers to overcome for open design when compared to software development where there are mature and widely used tools available and the duplication and distribution of code cost next to nothing. Creating, testing and modifying physical designs is not quite so straightforward because of the effort, time and cost required to create the physical artefact; although with access to emerging flexible computer-controlled manufacturing techniques the complexity and effort of construction can be significantly reduced (see tools mentioned in the fab lab article).

Open design was considered in 2012 a fledgling movement consisting of several unrelated or loosely related initiatives. Many of these organizations are single, funded projects, while a few organizations are focusing on an area needing development. In some cases (e.g. Thingiverse for 3D printable designs or Appropedia for open source appropriate technology) organizations are making an effort to create a centralized open source design repository as this enables innovation. Notable organizations include:




Melbourne University Football Club

Melbourne University Football Club, often known simply as University, is an Australian rules football club based at the University of Melbourne. The club fields two teams, known as the "Blacks" and "Blues", who both compete in the Victorian Amateur Football Association (VAFA) in the William Buck Premier Division.

The club achieved prominence by being a member of Victoria's elite competition in the early 20th century, the Victorian Football League (VFL; now AFL), between 1908 and 1914, departing after its strict policy of amateurism left it uncompetitive in an increasingly professional league. It is one of only three clubs to leave the competition in its entire history. It is one of 13 clubs to have competed in both the VFA and the breakaway VFL competition prior to its expansion into a national competition.

The club has also, since the 1990s, fielded a women's team (nicknamed the "Mugars") that competed at the highest level of women's competition, the Victorian Women's Football League (VWFL) and VFL Women's (VFLW) in 2016 prior to the formation of the national AFLW competition.

Although there are no records of its exact formation, University's first recorded match took place in the same month that the Castlemaine Football Club was formed, making it possible that University is the second-oldest club in Australia after the Melbourne Football Club, although Geelong Football Club asserts it is the second-oldest club.

University was founded in 1859 by students and graduates of the University of Melbourne. The first report of the university participating in a match was against a club named St Kilda (unrelated to the later VFL/AFL club) in June 1859. According to ‘Gymnastic’, writing in the sporting newspaper "Bell's Life in Victoria", the ‘long pending match’ finally came off between two teams of 15. University was captained by a player called Phillips, and St Kilda emerged the winners. The winning team under the rules at the time was the first team to score two out of three goals.

The 15 man team in 1859 consisted of: Messrs. Browning, Bromby, Curlewis, Craig, Davis, Greene, Hart, Jacomb, Molesworth, Patterson, Philips, Purcell, Nunn, Oldham, Stephen, Walker.

Shortly afterwards, it played against teams from Albert Park, Carlton, Melbourne, Royal Park and South Yarra. 
In 1861, University defeated Melbourne to win the first ever trophy for Australian rules football, instituted as part of the Calendonian Society's Games.

During the 1870s, the club played in the Second Twenties competition, the level below the main competition of the South Yarra Challenge Cup, except for in 1875 when it fielded a combined team with St. Kilda.

From 1885 to 1888, University played in the VFA, which at the time was both the major governing body and top level of senior Australian rules football.

From 1888 to 1904, the club spent periods in recess or playing in other competitions, including the Metropolitan Junior Football Association and the Colleges Football Association, and from 1905 to 1907 as a dominant member of the Metropolitan Football Association, also winning the national Intervarsity championship in 1906 and 1907.

On 4 October 1907, the eight founding clubs of the VFL voted to include University in the league as its ninth team, with the Richmond Football Club becoming the tenth team two weeks later. The club's home ground was originally the East Melbourne Cricket Ground, where it was a tenant of the Essendon Football Club; after a lengthy dispute with Essendon over rent, the club relocated in 1911 to the Melbourne Cricket Ground which it also shared, this time with the Melbourne Football Club.

The club was nicknamed The Students, The Professors and The Shop. The players wore a black guernsey with a blue chevron and blue collars and cuffs (the same design is still used to this day), black and blue socks, and an optional black and blue cap. Players had to have matriculated or hold a higher degree to be eligible to play in the team.

The club was not particularly successful: it never finished higher than sixth in the ten-team competition, and never played in the finals. It finished last in the competition from 1911 to 1914, and lost its last 51 games in a row. In total, it played 126 games for 27 wins, 2 draws and 97 losses between 1908 and 1914.

The club is unique among VFL/AFL clubs in never having any professional players, and this was a major factor in its decline in competitiveness after 1911, when player payments were becoming common amongst the other clubs.

It became clear that the club could not remain competitive or viable in the VFL if it wished to remain amateur, and the fact that its players were focussed primarily on their studies (particularly during mid-year examinations) was another logistical issue for the club. As a consequence, the club withdrew from the VFL at the end of 1914.

Many of its players transferred to the Melbourne Football Club, under an informal agreement between the clubs aimed at keeping the best University players together in the same club to keep the University intervarsity team strong.

Overall, 112 players played at least one game for University in the Victorian Football League between 1908 and 1914; and, of that 112, at least 20 died in active service in either World War I or World War II (see List of Victorian Football League players who died in active service).

Bert Hurrey played the most games for the club, with 101, and was the only University player to play at least 100 games in the VFA or VFL, while Roy Park was the club's leading goalscorer, kicking 111 goals between 1912 and 1914: Park also won the VFL's Leading Goalkicker Award in 1913 with 53 goals for the home-and-away season, a remarkable effort considering the team itself scored only 115 goals and finished last on the ladder without a win.

The following is a list of coaches to have coached the club in the VFL.

In the summer of 1919, after the War, Melbourne University began to rebuild its football involvement. Deciding not to reapply for a position in the VFL, they were instead requested by the VFL to supply two teams to the newly formed VFL reserves competition, or the Victorian Junior Football League. These two teams were initially called University A and B, but soon became known as "University Blues" and "University Blacks", respectively (the teams were only officially called the Blues and Blacks in 1930). The Blues contested the 1919 and 1920 VJFL Grand Finals, losing to Collingwood on both occasions; the Blacks, who joined the 1919 VJFL season only at short notice when was unable to organise its own junior team, moved to the Metropolitan Amateur Football Association in 1920, and the following season, were joined by the Blues. Both contested the 1921 MAFA Grand Final, with the Blacks winning what to date is the only grand final the two teams have contested in the MAFA or VAFA.

Melbourne University students and alumni continue to maintain their involvement in football through the Blues and Blacks. The Melbourne University Football Club is unique in that it only plays as "Melbourne University" in inter-university matches, and its regular weekly competition is provided through its component teams, University Blues and University Blacks. The Blues and Blacks play in the Victorian Amateur Football Association, and have been a perennial power in the highest division of a high-standard amateur competition.

Up until the 1950s, the Blacks were the leading University side as well as one of the dominant sides in the Amateur competition, winning 11 A-Section premierships by 1949, including a record six premierships in a row between 1938 and 1949 (the 1940–1945 seasons not being played due to World War II). However, in the later part of the century the Blues established themselves as the premier University side, and are currently the longest serving club to play in the top division of the VAFA.

The Blacks have won a total of 14 A-section flags (their most recent in 2014 & the most in the VAFA). The Blues have won a total of 4 A-section flags (with their most recent being in 2019).

Throughout their history, the Blues and Blacks have often played together in A section of the MAFA/VAFA, and with the Blacks return to A section in 2008 after a prolonged absence, the teams met again for the first time in 25 years. In head-to-head matches, the Blues lead the win tally with 43 wins to the Black's 36 and one draw. The Blacks and the Blues added to their head-to-head history in 2015 after the Blues won promotion after only one year in B section in 2014. Unfortunately the Blacks dropped to B in 2018.

Both teams have consistently been a spawning ground for young players who go on to the AFL. To date, 240 MUFC players have played in the VFL/AFL competition.

From 1955 until 1996, an additional team was fielded by the club called "University Reds" which competed in the lower sections of the VAFA with a firsts and reserves team. When the team was discontinued by the club, players and supporters of the team decided to keep the team operating and it continues to this day as Fitzroy Reds. The Fitzroy Reds merged with the Fitzroy Football Club in 2008.

A women's side was formed In 1996 as a stand-alone side that did not fall under the Melbourne University Football Club. The club was named Melbourne University Women's Football Club and was nicknamed the MUGARS, an acronym for Melbourne University Girls Australian Rules Squad. In 2016, the MUWFC became a part of the MUFC and is equally represented alongside the Blacks and Blues sides on the MUFC board.

The MUWFC field three senior sides and three junior sides across three different leagues. Historically having senior teams in both the Victorian Women's Football League and WRFL/EDFL Youth Girls Competition, in 2016, upon formation of the inaugural statewide competition aligned with the Victorian Football League, MUWFC entered a senior side, with a second and third team competing in the Premier Division and Division 3 of the Victorian Women's Football League respectively. The WRFL/EDFL Youth Girls Competition also expanded from under-13s side and under-18s side to also include and under-15s side.

In 2002, MUWFC won their first premiership against St Albans in Division 1. This was followed by double premierships in 2003 and 2005, to make up the club's five premierships.

In 2005, an Under-18s Youth Girls team was formed. They started competing in the Essendon Districts Football League in 2012.

From 2009, partnered with the club, allowing them to use Arden Street Oval for training and matches. Under this arrangement, Melbourne University served as North Melbourne's VFL Women's affiliate from 2016 until the end of 2019, when North Melbourne decided to field a standalone team instead.

In 2011, an Under-12s team was established in conjunction with North Melbourne Football Club.

The club also facilitates intervarsity teams, for both the Southern University Games and Australian University Games.




Geology of the Canyonlands area

The exposed geology of the Canyonlands area is complex and diverse; 12 formations are exposed in Canyonlands National Park that range in age from Pennsylvanian to Cretaceous. The oldest and perhaps most interesting was created from evaporites deposited from evaporating seawater. Various fossil-rich limestones, sandstones, and shales were deposited by advancing and retreating warm shallow seas through much of the remaining Paleozoic.

Eroded sediment from a nearby mountain range later mixed with coastal dune and sand bar deposits. The end of the Paleozoic and the start of the Mesozoic saw the seas retreat from the region until the late Cenozoic. A subdued topography was dominated by flood plains and tidal flats. Now much further inland, the Triassic climate in the region was dry. Vast deserts covered much of that part of North America, except for one period when streams for a time fought the sand dunes. Wetter times returned in the Cretaceous as the area was flooded by the Western Interior Seaway.

The uplifting of the Rocky Mountains starting in late Cretaceous - greatly affected the Canyonlands region. Erosion rates increased and further quickened the onset of the ice ages in the Pleistocene. Modern-day erosion occurs at a slower rate.

A vast sea covered the region in early Pennsylvanian time. A basin in the area called Paradox Basin subsided and a mountain range called the Uncompahgre Mountains was uplifted to the east. Great quantities of seawater were trapped in the subsiding basin and water became increasingly saline in the hot and dry climate. Thousands of feet of evaporites (anhydrite and gypsum then halite) started to build up in the Mid Pennsylvanian and storms occasionally washed sediment from the nearby mountains. Fresh seawater periodically refilled the basin but was never able to flush out the very salty water there (the new water in fact floated on top of the brine). These beds were later lithified to become the Paradox Formation, which in turn is part of the Hermosa Group. 
Compressed salt beds from the Paradox started to flow plastically later in the Pennsylvanian and probably continued to move from then until the end of the Jurassic. Satellite-based measurements indicate that flow of salt and gypsum continues today to cause flexing and faulting of overlying sedimentary layers.

The Paradox is up to 5000 feet (1520 m) thick in places and in the park is exposed at the bottom of Cataract Canyon as rock gypsum inter-bedded with black shale. Upward movement of the Paradox is also a possible theory for the creation of Upheaval Dome, although none of the Paradox is exposed on the dome, the predominant theory being a meteor crater.

A warm shallow sea again flooded the region near the end of the Pennsylvanian. Limey oozes, sand, and mud were deposited on top of the salt-filled basin. These sediments became the fossil-rich limestones, sandstones, and shales of the gray-colored Honaker Trail Formation. Outcrops of the Honaker Trail can be seen near the bottom of deep canyons in the park, most notably along the Colorado River.

A period of erosion then ensued, creating a break in the geologic record called an unconformity.

Early in the Permian a transgressing (advancing) sea laid down the Halgaito Shale. Coastal lowlands returned to the area after the sea regressed (retreated), forming the Elephant Canyon Formation. These formations can now be seen in Cataract and Elephant Canyons.

The Uncompahgre Mountains (Uncompahgre Plateau) were undergoing extensive erosion during this time. Large alluvial fans filled the basin where it met the range. The resulting Cutler red beds are made of iron-rich arkose sandstone. Underwater sand bars and sand dunes on the coast inter-fingered with the red beds and later became the white-colored cliff-forming Cedar Mesa Sandstone. Today these two competing rock units are exposed in a 4 to 5 mile (6.4 to 8 km) wide belt across the park, stretching from south of the Needles through the Maze and to the Elaterite Basin.

Brightly colored oxidized muds were deposited on top of the Cedar Mesa and ranged in color from red to brown. These sediments eventually became the slope-forming Organ Rock Shale formation and can be seen in the Land of Standing Rocks part of the park.

Coastal sand dunes and marine sand bars once again became dominant, creating the cross-bedded cliff-forming White Rim Sandstone. It is exposed as a topographic bench 1200 feet (365 m) below the top of Island in the Sky (thus earning its name) and along the White Rim Road. A fossilized offshore sand bar made of the White Cliff Sandstone is also exposed in the Elaterite Basin. A tarry dark-brown oil called elaterite seeps out of the structure, giving the basin its name.

The Permian sea retreated, which exposed the land to a long period of erosion and thus created a second unconformity.

Clastic red beds were laid down in shallow-water on top of the eroded Paleozoic surface early in the Triassic. These sediments were deposited on flood plains by streams on an expansive lowland that was slightly sloped in the direction of an ocean to the west. Mud built up in tidal flats to become the mudstone of Moenkopi Formation. Examples of this formation, some that still show fossilized ripple marks and mudcracks, can be seen in the northern and western parts of the park.

Another period of erosion returned, creating a third unconformity. The brightly colored shales of the slope-forming Chinle Formation were laid down on top of this eroded surface. Petrified wood from the Petrified Forest Member of the Chinle is sometimes found at the base of Chinle slopes.

The Glen Canyon Group of formations includes (from oldest - lowest - to youngest) the
These formations are most prominently exposed in the western and northern sections of the park.

Triassic climates progressively became dryer, prompting the formation of sand dunes that buried dry stream beds and their flood plain. This sand became the cliff-forming several hundred feet (many tens of meters) high and red-colored Windgate Sandstone. Outcrops tend to run for hundreds of miles (hundreds of kilometers) with few breaks, creating an impediment to human travel.

For a time climatic conditions became wetter and streams cut channels through the sand dunes. Reddish-brown to lavender-colored sandstones interbedded with siltstones and shales constitute the resulting ledgy slope-forming Kayenta Formation.

The youngest and therefore topmost formation in the Glen Canyon Group was formed after arid conditions returned to the region. A vast and very dry desert, not unlike the modern Sahara, covered 150,000 square miles (388,000 km²) of western North America. Cross bedded sand dunes accumulated to great thickness, especially in the nearby Zion and Kolob canyons area (see geology of the Zion and Kolob canyons area), forming the buff to pale orange Navajo Sandstone. Navajo outcrops form cliffs, temples, and under certain conditions natural arches (such as Millard Canyon Arch) in the area.

A fourth unconformity was created by a period of erosion.

Mud flats developed on top of the eroded surface of the Glen Canyon Group, forming the Carmel Formation. The massive cliff-forming Entrada Sandstone in turn was created on top of the Carmel. A long period of erosion stripped away most of the San Rafael Group in the area along with any formations that may have been laid down in the Cretaceous period.

Starting 70 million years ago and extending well into the Cenozoic, a mountain-building event called the Laramide orogeny uplifted the Rocky Mountains and with it the Canyonlands region. Even though the strata were uplifted thousands of feet (hundreds of meters) they were left at more-or-less the same horizontally. Uplift-associated-jointing did occur and has since influenced erosional patterns.

When ground water seeped into the salt beds of the Paradox Formation it carried away the topmost and more soluble salts, leaving gypsum. This process was so pronounced in ‘’The Grabens’’ that the overlying rock collapsed into voids left by escaping salt.

Increased precipitation during the ice ages of the Pleistocene quickened the rate of canyon excavation. Canyon widening and deepening was especially rapid for the gorges of the Green and Colorado Rivers, which were in part fed by glacier-melt from the Rocky Mountains. Alluvial-fan-creation-landslides and sand dune-migration were also accelerated in the Pleistocene. These processes continue to shape the Canyonlands landscape in the Holocene (the current epoch), but at a slower rate due to a significant increase in aridity.



Community Chest

Community Chest originally referred to a box for holding money or other valuables kept by a small organization and requiring more than one key to be simultaneously turned to open its lock, preventing embezzlement by any single key holder. It may refer to:

Organizations:

Other:

King Xi of Zhou

King Xi of Zhou (died 677 BC) (), personal name Jī Húqí, was the sixteenth king of the Chinese Zhou dynasty and the fourth of the Eastern Zhou.

He was a successor of his father King Zhuang of Zhou, and was succeeded by his son, King Hui of Zhou.

By his time China had dissolved into a multitude of states, only nominally subject to the king, who was no longer even the most powerful figure in China (that was Duke Huán of the State of Qí).

Sons:


Mosh (song)

"Mosh" is a protest song by Eminem from his fifth studio album, "Encore". The song debuted on Eminem's official mixtape, "Shade 45: Sirius Bizness", on October 20, 2004, which has Eminem standing in front of the White House holding an American flag on its cover. Days later, on October 26, one week before the 2004 presidential election, a promotional video created by Guerrilla News Network debuted on the company's website. The video aired on MTV the following day and immediately went to the top of the channel's "hot video" charts. The song, released to encourage voters to vote George W. Bush out of office, did not chart on the Billboard Hot 100 or Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs because it was released only as a promotional video and album track.

The video, mostly animated and directed by Ian Inaba of the Guerrilla News Network, portrays Eminem as a powerful rebellious figure who, just by using his voice and music, can mobilize people who are fed up with the president. With his following uniformly dressed in dark hoodies, the group looks to be storming toward the White House but ends up signing up to vote. At the same time in the song, Eminem talks about the people assembling to disarm what he calls the real weapon of mass destruction: George W. Bush. The video ends with a black screen and the words "Vote November 2".

Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic highlighted the song. "Entertainment Weekly" wrote a mixed description, saying the song "was nothing less than the sound of America's favorite Caucasian rapper at his most intense and focused. Protest songs made a comeback this year, but none captured doom and apocalypse the way 'Mosh' so brilliantly did. Eminem is still a narcissist, of course — he wants us to follow him to liberation, or at least to the voting booth — but the power of 'Mosh' made you forgive his never-ending self-absorption" and called the song itself an anomaly. "DX" magazine wrote that "he (Eminem) turns political and blatantly lashes out at Bush on 'Mosh' (sure to cause some repercussions from politicians considering his visibility)." Pitchfork Media wrote a mixed review: "'Mosh'—sadly, not yet completely past its sell-by date—seems more like a plodding dirge here among the spry string of tracks that surround it." "NME" magazine wrote a favorable review: "And then there's 'Mosh'. Oh boy, there's 'Mosh'. --- Should 'Encore' prove to be a swansong, then 'Mosh' is its blaze of glory, a scalding assault on the Bush regime that hits all the harder for its arriving days too late. The rapper sounds absolutely livid as he mounts a stealthy assault on the Prez that swells with density and rage over its five minutes until fire and brimstone is raining down on the shitwit Texan's perpetually befuddled head. Although you might argue that everything Eminem says is inherently political through the sheer numbers that he reaches and the sheer anti-social nature of most of what he espouses, this is a different kettle of politicised fish entirely. "If it rains, let it rain/Yeah, the wetter the better/They ain't gonna stop us, they can't/We're stronger now more than ever", he rages with a demented fervour that makes Rage Against the Machine sound like Belle & Sebastian. And if that non-specific rabble-rousery is a little on the vague side, the likes of "Stomp, push, shove, mush/Fuck Bush until they bring our troops home" should make it crystal clear. On a more base level, it's fucking fantastic to jump up and down and bang your head to, which is the level where politics and pop most effectively connect." Steve Jones of "USA Today" said that the song "[lambastes] President Bush and his war policies."

"The A.V. Club" wrote of the song: "[Eminem] stops attacking scapegoats and straw men and finally goes after the people who actually wield power. Over Dr. Dre's apocalyptic production—all rain-clouds and thunderclaps—Eminem launches into a searing, overtly emotional attack on President Bush and his administration's bloodlust and misplaced priorities. Eminem has always been angry, but his anger has never before been this righteous, focused, or plugged in to what matters in American life." "Los Angeles Times" was somewhat positive too: he stated that Eminem "catches us off-guard with eloquent political reflections in 'Mosh,' his equivalent of Bob Dylan's "The Times They Are A-Changin'." While Eminem's rap doesn't have the timelessness or literary aspirations of the Dylan song, it hits with the visceral charge and topical urgency of the best rap. Lashing out at various social injustices, he leads a legion of young followers toward what appears to be the kind of violent rebellion one might expect in hard-core rock and rap. Instead, as the video for 'Mosh' shows, their charge is to the voting booth." "The Austin Chronicle" called the song a "potent anti-Bush rant". "SPIN" was a bit positive: "The seething anti-Bush single 'Mosh' may not have brought droves of Eminem acolytes to the polls last November, but it suggests that Em—like fellow potty-mouth-turned activist Howard Stern—realizes that his gifts have uses beyond FCC-baiting and fart jokes."

RapReviews was also unimpressed: "'Mosh' suffers from a similar stigma: a disconcerted, ADD Eminem who can't seem to lock down his lyrics." Robert Christgau of "Rolling Stone" wrote: "[Was "Encore"] a feint designed to double the wallop of 'Mosh,' which signaled a Marshall Mathers gone political — too late to help his candidate, but, be real, the Muse doesn't follow a schedule." "The Guardian" was positive: "Finally, there is Mosh, the anti-war, anti-Bush track "leaked" just before the election. It offers both the best lyric Eminem has ever written and the one moment on the album where the repetitious production style works, providing a suitably relentless basis for his quickfire hectoring. That Mosh seemingly did nothing to affect the election's outcome is something of a double-edged sword." Franklin Soults of "The Boston Phoenix" was a bit negative toward the song: "In the latest "Rolling Stone", Eminem says he hopes his galvanizing anti-Bush single "Mosh" wasn't "too little, too late." Well, it was, and this puke-and-shit-stained album makes it even less likely that sympathizers who read "Rolling Stone" or the "Phoenix" will reach out for it anyway"; he did state, however, that the album had "several moments more consistently remarkable than 'Mosh'", including "Mockingbird" and "Like Toy Soldiers".

"The New York Times" noted that this song "gained notoriety for its anti-Bush lyrics, but Eminem sounds nearly as long-winded as the politicians he's excoriating." "Shaking Through" called this song "political screed." "Slant Magazine" called it "a protest song originally intended solely for online promotion but which quickly earned its status as the album's official second single. 'Mosh' is not only a worthy follow-up to 'Lose Yourself,' it had the potential to shepherd thousands of young, seemingly apathetic voters to the polls on Election Day—had it not been released after almost every registration deadline in the country." The publisher added that the song "[matched] America's angriest pop voice with America's most righteous pastime: Bush-bashing. George W. Bush and Eminem might seem like unlikely foes—after all, the enemy of your enemy is your friend, right?—but Eminem is the poster boy for pushing the limits of the 1st Amendment, and bashing the President is currently the most vilified form of free speech in the country, so who better to champion the cause? 'Maybe this is God just sayin' we're responsible/For this monster, this coward that we have empowered,' he spits rhythmically atop a sturdy, dirge-like beat." "Stylus Magazine" was the most negative of all: "Add [in] Em's brand new tendency to bite himself, and you've actually got a pretty airtight case for playing the career suicide card."



Yuji Fujinawa

General was the Chairman of the Joint Staff Council of the Japan Self-Defense Forces. A lifelong career military officer, he began as an infantry officer. He was named Chief-of-Staff of the Ground Self-Defense Force in July 1997, and became Chairman of the Joint Staff Council in March 1999, his term ending in March 2001.

United Labour

United Labour or United Labour Party may refer to:



Jimmy Carruthers

James William Carruthers (5 July 1929 – 15 August 1990) was an Australian boxer, who became world champion in the bantamweight division.

Jimmy was the 2009 Inductee for the Australian National Boxing Hall of Fame Veterans category.

Carruthers's boxing career started as an Australian representative at the 1948 Summer Olympics in London. In his first-round match of the bantamweight competition, he fought Fred Daigle of Canada and won on points. He defeated Arnoldo Parés of Argentina in his second match. However, he had sustained an eye injury during his bout with Parés, and had to withdraw from the quarter-final match with the eventual gold medalist Tibor Csík of Hungary.

Carruthers joined the professional ranks in 1950, and was an immediate success. By then, he was being managed by Dr. Jim McGirr, and trained by "Silent" Bill McConnell.

He won the Australian Bantamweight title in 1951 and then the British Commonwealth and Bantamweight Championship of the World the following year. Carruthers became Australia's first universally recognised boxing World Champion. Great Australians of the past—including Young Griffo, Mick King, and Les Darcy—had all won world titles, but they had not received international acceptance at the time of winning their respective crowns. After defending his newly won World bantamweight title against Vic Toweel in Johannesburg, and then against the American Henry "Pappy" Gault in Sydney, it was found that Carruthers was carrying a 30-foot-long tapeworm.

He was matched for a world title bout against the New Zealand Bantamweight Champion Lyn Philp. For unclear reasons the fight never went ahead.

After a non-title bout in Sydney, and a further title defence against Chamroen Songkitrat in Bangkok, Carruthers retired on 16 May 1954. Among the fighters he defeated were South African Vic Toweel (twice); Pappy Gault; Bobby Sinn and Chamroen Songkitrat. He made a brief comeback in Melbourne and Sydney in the early sixties in non-title fights, with his last fight in Wellington New Zealand in 1962 where he lost to Jimmy Cassidy.

He worked on the Sydney docks as a wharf labourer in the 1950s.

Carruthers was married to Myra (née Hamilton) until his death and is survived by four children - Boyd, Ginna, Dimiette and Lukas. During the 1950s he owned the colourful Bells Hotel in Sydney's Woolloomooloo. After that he had a number of businesses, including several vegetarian takeaway and juice bars in Sydney.

In his last years Carruthers suffered from lung cancer and Parkinson's disease. He died on 15 August 1990. In 1995 he was inducted into the World Boxing Hall of Fame.




Mutator method

In computer science, a mutator method is a method used to control changes to a variable. They are also widely known as setter methods. Often a setter is accompanied by a getter, which returns the value of the private member variable. They are also known collectively as accessors.

The mutator method is most often used in object-oriented programming, in keeping with the principle of encapsulation. According to this principle, member variables of a class are made private to hide and protect them from other code, and can only be modified by a public member function (the mutator method), which takes the desired new value as a parameter, optionally validates it, and modifies the private member variable. Mutator methods can be compared to assignment operator overloading but they typically appear at different levels of the object hierarchy.

Mutator methods may also be used in non-object-oriented environments. In this case, a reference to the variable to be modified is passed to the mutator, along with the new value. In this scenario, the compiler cannot restrict code from bypassing the mutator method and changing the variable directly. The responsibility falls to the developers to ensure the variable is only modified through the mutator method and not modified directly.

In programming languages that support them, properties offer a convenient alternative without giving up the utility of encapsulation.

In the examples below, a fully implemented mutator method can also validate the input data or take further action such as triggering an event.

The alternative to defining mutator and accessor methods, or property blocks, is to give the instance variable some visibility other than private and access it directly from outside the objects. Much finer control of access rights can be defined using mutators and accessors. For example, a parameter may be made read-only simply by defining an accessor but not a mutator. The visibility of the two methods may be different; it is often useful for the accessor to be public while the mutator remains protected, package-private or internal.

The block where the mutator is defined provides an opportunity for validation or preprocessing of incoming data. If all external access is guaranteed to come through the mutator, then these steps cannot be bypassed. For example, if a date is represented by separate private codice_1, codice_2 and codice_3 variables, then incoming dates can be split by the codice_4 mutator while for consistency the same private instance variables are accessed by codice_5 and codice_6. In all cases month values outside of 1 - 12 can be rejected by the same code.

Accessors conversely allow for synthesis of useful data representations from internal variables while keeping their structure encapsulated and hidden from outside modules. A monetary codice_7 accessor may build a string from a numeric variable with the number of decimal places defined by a hidden codice_8 parameter.

Modern programming languages often offer the ability to generate the boilerplate for mutators and accessors in a single line—as for example C#'s codice_9 and Ruby's codice_10. In these cases, no code blocks are created for validation, preprocessing or synthesis. These simplified accessors still retain the advantage of encapsulation over simple public instance variables, but it is common that, as system designs progress, the software is maintained and requirements change, the demands on the data become more sophisticated. Many automatic mutators and accessors eventually get replaced by separate blocks of code. The benefit of automatically creating them in the early days of the implementation is that the public interface of the class remains identical whether or not greater sophistication is added, requiring no extensive refactoring if it is. 

Manipulation of parameters that have mutators and accessors from "inside" the class where they are defined often requires some additional thought. In the early days of an implementation, when there is little or no additional code in these blocks, it makes no difference if the private instance variable is accessed directly or not. As validation, cross-validation, data integrity checks, preprocessing or other sophistication is added, subtle bugs may appear where some internal access makes use of the newer code while in other places it is bypassed.

Accessor functions can be less efficient than directly fetching or storing data fields due to the extra steps involved, however such functions are often inlined which eliminates the overhead of a function call.

student struct
student ends
student_get_age proc object:DWORD
student_get_age endp

student_set_age proc object:DWORD, age:DWORD
student_set_age endp

In file student.h:


struct student; /* opaque structure */
typedef struct student student;

student *student_new(int age, char *name);
void student_delete(student *s);

void student_set_age(student *s, int age);
int student_get_age(student *s);
char *student_get_name(student *s);

In file student.c:


struct student {

student *student_new(int age, char *name) {

void student_delete(student *s) {

void student_set_age(student *s, int age) {

int student_get_age(student *s) {

char *student_get_name(student *s) {

In file main.c:


int main(void) {

In file Makefile:

all: out.txt; cat $<
out.txt: main; ./$< > $@
main: main.o student.o
main.o student.o: student.h
clean: ;$(RM) *.o out.txt main
In file Student.h:



class Student {
public:

private:


In file Student.cpp:


Student::Student(const std::string& name) : name_(name) {

const std::string& Student::name() const {

void Student::name(const std::string& name) {

This example illustrates the C# idea of properties, which are a special type of class member. Unlike Java, no explicit methods are defined; a public 'property' contains the logic to handle the actions. Note use of the built-in (undeclared) variable codice_11. 
public class Student

In later C# versions (.NET Framework 3.5 and above), this example may be abbreviated as follows, without declaring the private variable codice_12.
public class Student

Using the abbreviated syntax means that the underlying variable is no longer available from inside the class. As a result, the codice_13 portion of the property must be present for assignment. Access can be restricted with a codice_13-specific access modifier.

public class Student

In Common Lisp Object System, slot specifications within class definitions may specify any of the codice_15, codice_16 and codice_17 options (even multiple times) to define reader methods, setter methods and accessor methods (a reader method and the respective codice_18 method). Slots are always directly accessible through their names with the use of codice_19 and codice_20, and the slot accessor options define specialized methods that use codice_20.

CLOS itself has no notion of properties, although the MetaObject Protocol extension specifies means to access a slot's reader and writer function names, including the ones generated with the codice_17 option.

The following example shows a definition of a student class using these slot options and direct slot access:

(defmethod student-age ((self student))

(defmethod (setf student-age) (new-age (self student))

(defmethod set-student-number :before (new-number (self student))
D supports a getter and setter function syntax. In version 2 of the language getter and setter class/struct methods should have the codice_23 attribute.

class Student {

A codice_24 instance can be used like this:

auto student = new Student;
student.name = "David"; // same effect as student.name("David")
auto student_name = student.name; // same effect as student.name()
This is a simple class in Delphi language which illustrates the concept of public property for accessing a private field. 
interface

type

implementation

procedure TStudent.SetName(const Value: string);
begin
end;

end.
In this example of a simple class representing a student with only the name stored, one can see the variable "name" is private, i.e. only visible from the Student class, and the "setter" and "getter" are public, namely the "codice_25" and "codice_26" methods.

public class Student {

In this example constructor-function codice_24 is used to create objects representing a student with only the name stored.

function Student(name) {

Or (using a deprecated way to define accessors in Web browsers):

function Student(name){

Or (using prototypes for inheritance and ES6 accessor syntax):

function Student(name){

Student.prototype = {
};

Or (without using prototypes):

var Student = {
};

Or (using defineProperty):

function Student(name){
Object.defineProperty(Student.prototype, 'name', {
});

package

Using traditional Objective-C 1.0 syntax, with manual reference counting as the one working on GNUstep on Ubuntu 12.04:

@interface Student : NSObject

- (NSString *)name;
- (void)setName:(NSString *)name;

@end

@implementation Student

- (NSString *)name

- (void)setName:(NSString *)name

@end

Using newer Objective-C 2.0 syntax as used in Mac OS X 10.6, iOS 4 and Xcode 3.2, generating the same code as described above:

@interface Student : NSObject

@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString *name;

@end

@implementation Student

@synthesize name = _name;

@end

And starting with OS X 10.8 and iOS 6, while using Xcode 4.4 and up, syntax can be even simplified:

@interface Student : NSObject

@property (nonatomic, strong) NSString *name;

@end

@implementation Student

//Nothing goes here and it's OK.

@end

package Student;

sub new {

sub set_name {

sub get_name {

1;
Or, using Class::Accessor

package Student;
use base qw(Class::Accessor);
__PACKAGE__->follow_best_practice;

Student->mk_accessors(qw(name));

1;
Or, using the Moose Object System:

package Student;
use Moose;

has 'name' => (is => 'rw', isa => 'Str', reader => 'get_name', writer => 'set_name');

1;
PHP defines the "magic methods" codice_28andcodice_29 for properties of objects.

In this example of a simple class representing a student with only the name stored, one can see the variable "name" is private, i.e. only visible from the Student class, and the "setter" and "getter" is public, namely the codice_25 and codice_31 methods.

class Student

This example uses a Python class with one variable, a getter, and a setter.
class Student:

»> bob = Student("Bob")
»> bob.name 
Bob
»> bob.name = "Alice"
»> bob.name 
Alice
»> bob._name = "Charlie" # bypass the setter
»> bob._name # bypass the getter
Charlie
In Racket, the object system is a way to organize code that comes in addition to modules and units. As in the rest of the language, the object system has first-class values and lexical scope is used to control access to objects and methods.
(define student%

(send s get-name) ; => "Alice"
(send s get-name) ; => "Bob"
Struct definitions are an alternative way to define new types of values, with mutators being present when explicitly required:

(struct student (name) #:mutable)
(student-name s) ; => "Bob"
In Ruby, individual accessor and mutator methods may be defined, or the metaprogramming constructs codice_32 or codice_33 may be used both to declare a private variable in a class and to provide either read-only or read-write public access to it respectively.

Defining individual accessor and mutator methods creates space for pre-processing or validation of the data

class Student

end
Read-only simple public access to implied codice_34 variable

class Student
end
Read-write simple public access to implied codice_34 variable

class Student
end

struct Student {

impl Student {

 age: aNumber

class Student {

This example illustrates the VB.NET idea of properties, which are used in classes. Similar to C#, there is an explicit use of the codice_36 and codice_37 methods. 

Public Class Student

End Class

In VB.NET 2010, Auto Implemented properties can be utilized to create a property without having to use the Get and Set syntax. Note that a hidden variable is created by the compiler, called codice_38, to correspond with the Property codice_12. Using another variable within the class named codice_38 would result in an error. Privileged access to the underlying variable is available from within the class.

Public Class Student
End Class


.jm

.jm is the Internet country code top-level domain (ccTLD) for Jamaica. Registrations are at the third level beneath the second level names com.jm, net.jm, org.jm, edu.jm, gov.jm, and mil.jm. Registrations are processed by hand rather than automatically, so registrants are asked to allow 30 days for the registrations to be completed. Updates to domain names (such as changes to nameservers) can only be authorized by the technical or registrant e-mail addresses. Registration of .jm domains is handled by Mona Information Technology Services (MITS) at the University of the West Indies. Registration is free, although there has been some discussion about MITS making the service commercial in the coming years.



Chen

Chen or Ch'en may refer to:






.jo

.jo is the country code top-level domain (ccTLD) for Jordan. A local contact is required to register a domain name under .jo. It used to be administered by the NITC and is now administered by Jordan's Ministry of Digital Economy and Entrepreneurship.

Jordan also has an internationalized country code top-level domain, 

Registration directly at second level, under .jo is possible, but there is a number of second level domains used for registrations as well. Registration under the IDN is open for all public and private organisations and companies.

Marc Burns

Marc Burns (born 7 January 1983) is an athlete from Trinidad and Tobago specializing in the 100 metres and the 4 x 100 metres relay.

Participating in the 2004 Summer Olympics, he was disqualified from his 100 metres heat due to a false start, thus failing to make it through to the second round.

Marc Burns placed second in the men's 100 metres dash at the Bislett Games IAAF Golden League meet in Oslo in July 2005, in preparation for the 2005 World Championships in Athletics. At the 2005 World Championships he won (together with Kevon Pierre, Jacey Harper and Darrel Brown) a silver medal. Later that year he won the World Athletics Final.

At the 2006 Commonwealth Games he won a bronze medal over 100 metres.

He was a finalist in the 100 m final at the 2007 World Championships in Osaka.

At the London Grand Prix he ran a season's best time of 9.97 seconds coming second behind former world record holder Asafa Powell.

In the 2008 Summer Olympics he competed at the 100 metres sprint and placed 2nd in his heat after Samuel Francis in a time of 10.46 seconds. He qualified for the second round in which he improved his time to 10.05 seconds, winning his race with opponents as Kim Collins and Tyrone Edgar. In the semi-finals he finished 3rd (9.97 seconds) in his heat behind Usain Bolt and Walter Dix and qualified for the final. There he finished his race in 7th place in a time of 10.01 seconds. Together with Keston Bledman, Aaron Armstrong and Richard Thompson he also competed at the 4x100 metres relay. In their qualification heat they placed first in front of Japan, the Netherlands and Brazil. Their time of 38.26 was the fastest of all sixteen teams participating in the first round and they qualified for the final. Armstrong was replaced by Emmanuel Callender for the final race and they sprinted to a time of 38.06 seconds, the second time after the Jamaican team, winning the silver medal. In 2022, Burns and his teammates received the gold medal due to Jamaica's Nesta Carter testing positive for the prohibited substance methylhexaneamine.

At the 2012 Summer Olympics, he was part of the Trinidad and Tobago team that won the silver medal in the men's 4 × 100 m relay. He was also part of the team that won the bronze medal at the 2014 Commonwealth Games.

Burns was coached most of his professional career by Henry Rolle.


.re

.re is the Internet country code top-level domain (ccTLD) for Réunion (a French island located in the Indian Ocean, east of Madagascar). Along with .fr, .tf, and .ovh, it is administered by AFNIC.

In recent years, the .re TLD has been increasingly used for real estate–related domains (RE = Real Estate), including place names (neighborhoods, cities, countries, etc.), real estate companies, developers/projects, property-related websites, and individual realtors and estate agents around the world. The .re domain has also been applied to insurance and reinsurance companies (e.g. swiss.re), those involved with reverse engineering, and as domain hacks for words ending in .re (for example, adventu.re or nearfutu.re), similar to contractions used with other TLDs (for example, websites such as bit.ly and delicio.us). Domains with the .re TLD can be registered with some of the largest online registrars such as Name.com, as well as most European domain registrars.

Since 6 December 2011, the rules for registering French domains have shifted. The owner of a domain no longer needs to be based in France or Overseas France anymore, with all individuals, companies and organizations residing in the European Union able register domains of France or its possessions.

.re allows two-character domains with at least one number. So, m7.re or 42.re are acceptable, while fi.re is not.

In addition to direct second level registrations, registrations have been made at the third level beneath these names:


Starting December 6, 2011, domain names at the official subdomains can no longer be registered. The owner of such domain names can renew their existing domains.


Ian Read (musician)

Ian Read is an English neofolk and traditional folk musician, and occultist active within chaos magic and Germanic mysticism circles.

Read was a member of Sol Invictus, and founded Fire + Ice in 1991.
Read left school at 16, and at the age of 17, he became an adherent of Germanic neopaganism and began studying Germanic paganism.

In 1987, Read joined Tony Wakeford's Sol Invictus along with Karl Blake. Read recorded three albums and an EP with Sol Invictus before leaving to form the band Fire + Ice in 1991.

Ian Read founded an all traditional folk band named Figg's Academy that played a couple of gigs, notably in 2008 at the Wave-Gotik-Treffen in Leipzig.

Read founded Fire + Ice in 1991 after several years as a member of Sol Invictus. According to their sole website, "The heartlessness of the modern commercial consumer society ruins the lives of many. FIRE + ICE takes the purity and philosophy of early music and melds it into a message redolent with powerful seeds of honour, truth, loyalty and the bond of true friendship."

His work as Fire + Ice have had a large amount of influence on neofolk music.

The band played Wave-Gotik-Treffen in Leipzig in 1999 with a lineup that included Ysanne Spevack and Julia Kent.

The band followed up by releasing a split 7-inch single with the neofolk song The Unquiet Grave recorded in London in 2000, featuring vocals and viola by Ysanne Spevack as a duet with Ian Read. It was released in Germany by Tesco Distribution on blue vinyl with a letterpress foil gatefold cover.

In 1996, Read was named as a Rune-Master within the Rune-Gild. His master work was the Fire + Ice album "Rûna" that included a self-written and sung galdor (or galdr) of the Rune poem. Read presently holds the position of Drighten in the Rune Gild and co-published the periodical "Rûna", which ceased after 24 issues.

Read became the leader of the English branch of the Illuminates of Thanateros (IOT), in the early 1990s after founder Peter Carroll stepped down as leading Magus. Read is currently the editor of the IOT's "Chaos International".

He participated to the sessions of Current 93's album "Swastikas For Noddy", therefore he appears on this album and some subsequent albums containing remixes of this material:

He participated to Death in June's album "Brown Book" and the tracks have appeared in subsequent Death In June's releases as well:




.ru

.ru is the Latin alphabet Internet country code top-level domain (ccTLD) for Russia introduced on 7 April 1994. The Russian alphabet internationalized country code is .рф.

Control of .ru is assigned to the Coordination Center for TLD RU (CC for TLD RU), the current official registry. On 1 January 2005, the former registry, the Russian Institute for Public Networks (RIPN), stopped new registrations directly under .ru, but still carried out registry operations for domain names under the second-level domains .com.ru, .net.ru, .org.ru and .pp.ru.

The company RELCOM also proposes third-level registrations beneath various second-level domains such as .msk.ru (Moscow), while Macomnet Telcom proposes third-level registrations beneath .int.ru simultaneously.

The creation of .ru in April 1994 was preceded by a historical agreement in 1993 known as "The order of RU top-level domain administration". According to the agreement, administrative and technical support responsibilities for the .ru domain were to be handed over to RIPN. In 2002, the administrative functions were handed over to CC for TLD RU.

The ccTLD is developing rapidly under self-regulation. In 1993, an informal union was formed, known as the RU Top-Level Domain Coordination Group (RU TLD CG). The union includes the leading Russian ISPs as well as scientific and educational networks entrusted by RIPN with RU domain administration.

In 1998, RIPN and RU TLD CG established a domain registration association. Subsequently, in 2000, a new system of domain name registration for .ru was introduced. It was a distributed system of second-level domain name registrations in .ru, through accredited registrars. The accredited registrars provide domain name registration and support services on a "first come, first served" basis to end-users.

RIPN became one of four co-founders of CC for TLD RU, but continued to support centralized technical aspects of the operation of .ru. All organizational and administrative functions were handed over to CC for TLD RU. To preserve historical continuity, one of CC for TLD RU's committees was established on the basis of RU TLD CG.

CC for TLD RU maintains domain name registration rules for .ru, the registrar accreditation procedure, and promotes perspective projects that involve the growth of .ru, whereas RIPN secures .ru technical base functions and supports DNS for the .ru DNS zone.

The current distributed registration system was first tested in 2001 and implemented in 2005.

Although direct registration of second-level domains is widespread, there are a number of second-level domains designated for third-level domain name registrations depending on organizational type and geographic location. The full list is published on the CC for TLD RU website.


Some federal subjects have multiple second-level domains, and others (not listed below) have none.

These were created before rules were established for geographic second-level domain names in .ru, and have had to be grandfathered in.

In addition, the .test.ru second-level domain is reserved for use in examples in documentation.



.rw

.rw is the Internet country code top-level domain (ccTLD) for Rwanda.

In addition to registering a Rwanda domain name directly under .rw, RICTA, through accredited and registered registrars, offers as well the following second level domains:

As of February 17, 2021, accredited registrars include:



.in

.in is the Internet country code top-level domain (ccTLD) for India. It was made available in 1989, four years after original generic top-level domains such as .com, .net and the country code like .us. It is currently administered by the National Internet Exchange of India (NIXI).

The domain was originally managed by the National Centre for Software Technology (NCST) and its Centre for Development of Advanced Computing (C-DAC). The Government of India issued an executive order in 2004 to transfer responsibility for managing .in domains to the newly created INRegistry under the authority of the National Internet Exchange of India (NIXI). The National Informatics Centre (NIC), ERNET, and the Ministry of Defence were appointed as registrars for the gov.in, res.in and ac.in, and the mil.in domains respectively.

In August 2018, NIXI appointed Neustar Data Infotech (India), a subsidiary of Neustar Inc, to be the country's new registry services provider. Neustar completed migration of existing .in domains to its registry infrastructure in March 2019. Neustar added the ability to register Indian-language domains in native script by enabling end-to-end web portal language support.

, liberalised policies for the domain allow unlimited second-level registrations under . Unlimited registrations under the previously structured existing zones are also allowed:


Zones reserved for use by qualified institutions in India:

The domain is reserved for India's National Informatics Centre, but in practice most Indian government agencies have domains ending in .

The .in registry launched following sub-domains on Oct 29, 2021 to benefit the growing market:

Before the introduction of liberalised registration policies for the domain, only 7000 names had been registered between 1992 and 2004. , the number had increased to over 610,000 domain names with 60% of registrations coming from India and the rest from overseas. By October 2011, the number had surpassed 1 million domain names. , the number has more than doubled to over 2 million domain names.
As per the terms and conditions of the registry, domain privacy is not allowed.

Recently updated EKYC guidelines were issued to all registrars to authenticate new registrants. Hence, the previous rule relating to bulk booking of .in domain names has been withdrawn. Now customers can book unlimited .in domain names as previously in line with promoting .in TLD on par with other popular TLDs like .com and others which also has no restrictions relating to bulk booking.

India plans to introduce internationalised domain names in the 22 local languages used in India. , fifteen of these internationalised domain names were accepted by ICANN:


In 2016, an application for eight further domains was accepted. While Indian government also applied for .বাংলা (Bengali) it was given to a competing applicant, the Bangladesh Telecommunication Company Limited (BTCL). They were not available (): But, they were later on made available and now are open for domain registration in India.



Kareem Streete-Thompson

Kareem Streete-Thompson (born March 30, 1973) is a Caymanian-American athlete specializing in the long jump and the 100 metres. He was born in Ithaca, New York.

Although born in the United States, he lived his first 18 years in the Cayman Islands. Originally he represented the Cayman Islands, then the United States, and then from 1999 the Cayman Islands again.

Two times in the role, he was awarded the Austin Sealy Trophy for the
most outstanding athlete of the 1989 CARIFTA Games and 1990 CARIFTA Games.

In the 2004 Summer Olympics, he participated in the 100 metres, achieving a second place and a season's best time in the heat from which he qualified, before exiting the competition in the second round with a fifth-placed finish. In the long jump competition, he did not qualify for the final.


.io

The Internet country code top-level domain (ccTLD) .io is nominally assigned to the British Indian Ocean Territory. The domain is managed by Internet Computer Bureau Ltd, a domain name registry, with registrar services provided by Name.com.

Google's ad targeting treats .io as a generic top-level domain (gTLD) because "users and website owners frequently see [the domain] as being more generic than country-targeted."

The .io domain was delegated by the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority to British entrepreneur Paul Kane in 1997 together with the ccTLDs .ac (Ascension Island), .sh (St Helena), and .tm (Turkmenistan). Kane operated them for private benefit under the trade name "Internet Computer Bureau" from 1997 until 2017. In 2014, Kane claimed that "profits are distributed to the authorities for them to operate services as they see fit" and that "Each of the overseas territories has an account and the funds are deposited there because obviously the territories have expenses that they incur and it’s offsetting that." However the UK government has repeatedly stated that this is untrue: “There is no agreement between the UK Government and ICB regarding the administration of the .io domain” and "the Government receives no revenues from the sales or administration of this domain."
The first subdomain was registered under .IO in 1998, when Levi Strauss & Co. registered the domain levi.io.

In April 2017, Paul Kane sold the Internet Computer Bureau holding company to privately held domain name registry services provider Afilias for $70.17m in cash.

In December 2020, Afilias' owner Hal Lubsen sold it to privately held Donuts for an undisclosed sum.

One month later, in January 2021, Donuts was acquired by private equity firm Ethos Capital, again for an undisclosed sum.

In 2021, the United Nations' International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea ruled that the United Kingdom has no sovereignty over the Chagos Archipelago, and that sovereignty instead belongs to Mauritius. This would extinguish the British Indian Ocean Territory, and the IO ISO-3166 two-letter country code and .io domain could also be extinguished. The United Kingdom, which was not a party to the case, disputes and does not recognise the tribunal's decision, so further legal processes are likely. In 2022, the Mauritian government was considering how to progress the issue.

In July 2021, the Chagos Refugees Group UK submitted a complaint to the Irish government against domain-name speculators Paul Kane and Ethos Capital subsidiary Afilias, seeking repatriation of the .IO ("Indian Ocean") country-code top-level domain and payment of back royalties from the $7m/year in revenue generated by the domain. While attempts to repatriate top-level domains are not uncommon, this one is notable in that it cites consumer and human rights violations of the OECD's 2011 Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises rather than multistakeholder representation under ICANN policy, and because the .io domain has enjoyed commercial success, particularly among cryptocurrency companies, with more than 270,000 domains registered.

Individuals and organisations are allowed to register .io domains.

Labels for .io domains may only contain alphanumeric characters and hyphens, and must be between 3 and 63 characters long. Domain names cannot begin or end with a hyphen symbol, and may not contain two consecutive hyphens. The entire domain name may not contain more than 253 characters.

Applicants for the registration of .io domains do not need to be registered or established in the British Indian Ocean Territory. Third-level domains, such as "xyz.com.io", can only be registered by an inhabitant of the area. (Since there are no legal, permanent inhabitants of the British Indian Ocean Territory, theoretically no third-level domains will be registered.) Any second-level domains used by NIC.IO and top-level domains cannot be used as a third-level domain. For example, the domains "com.com.io", "org.com.io", and "biz.com.io" are all restricted.

Domain names in .io may not be used, "for any purpose that is sexual or pornographic or that is against the statutory laws of any nation." If this requirement is breached, "NIC.IO reserves the right to immediately deactivate the offending registration."

.io domains may be registered for a minimum of one year, and a maximum of 5 years.

Domain names in .io are priced higher than those in many other TLDs. Registering an available .io-domain currently () costs US$36 per year.

The .io domain is used almost exclusively for purposes unrelated to the British Indian Ocean Territory.

In computer science, "IO" or "I/O" is commonly used as an abbreviation for input/output, which makes the .io domain desirable for services that want to be associated with technology. .io domains are often used for open source projects, application programming interfaces ("APIs"), startup companies, browser games, and other online services.

The TLD is also used for domain hacks, as the letters "io" are an ending of many English terms. For example, Rub.io is a shortened URL that was used for the 2016 U.S. presidential campaign of Marco Rubio.

One reason given for the TLD's popularity is that it stands out by being shorter than other TLDs. Also, the .io TLD is less occupied than other TLDs, so it is more likely that a given term is available there.

Around 2015 a multiplayer game, "Agar.io", spawned many other games with a similar multiplayer playstyle that used the .io domain, such as "Diep.io", "Slither.io", "Surviv.io", and "ZombsRoyale.io". Such games are collectively called ".io games".

According to a 2014 Gigaom interview with Paul Kane, then chairman of the Internet Computer Bureau, the domain name registry is required to give some of its profits to the British government, for administration of the British Indian Ocean Territory. After being questioned as a result of the interview, the British Government denied receiving any funds from the sale of .io domain names, and argued that consequently, the profits could not be shared with the Chagossians, the former inhabitants forcibly removed by the British government. Kane, however, contradicted the government's denial.


Serangoon

Serangoon () is a planning area and residential town located in the North-East Region of Singapore.

Serangoon is bordered by these planning areas – Sengkang to the north, Hougang to the east, Ang Mo Kio and Bishan to the west, as well as Toa Payoh to the south. Serangoon planning area has a total of seven subzones: Serangoon Central, Lorong Chuan, Upper Paya Lebar, Serangoon Garden, Serangoon North, Seletar Hills and Serangoon North Industrial Estate.

The original Serangoon bus interchange was opened on 13 March 1988 along Serangoon Central. It later relocated to nex on 3 September 2011.

A large part of the North East MRT line runs in parallel with this arterial road. Stations that are located along this road are from Little India to Kovan. Current MRT Stations that are located in the Serangoon area includes:


There are plans to build 2 more stations under the Cross Island Line, namely the below stations. These stations will be completed by 2030. 


Upper Serangoon Road is an important road being one of the oldest and busiest roads, links the North-East region with Central area

Other important main roads include Yio Chu Kang Road, Upper Paya Lebar Road, Bartley Road, Braddell Road, and Ang Mo Kio Avenue 1 and 3.

The CTE (Central Expressway) at the west of the town provides a link to Seletar Airport, Toa Payoh and CBD (Central Business District).

, this area has a total of 5 primary schools, 4 secondary schools and Nanyang Junior College.

Serangoon Neighbourhood 1, some parts of Neighbourhood 2 and Serangoon Garden fall under the Aljunied GRC (Serangoon division), served by the Workers' Party, while the area surrounding Upper Paya Lebar Road lies within the Aljunied GRC Paya Lebar division. Prior to 2006, the Serangoon division belonged to the Marine Parade GRC, which administers Serangoon Neighbourhoods 2, 3 and 4 in the Braddell Heights division till this day. Neighbourhood 5 in Serangoon North falls under the Ang Mo Kio GRC (Jalan Kayu division).




.ir

.ir is the Internet country code top-level domain (ccTLD) for Iran. It is managed by the Institute for Research in Fundamental Sciences.


Persian internationalized domain names are available for registration under .ایران.ir for public, in the Persian script.

In 2010, ICANN approved IRNIC's proposal for the ایران. IDN ccTLD (representing the Persian spelling of "Iran"), pending the final step of String Delegation.



Leonard Myles-Mills

Leonard ("Leo") Myles-Mills (born May 9, 1973, in Accra, Greater Accra Region) is a Ghanaian former athlete who specialized in the 100 metres. He ran a personal best of 9.98 seconds for the event in 1998, becoming the first Ghanaian to break the 10-second barrier. His best of 6.45 seconds for the 60 metres is an African record. Myles-Mills twice represented his country at the Summer Olympics and also at the Commonwealth Games. He was a two-time NCAA Men's 100 m dash champion while running for Brigham Young University.

His brother John Myles-Mills was also a sprint athlete.

He has won a gold medal at the 1999 All-Africa Games, a silver medal at the 2003 All-Africa Games and a bronze medal at the 1998 African Championships. In 1999 he set a new African indoor record in 60 metres with 6.45 seconds. His personal best over 100 metres; 9.98 seconds was a Ghanaian record until Benjamin Azamati broke it by running a time of 9.97 seconds in 100 meters at the Texas relays on 26 March 2021.

Participating in the 2004 Summer Olympics, he achieved a third place in the 100 metres, thus securing qualification from his heat in a season's best time. Entering the second round, he managed to qualify through to the semi-final, following a third place in the race and recording a further improvement upon his season's best. He finished the semi-final in sixth place, thus failing to secure qualification to the final.

Myles-Mills is a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.



.is

.is (dot is) is the top-level domain for Iceland. The country code is derived from the first two letters of "Ísland", which is the Icelandic word for Iceland. Registration of .is domains is open to all people and companies without any special restriction.

The first .is domain, hi.is, is the domain of (University of Iceland). It was registered on December 11, 1986, making it one of the earliest ever domain registrations on the Internet.

According to McAfee report "Mapping the Mal Web," ".is" was evaluated as one of the top 10 most secure TLDs in the world in the years 2007, 2008, 2009, and 2010. No report has come out since then. , there were just over 86,000 .is domains registered.

, .is domains can be registered for up to five years.

In April 2013, ISNIC briefly hosted The Pirate Bay's domain "ThePirateBay.is."

In 2014, ISNIC suspended two domains which hosted material produced by the Islamic State, including "Khilafah.is".

In September 2017, ISNIC briefly hosted American neo-Nazi domain "dailystormer.is", which had been removed by several domain Registries around the world. It was pulled from its .is domain after its publisher did not fulfill the standard procedure of disclosing his address.

In September 2022, ISNIC suspended the .is domain for Kiwi Farms, a controversial internet trolling and harassment forum. 

Many domain hacks exist which use the .is suffix as the English verb "is".


Apremont

Apremont is the name or part of the name of several communities:




.it

.it is the national top-level domain (ccTLD) assigned to Italy.

Registration is open to organisations and individuals of legal age who are citizens or residents of/headquartered in the countries of the European Economic Area (EEA), the Vatican State, the Republic of San Marino and the Swiss Confederation.

Since 11 July 2012, .it has also supported internationalised domain names.

The first .it domain requested was that of the CNR (National Research Council: cnuce.cnr.it); the request was sent on 23 December 1987, and the domain became active on 1 January 1988. On 23 December 1987, IANA assigned the .it ccTLD to CNUCE, an institute of the CNR in Pisa, and the first name registered was that of the CNR's CNUCE. In 1997, the task was passed on to the Institute for Telematic Applications (Istituto per le Applicazioni Telematiche, IAT), also at the CNR in Pisa, which was born out of the necessary expansion of the 'Research Network Infrastructure Department' (Reparto Infrastrutture Reti per la Ricerca, RIRR) of the CNUCE.
Policies and rules were agreed with operators in the sector using a variety of forms. After the setting-up of the initial group, called MAIL-ITA, followed by ITA-PE 162 (which held its meetings at the CSELT) in 1994, 1998 saw the establishment of the Italian Naming Authority, which was responsible for drafting the rules for assigning '.it' domains until 2005. This structure differed from the Italian Registration Authority, which was responsible for keeping the Registry of names and made available the technical infrastructure needed to maintain it, thereby also including the management of authoritative DNS delegations. In 1999, the Naming Authority carried out a 'liberalisation' of the ccTLD by removing the limit on the number of domain names that could be registered for organisations of any kind. In the same year, management of the Registry passed to the Institute's Director Franco Denoth. 
In 2001, a merger of several institutes of the CNR gave rise to the Institute of Informatics and Telematics, which consequently took over responsibility. In 2004, the limit on the number of registrations was also removed for natural persons. As of 2005, the Registry took over both regulatory and implementation functions with the establishment of an internal committee (the Steering Committee) that included representatives of the sector's operators. In 2009, the '.it' ccTLD Registry changed its name to Registro .it, the registry of Italian domains.
Following Denoth's death in April 2006, the direction of the Institute (and thus of Registro) was temporarily taken over by Enrico Gregori on 17 May 2006, followed by Domenico Laforenza in 2008. Currently, the Institute is directed by Marco Conti.
Since 11 July 2012, it has also been possible to register .it domains with non-ASCII characters (IDN), i.e., special characters, accented letters, etc.

Second-level domains are the ones 'before' the .it, and can be of different types:


Saline Valley

Saline Valley is a large, deep, and arid graben, about in length, in the northern Mojave Desert of California, a narrow, northwest–southeast-trending tectonic sink defined by fault-block mountains. Most of it became a part of Death Valley National Park when the park was expanded in 1994. This area had previously been administered by the Bureau of Land Management. It is located northwest of Death Valley proper, south of Eureka Valley, and east of the Owens Valley. The valley's lowest elevations are about and it lies in the rain shadow of the Sierra Nevada range, plus the Inyo Mountains bordering the valley on the west.

A large dry lake occupies the center of the valley. The west end of the lake supports a salt marsh, which contains a variety of plant and animal life. The marsh is fed by a perennial stream from Hunter Canyon. North of the lake is a large area of low and sweeping sand dunes.

There are a number of hot springs in the northeast corner of the valley. The water temperature at the source of these springs averages at . Saline Valley's three main warm springs are reached by a primary road known as the Warm Springs Road or Painted Rock Road.

Lower Warm Springs is the largest, most developed, and most popular dispersed camping area. Palm Spring is smaller and less crowded with great views of Saline Valley and the source feeds two tubs known as Wizard Pool and Volcano Pool. Upper Warm Spring, the smallest and least disturbed of the main springs, is a deep pool of lukewarm azure water surrounded by cattail, arrow-weed, and grasses, in full view of the Saline Range.

Saline Valley is a closed or endorheic basin. If filled with water it would be over deep, form a lake with a surface area of roughly , and hold approximately of water.

Saline Valley was inhabited by the Ko'ongkatün Band of Timbisha Shoshone (also known as Panamint or Koso). One of their principal villages was known as "Ko'on" and located in Saline Valley, therefore the valley was named after the village and known as Ko'ongkatün ("Ko'on" + "kantün" - "possessing, characterized by" the village Ko'on) or simply Ko'on. The Timbisha Shoshone living at "Ko'on" were called Ko'ontsi (″People of the village Ko'on"). The village was abandoned in the early 20th century and the inhabitants moved to Darwin, California.

Saline Valley was a significant mineral source in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. The Conn and Trudo Borax Company mined borax from the salt marsh from 1874 to 1895. The remains of this site can be seen today as a few shallow pits near Saline Valley Road. Salt mining began in 1903 at the south end of the lake, and continued into the 1930s.
An electric aerial tram was constructed in 1911 to carry the salt over the Inyo Mountains to a terminus northeast of Keeler, California in the Owens Valley. It operated sporadically from 1913 to 1936, but ultimately proved to be too expensive to run. The tram, which was placed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1973, was the steepest ever constructed in the United States. It rose from an elevation of in Saline Valley to over the mountains, and then down to . Route was south from Salt Lake to Daisy Canyon then southwest and terminated at the Southern Pacific RR between Dolomite and Swansea. In recent years it has been badly damaged by vandals.

As early as the 1960s, the hot springs in the valley became popular among nudists, and were eventually improved by volunteer labor, to include concrete tubs, a shower, a sink, and three outhouses (which the Park Service later replaced with concrete-lined latrines). For improved access, two airstrips were built, the "Chicken Strip" and "Tail-Dragger Strip" (the latter is now closed).

The Saline Valley Warm Springs, as they are called, have become controversial in recent years. The improvements would have violated Park Service policy if they had taken place today. There has been compromise so far; a park host is always on duty, visitors are limited to 30 days per year, and the springs do not appear on any official NPS map. The campgrounds retain a clothing-optional policy which the park has taken no official stance on. As stated in the 2019 Saline Valley Warm Springs Management Plan and Environmental Impact Statement, "Public nudity is common at the site, and the plan is silent on this topic. Public nudity is not against Federal regulations, but lewd behavior is."
There are 3 sections of springs, the upper, middle and lower springs. The middle and lower springs have been developed with concrete soaking tubs and showers are present. The upper spring is in an undeveloped natural state. In late 2005, seismic activity disturbed the flow of water to the lower springs. The only functional section remaining after that was the middle springs. However, the flow appears to be returning to the lower springs. As of early 2007, flow is estimated to be about 50% of what it was before the earthquake, and is increasing, making both springs functional.

Low-flying jet aircraft have long been common in the valley. The airspace over the valley is part of the US military's vast R-2508 Special Use Airspace complex. The Saline Military operations area (MOA) covers the entire valley south to Hunter Mountain from 200' AGL up to FL180 with an ATCAA located over the same area extending from FL180 up to FL600. The airspace is used by military aircraft primarily from Nellis AFB, Edwards AFB, NAWS China Lake, and NAS Lemoore for high and low altitude mission training. Military aircraft utilize radio communications on either 256.8 MHz or 123.95 MHz while operating in the Saline MOA; however, military aircraft throughout the R-2508 complex often use 315.9 MHz when conducting low altitude operations below 1500' AGL.

In December 2003, Edwards Air Force Base completed an environmental assessment for proposed construction and operation of a radar system and microwave repeater facility in the valley. The assessment's conclusion is that:

The Deadly Years

"The Deadly Years" is the twelfth episode of the of the American science fiction television series "". Written by David P. Harmon and directed by Joseph Pevney, it was first broadcast December 8, 1967.

In the episode, strange radiation causes members of the crew of the "Enterprise" to age rapidly.

The USS "Enterprise" is ferrying a senior officer, Commodore Stocker, to Starbase 10 where he is due to assume command. On the way, the ship makes a stop at planet Gamma Hydra IV to resupply the research station there. A landing party consisting of Captain Kirk, First Officer Spock, Chief Medical Officer Dr. McCoy, Chief Engineer Scott, navigator Ensign Chekov, and Lieutenant Arlene Galway beam down to the facility. The station seems completely deserted, until Ensign Chekov discovers the body of a man who apparently has died of old age, and panics. Robert Johnson, a member of the station crew, appears with his wife Elaine. Both claim to be in their late 20s, yet appear 50 years older. The two soon die in the "Enterprise" sickbay.

Mr. Spock and civilian scientist Dr. Janet Wallace begin an investigation. Their only clue is a comet that passed Gamma Hydra IV recently. Soon the landing party, with the exception of Chekov, begin to age rapidly as well. Lt. Galway ages most rapidly and soon dies. By now they have learned that the comet gave off low-level radiation that most likely caused the aging effect.

As Kirk continues to age, he becomes increasingly forgetful, including ordering the use of an obsolete code despite having recently been told the code had been broken by the Romulans. This leads Commodore Stocker to order Spock to convene a hearing, in which Kirk is found unfit to command. With Spock also afflicted, Stocker assumes command, and orders a direct course to Starbase 10, ignoring warnings that this will take the ship through the Romulan neutral zone.

Meanwhile, Kirk, McCoy, and Spock discuss Chekov's immunity to the affliction. Remembering Chekov's fright at the discovery of the dead body, McCoy surmises that Chekov's increased adrenaline levels may have had some effect, and recalls that adrenaline had once shown promise as a treatment for radiation sickness. Mr. Spock and Dr. Wallace, assisted by Nurse Chapel, begin work on an adrenaline-based compound to test on the landing party.

As "Enterprise" enters the neutral zone, Romulan vessels attack, ignoring all attempts at contact. Stocker, having no field command experience and paralyzed with indecision, considers surrendering, but is reminded that Romulans do not take prisoners. In sickbay, Spock announces that the drug is ready, warning that it may kill as well as cure. Kirk insists on taking the first injection. The drug reverses the aging effect, and Kirk races to the bridge to relieve Stocker.

Kirk bluffs the Romulans by sending a message to Starfleet Command, deliberately using the broken code, warning that "Enterprise" will self-destruct using the "corbomite device", which will also destroy any nearby ships. The Romulans move to a safe distance, giving "Enterprise" room to make a surprise escape.

DeForest Kelley (Dr. McCoy) said of the make-up used in this episode, "I only worked half days on that show because I was in makeup the other half. I'd sit in the chair for a while, then I'd take a break, go to the john, come back and they'd work some more. It was a tremendous makeup effort. There were three makeup men working on me all the time, on my hands and on my face. Leonard [Nimoy] was lucky on that show. He was blessed by the fact that Vulcans don't age as fast as humans."

Critic Darren Mooney notes that the aging in the episode focuses on the negative, physical process, and none of the grace and enjoyment of life's accomplishments. Part of this focus on the physical aspects of aging came from associate producer Robert Justman's notes to producer Gene Coon where he details the steps of Kirk's aging.

Zack Handlen of " The A.V. Club" gave the episode a "B−" rating, noting the focus on the physical aspects of aging, saying, "Nobody learns a valuable lesson about how getting old is just a natural part of life."

An episode of the "" series, created by fans of the series, called "To Serve All My Days" is a sequel to this episode. The screenplay was written by D. C. Fontana and stars Walter Koenig as a rapidly aging Chekov.


Helena Brewers

The Helena Brewers were a Minor League Baseball team in the Pioneer League located in Helena, Montana, from 1978 to 2018. The team played their home games at Kindrick Legion Field, which was built in 1939. They were affiliated with the Milwaukee Brewers (1985–2000, 2003–2018) and Philadelphia Phillies (1978–1983).

Among the best-known players to play in Helena are Hall of Famer Ryne Sandberg, who started his career with the Phillies in Helena, Gary Sheffield, who started his career with the Helena Gold Sox in 1986, Jeff Cirillo and Mark Loretta who began their careers with the 1991 and 1993 Helena Brewers, respectively; and Milwaukee Brewers outfielder Ryan Braun.

The Helena Phillies joined the Pioneer League in 1978, giving Helena a professional baseball team for the first time in 64 years. In 1984, the Helena Gold Sox won the Pioneer League Championship, a rarity for an independent club. The team hooked on with the Milwaukee Brewers in 1985 and changed its name to the Helena Brewers in 1987. Helena won the league championship in back-to-back seasons in 1995 and 1996. The franchise moved to Provo, Utah, as the Provo Angels after the 2000 season. In 2003, the Medicine Hat Blue Jays moved to Helena, and the team once again became a Brewers affiliate. 

The franchise left Helena for Colorado Springs, Colorado, after the 2018 season, where it would play as the Rocky Mountain Vibes.

The following is a list of Helena players by year that later played in Major League Baseball:


Béon

Béon is the name of several communes in France:


Crown Heights riot

The Crown Heights riot was a race riot that took place from August 19 to August 21, 1991, in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn, New York City. Black residents attacked Orthodox Jewish residents, damaged their homes, and looted businesses. The riots began on August 19, 1991, after two children of Guyanese immigrants were unintentionally struck by a driver running a red light while following the motorcade of Rebbe Menachem Mendel Schneerson, the leader of Chabad, a Jewish religious movement. One child died and the second was severely injured.

In the immediate aftermath of the fatal crash, black youths attacked several Jews on the street, seriously injuring several and fatally injuring an Orthodox Jewish student from Australia. Over the next three days, black rioters looted stores and attacked Jewish homes. Two weeks after the riot, a non-Jewish man was killed by a group of black men; some believed that the victim had been mistaken for a Jew. The riots were a major issue in the 1993 mayoral race, contributing to the defeat of Mayor David Dinkins, an African American. Opponents of Dinkins said that he failed to contain the riots, with many calling them a 'pogrom' to emphasize what was seen as the complicity of New York City political leaders.

Ultimately, black and Jewish leaders developed an outreach program between their communities to help calm and possibly improve racial relations in Crown Heights over the next decade.

At approximately 8:20 p.m. on Monday, August 19, 1991, Yosef Lifsh, 22, was driving a station wagon with three passengers west on President Street, part of the three-car motorcade of Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson, leader of the Chabad Lubavitch Hasidic movement. The procession was led by an unmarked police car with two officers, with its rooftop light flashing.

The police car and Schneerson's automobile crossed Utica Avenue on a green light and proceeded along President Street at a normal speed, but Lifsh's vehicle had fallen behind. Not wishing to lose sight of Schneerson's car, Lifsh crossed Utica Avenue on a red light. There was no indication of the exact speed of his vehicle. Lifsh's vehicle struck a car being driven on Utica Avenue, veered onto the sidewalk, knocked a 600-pound (275 kg) stone building pillar down and pinned two children against an iron grate covering the window of a first-floor apartment in a four-story brick building (). Seven-year-old Gavin Cato, the son of Guyanese immigrants, who was working on his bicycle chain while on the sidewalk near his apartment on President Street, died instantly. His seven-year-old cousin Angela Cato, who was playing nearby, survived but was severely injured.

Lifsh believed he had the right of way to proceed through the intersection because of the police escort. Lifsh said he deliberately steered his car away from adults on the sidewalk, toward the wall, a distance of about , in order to stop the car. Lifsh later said that the car did not come to a full stop when it hit the building but slid to the left along the wall and hit the children.

Accounts differ as to the next sequence of events. After the collision, Lifsh said that the first thing he did was to try to lift the car in order to free the two children beneath it. Members of the Hatzolah EMS unit, who arrived on the scene about three minutes after the crash, said that Lifsh was being beaten and pulled out of the station wagon by three or four men. A volunteer ambulance from the Hatzolah ambulance corps arrived on the scene at about 8:23 pm, followed by police and a City ambulance. The latter took Gavin Cato to Kings County Hospital, arriving at 8:32 pm; Cato was pronounced dead shortly thereafter. Volunteers from a second Hatzolah ambulance helped Angela Cato, until a second City ambulance arrived and took her to the same hospital.

Two attending police officers, as well as a technician from the City ambulance, directed the Hatzolah driver to remove Lifsh from the scene for his safety, while Gavin Cato was being removed from beneath the station wagon. According to "The New York Times", more than 250 neighborhood residents, mostly black teenagers, many of whom were shouting "Jews! Jews! Jews!", jeered the driver of the car and turned their anger on the police.

Some members of the community were outraged because Lifsh was taken from the scene by a private ambulance service while city emergency workers were still trying to free the children who were pinned under the car. Some believed that Gavin Cato died because the Hatzolah ambulance crew was unwilling to help non-Jews. There was a rumor at the time that Lifsh was intoxicated. A breath alcohol test administered by police within 70 minutes of the crash indicated this was not the case. 

Later that evening, as the crowds and rumors grew, people threw bottles and rocks. Someone reportedly shouted, "Let's go to Kingston Avenue and get a Jew!" A number of black youths set off westward toward Kingston Avenue ( away from Utica Avenue), a street of predominantly Jewish residents several blocks away, vandalizing cars, and throwing rocks and bottles as they went.

About three hours after the riots began, early on the morning of August 20, a group of approximately 20 young black men, with the incitement of Charles Price, who chanted "Let's go get a Jew," surrounded Yankel Rosenbaum, a 29-year-old Jewish University of Melbourne student in the United States conducting research for his doctorate. They stabbed him several times in the back and beat him severely, fracturing his skull. Before being taken to the hospital, Rosenbaum identified 16-year-old Lemrick Nelson Jr. as his assailant in a line-up shown to him by the police. Rosenbaum died later that night because the doctor did not notice a stab wound in his chest. Nelson was charged with murder as an adult; he was acquitted at trial.

Following that trial, Australian attorney Norman Rosenbaum became an advocate for his late brother, inspiring protests that included a shutdown of the Brooklyn Bridge and a demonstration at Gracie Mansion, the mayor's official residence.

In 1997, Nelson and Price were both convicted in federal court of violating Rosenbaum's civil rights resulting in his death. After the judge ruled that the two men had committed second degree murder, Nelson was sentenced to nearly 20 years in prison, while Price was sentenced to nearly 22 years in prison. However, that verdict was vacated on appeal due to unfairness in the jury selection process. A retrial was held in 2003. There were two primary issues of contention: whether Nelson's actions had been motivated by prejudice and whether Nelson's actions caused Rosenbaum's death.

Nelson later was convicted in federal court of violating Rosenbaum's civil rights. He eventually admitted that he had stabbed Rosenbaum but was acquitted of having caused Rosenbaum's death. Nelson received the statutory maximum of 10 years in prison. In 2002, Charles Price pleaded guilty to civil rights violations resulting in Rosenbaum's death. He was sentenced to 11 years and six months in prison.

For three days following the crash, numerous African Americans and Caribbean Americans of the neighborhood, joined by growing numbers of non-residents, rioted in Crown Heights. In the rioting of the ensuing three days, according to Edward Shapiro, many of the rioters "did not even live in Crown Heights."

During the riots, Jews were injured, stores were looted, and cars and homes were damaged. The rioters identified Jewish homes by the mezuzot affixed to the front doors.

An additional 350 police officers were added to the regular duty roster on August 20 and were assigned to Crown Heights in an attempt to quell the rioting. After episodes of rock- and bottle-throwing involving hundreds of blacks and Jews, and after groups of blacks marched through Crown Heights chanting "No Justice, No Peace!", "Death to the Jews!", and "Whose streets? Our streets!", an additional 1,200 police officers were sent to confront rioters in Crown Heights.

On the third day of the disturbances, Al Sharpton and Sonny Carson led a march. The marchers proceeded through Crown Heights carrying antisemitic signs and burning an Israeli flag. Rioters threw bricks and bottles at police; shots were fired at police and police cars were pelted and overturned, including the Police Commissioner's car.

Riots escalated to the extent that a detachment of 200 police officers was overwhelmed and had to retreat for their safety. On August 22, over 1,800 police officers, including mounted and motorcycle units, had been dispatched to stop the attacks on people and property.

By the time the three days of rioting ended, 152 police officers and 38 civilians were injured, 27 vehicles were destroyed, seven stores were looted or burned, and 225 cases of robbery and burglary were committed. At least 129 arrests were made during the riots, including 122 blacks and seven whites. Property damage was estimated at one million dollars.

On September 5, two weeks after the riot had been controlled, Anthony Graziosi, an Italian sales representative with a white beard dressed in dark business attire, was driving in the neighborhood. As he stopped at a traffic light at 11 pm, six blocks away from where Yankel Rosenbaum had been murdered, a group of four black men surrounded his car and one of them shot and killed him. It was alleged by Graziosi's family and their attorney, as well as Senator Al D'Amato, Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, State Attorney General Robert Abrams, former Mayor Ed Koch, and a number of advocacy organizations, that Graziosi's resemblance to a Hasidic Jew precipitated his murder. The New York Police Department, Mayor Dinkins, newspaper columnist Mike McAlary, and the U.S. Justice Department did not agree. The murder was not treated as a hate crime.

After the death of Gavin Cato, members of the black community believed that the decision to remove Lifsh from the scene first was racially motivated. They also said that this was one example of a perceived system of preferential treatment afforded to Jews in Crown Heights, and referred to the riot as an 'uprising'. (Some Jews referred to the riot as a 'pogrom'; see ). The preferential treatment was reported to include biased actions by law enforcement and uneven allocations of government resources, amongst others. Many members of the black community were concerned that the number of Jews in the community had increased and that they were buying all of the property in the crowded area.

An interview with Shmuel Butman, published in 1991, mentions a police directive to Hatzolah to transport Lifsh, along with Jews already injured by rioters, without transporting either of the Cato children. "We did exactly what the police officers wisely advised us." Based on protesters' statements and actions during the rioting, Butman said, "We were always hoping that after World War II no Jew would ever be killed just for being Jewish, but this is what happened in the city of New York." In his eulogy at the funeral, the Rev. Al Sharpton referred to "diamond merchants" and said, "It's an accident to allow an apartheid ambulance service in the middle of Crown Heights."

A writer for "City Journal" criticized the news media for downplaying the role of antisemitism in the riots, noting various antisemitic displays, such as a banner displayed at the funeral of Cato that said, "Hitler did not do the job". Edward S. Shapiro, a historian at Seton Hall University, later described the riot as "the most serious anti-Semitic incident in American history" and published a book about it in 2006. He notes that there are many interpretations of what happened:

A grand jury composed of 10 black, 8 white, and 5 Hispanic jurors found no cause to indict Lifsh. Brooklyn District Attorney Charles J. Hynes explained that under New York law, the single act of "losing control of a car" is not criminal negligence, even if death or injury resulted. Lifsh waived immunity and testified before the grand jury. About an hour after hearing Lifsh's testimony, the grand jury voted not to indict him. Subsequently, Lifsh moved to Israel, where his family lives, because he claimed his life was threatened. In Israel, Lifsh settled in the Lubavitch village of Kfar Chabad.

Afterwards, Hynes fought unsuccessfully for the public release of the testimony that the grand jury had heard. His lawsuit was dismissed, and the judge noted that more than three-quarters of the witnesses who had been contacted refused to waive their right to privacy. The judge also expressed concern for the witnesses' safety.

The Crown Heights riot contributed to the defeat of David Dinkins in his second mayoral bid. He was attacked by many political adversaries in his reelection bid, including vocal proponents of "Black nationalism, back-to-Africa, economic radicalism, and racial exclusiveness."

On November 17, 1992, New York Governor Mario Cuomo gave the Director of Criminal Justice Services, Richard H. Girgenti, the authority to investigate the rioting and the Nelson trial. The "Girgenti Report" was compiled by over 40 lawyers and investigators. The 656-page document, dated July 1993, is available through a website of the Washington, DC-based Police Foundation, which prefaces the report with a disclaimer that the "review does not seek to put blame on any entity for what happened..."

The report was extremely critical of Police Commissioner Lee Brown. The report also criticized Mayor Dinkins for poor handling of the riots. However, the report found no evidence to support the most severe charge against Dinkins and Brown: that they had purposely delayed the police response in order to allow rioters to "vent" their rage.

The first night of the riot, Dinkins, along with Police Commissioner Brown, both African Americans, went to Crown Heights to talk to the community to dispel the rumors about the circumstances surrounding the crash. They had no appreciable influence on the rioters, most of whom were young black men.

In a 16-minute speech on the Thanksgiving holiday following the riot, Dinkins rebutted allegations that he had prevented police from protecting citizens in Crown Heights. The Jewish community believed Dinkins failed to contain the riot and failed to exercise his responsibility, to their detriment.

The Crown Heights riot was an important issue that was raised repeatedly on the campaign trail in the 1993 mayoral election. According to Edward S. Shapiro, politicians opposed to Mayor Dinkins used the word 'pogrom' to characterize the riot in order to discredit the mayor's response to the riot, writing "the controversy over how to define the Crown Heights riot was not merely an issue of semantics."

Rudy Giuliani, who would be elected as the next mayor of New York, referred to the Crown Heights riot as a 'pogrom' on July 1, 1993, in a speech at Bay Ridge, Brooklyn: "You can use whatever word you want, but in fact for three days people were beaten up, people were sent to the hospital because they were Jewish. There's no question that not enough was done about it by the city of New York. One definition of pogrom is violence where the state doesn't do enough to prevent it." Other political opponents to Dinkins used the term, including Ed Koch, who had been defeated by Dinkins in the 1989 Democratic mayoralty primary, and Andrew Stein, a candidate in the 1993 Democratic mayoral primary. The term had been used previously in 1991 by journalists such as A. M. Rosenthal in "The New York Times" and Eric Breindel in the "New York Post", and politicians such as New York City Councilman Noach Dear and later by Judah Gribetz, president of the JCRC of New York. By September 1991, it had become routine within Jewish circles to describe the riot as a pogrom. Some Jews continued to use this term for the riot a decade later, as shown by articles in publications such as "Jewish Week", "The Jerusalem Post", "The Forward" and "The Jewish Press"; others went further and called it "America's Kristallnacht".

Use of the word was rejected by Dinkins and his supporters, primarily on the basis that a pogrom by definition is state sponsored. Dinkins said, "To suggest that this is [a pogrom] is not to contribute to the resolution of the problem but to exacerbate tensions and problems that are there." Dinkins was personally offended by the use of "pogrom" since it insinuated that the riot was state-sanctioned and that he personally was an antisemite. "I am incensed by it... [it is] patently untrue and unfair."

Michael Stanislawski, Professor of Jewish History at Columbia University, wrote in 1992 that it was "historically inaccurate" to couple "pogrom" with Crown Heights, because the word denoted organized violence against Jews "having some sort of governmental involvement." Journalists also disagreed with the use of the term, including Joyce Purnick in "The New York Times", Earl Caldwell in the "New York Daily News", and an article in "The City Sun". Rev. Al Sharpton said that Giuliani was engaged in "race-baiting" by using the word "pogrom." Henry Siegman and Marc D. Stern of the American Jewish Congress also publicly rejected use of the term to refer to the riot.

In 2011, shortly before the twentieth anniversary of the riots, an editorial in "The Jewish Week" wrote: "A divisive debate over the meaning of pogrom, lasting for more than two years, could have easily been ended if the mayor simply said to the victims of Crown Heights, yes, I understand why you experienced it as a pogrom."

Prior to the riots, Eastern Parkway divided the black community in northern Crown Heights and the Jewish community in southern Crown Heights. Efforts aimed at the improvement of the relations between black people and Jews in Crown Heights began almost immediately following the rioting. Brooklyn Borough President Howard Golden summoned the leaders of each of the ethnic communities to Borough Hall within days after the riots ended, creating what became known as the Crown Heights Coalition. The Coalition, led by Edison O. Jackson, then President of Medgar Evers College, and Rabbi Shea Hecht, chairman of the Board of the National Committee for Furtherance of Jewish Education (NCFJE), operated for ten years as an inter-group forum in which to air neighborhood concerns and work out issues. Golden used the Coalition to initiate interracial projects designed to promote dialogue. One project involved sending a Jewish leader and a black leader together in a pair to public intermediate and high schools in the area to answer questions from the children about each other's cultures.

A week after the riots, Hatzolah helped repair an ambulance of a black-owned volunteer service. The following year, the Brooklyn Children's Museum held an exhibit on the contributions made by black people and Jews in New York. In 1993, the Rev. Jesse Jackson was active in promoting improved black-Jewish relations. In 1993, a series of neighborhood basketball games were scheduled between the two groups, including a scrimmage held as part of the halftime entertainment of a New York Knicks vs. Philadelphia 76ers professional basketball game. Also that year, Rabbi Israel Shemtov, whose anti-crime patrol had long been perceived by many black residents as biased against them, rushed to the aid of a black woman who had been shot on the street in Crown Heights, putting her in his car and taking her to the hospital. The Crown Heights Mediation Center was established in 1998 to help resolve local differences, also a direct outcome of the Coalition.

On August 19, 2001, a street fair was held in memory of Cato and Rosenbaum, and their relatives met and exchanged mementos in hopes of healing in Crown Heights. Again in 2016, family members Carmel Cato and Norman Rosenbaum planned to meet together to commemorate their loss.

Twenty years after the riot, a Manhattan synagogue invited Sharpton to participate in a panel discussion marking the anniversary. Norman Rosenbaum, brother of the murdered Yankel Rosenbaum, was outraged, saying inviting Sharpton to speak was "an absolute disgrace" and that his "vile rhetoric incited the rioting." He added that Sharpton "did absolutely nothing then to improve black-Jewish relations — and nothing since." Sharpton expressed regret for some aspects of his involvement. He insisted that his marches were peaceful, although his language and tone "sometimes exacerbated tensions."

In a 2019 speech to a Reform Jewish gathering, Sharpton said that he could have "done more to heal rather than harm". He recalled receiving a call from Coretta Scott King at the time, during which she told him "sometimes you are tempted to speak to the applause of the crowd rather than the heights of the cause, and you will say cheap things to get cheap applause rather than do high things to raise the nation higher".

In his 2006 book on the riot, Edward Shapiro wrote that the demographic trends of Crown Heights remained largely the same as in 1991. Jews did not flee from Crown Heights, and the Lubavitch population of Crown Heights increased after the riot, leading to an expansion of the area in which they reside.



Heartbreaker

Heartbreaker(s) or The Heart Breaker(s) may refer to:








William Jervois

Lieutenant General Sir William Francis Drummond Jervois (10 September 1821 – 17 August 1897) was a British military engineer and diplomat. After joining the British Army in 1839, he saw service, as a second captain, in South Africa. In 1858, as a major, he was appointed Secretary of a Royal Commission set up to examine the state and efficiency of British land-based fortifications against naval attack; and this led to further work in Canada and South Australia. From 1875 to 1888 he was, consecutively, Governor of the Straits Settlements, Governor of South Australia and Governor of New Zealand.

Born on 10 September 1821 in Cowes in the Isle of Wight, Jervois was the son of General William Jervois (pronounced "Jarvis"), and his wife Elizabeth Jervois (née Maitland). From a military family of Huguenot descent, he was educated at Dr. Burney's Academy, Gosport, before entering the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich.

Upon graduating from Woolwich, Jervois was commissioned as a second lieutenant in the Royal Engineers in March 1839. From then until 1841, Jervois was trained at the School of Military Engineering at Chatham. In 1842, having been promoted to lieutenant the year before, Jervois was sent to South Africa where he served as a brigade major. As a second captain he saw service in the 7th Xhosa War, 1846–1847 during which he drew military sketches of British Kaffraria (now part of the Eastern Cape Province) in South Africa.

Returning to Britain in 1848, he commanded a company of Sappers and Miners at Woolwich and then in June 1849 was ordered to Alderney with instructions to manage the construction of substantial fortifications. Following a visit by Queen Victoria and Prince Albert to inspect the progress of the fortifications in 1854, he was promoted to the rank of major. Having been refused permission to go to the Crimea he returned to London in January 1855, he became the Commanding Royal Engineer (Major) for the London District and Assistant Inspector-General of Fortifications in April the following year. Jervois became Secretary of a Royal Commission set up on 20 August 1859 to examine the state and efficiency of British land-based fortifications against naval attack. It was specifically tasked to consider Portsmouth, Spithead, the Isle of Wight, Plymouth, Portland, Pembroke Dock, Dover, Chatham and the Medway. The commission's report was published on 7 February 1860. Amongst other things, it proposed several options for a ring of defences around London, none of which were adopted, although elements were used in the later London Defence Scheme. Jervois went on to oversee the design of the resulting fortifications that became known as the Palmerston Forts.

Promotion to lieutenant colonel came in 1861, and in 1864 and 1865, he was sent to Canada to review its fortifications and at the conclusion of his inspection he submitted what became a politically controversial report that stated that the Great Lakes and Upper Canada were not defensible. He then lectured about iron fortifications, and inspected and provided advice regarding the defences of various British colonies including Gibraltar and the Andaman Islands. He was promoted to colonel in 1867. In 1871 he was sent to India; and then worked on the defences of Cork harbour, which were completed in 1874.

Following the withdrawal of British garrison troops from Australia in 1870, Jervois and Lieutenant Colonel Peter Scratchley were commissioned by a group of colonies to advise on defence matters. They inspected each colony's defences and produced the Jervois-Scratchley reports of 1877 and 1878. These emphasised the importance of shore-based fortifications to defend against naval attack and also led to the establishment of local infantry and artillery units. In the 1880s many of the reports' recommendations were implemented by the various colonial governments and they went on to form the basis of defence planning in Australia and New Zealand until Federation. Jervois was raised to the rank of major general in 1877; he received a final promotion to lieutenant general in 1882.

In April 1875, Jervois was appointed the Governor of the Straits Settlements, a British dependency which included Penang, Malacca and Singapore. He took office in Singapore on 8 May 1875, and served until 3 April 1877. Decisions he made during his tenure cemented Britain's foothold on the Malay peninsula; he was instrumental in the formation of a local militia and the quelling of a Malay uprising. Although distrustful of Malays, he was sympathetic to the Chinese and would later bolster public support for oriental immigration during his time as Governor of South Australia.

During an 1877 inspection of Australian maritime defences, Jervois was appointed Governor of South Australia. He was given notice of his "promotion" while in Melbourne in June, although the true reason for his reassignment was that the Colonial Office disliked his interference on the Malay mainland. Jervois arrived in South Australia on HMS "Sapphire" on 2 October 1877.

Jervois arrived in the colony during a time of political crisis. Later in October, the Colton Ministry resigned over a disagreement with the Legislative Council about the new Parliamentary buildings. Jervois resisted the pressure to dissolve parliament, and James Boucaut became Premier. Jervois' term also coincided with unusually good rainfall and a massive agricultural expansion. He laid the foundation stones of the University of Adelaide, the Institute and the Art Gallery, and commissioned a new vice-regal summer residence at Marble Hill.

Jervois then served as Governor of New Zealand from 1883 to 1888. In this role, Jervois provided advice on harbour defence, guided the colonial government on Imperial matters, was active in the country's social life, and worked to promote equality. He officiated at the opening of Auckland University College in 1883, declaring that it would be accessible to all New Zealanders, and recognised the service of nurses in the Zululand conflict, awarding a Royal Red Cross to a New Zealand woman for the first time. He also engaged with the Maori leadership. He also served as president of the New Zealand Institute and patronised many sporting institutions, including the New Zealand Amateur Rowing Association.

At the conclusion of his term as governor-general in New Zealand, Jervois returned to England in 1889. The following year, he was appointed to serve on the Stanhope Commission, which again reviewed the state of Britain's fortifications. He returned to New Zealand briefly in 1892, before being appointed the colonel commandant of the Royal Engineers the following year.

His wife, Lucy, with whom he had had three daughters and two sons since their marriage in 1850, died in 1895. Jervois died on 17 August 1897, at the age of 75, as a result of injuries sustained in a carriage accident, and was buried at Virginia Water, Surrey.

Jervois received numerous honours for his military and diplomatic service. He was invested Companion of the Order of the Bath in 1863, Knight Commander of the Order of St Michael and St George in 1874, and Knight Grand Cross of the Order of St Michael and St George in 1888. He was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society in 1888. Several streets were also named after him, including: Jervois Quay in Wellington, and Jervois Close and Jervois Road in Singapore. In Australia, a bridge in Adelaide, a mine and Jervois, a locality on the Murray River in South Australia were named for him.



Bey (disambiguation)

Bey is an Ottoman and Turkish term for a tribal chieftain and Islamic official; the leader of a "beylik".

Bey or BEY may also refer to:





Law School Admission Council

The Law School Admission Council (LSAC) is a nonprofit organization whose members include more than 200 law schools throughout the United States, Canada and Australia. Its headquarters are in Newtown, Pennsylvania (about 15 miles north of Philadelphia).

The Law School Admission Council (LSAC) is a nonprofit corporation that provides products and services to facilitate the admission process for law schools and their applicants worldwide. More than 200 law schools in the United States, Canada, and Australia are members of the Council. All law schools approved by the American Bar Association are LSAC members, as are Canadian law schools recognized by a provincial or territorial law society or government agency. Many nonmember law schools also use LSAC's services.

Founded in 1947, the Council is best known for administering the Law School Admission Test (LSAT®), with over 150,000 tests administered annually at testing centers worldwide. In the face of pushback from members of the Law School Admission Council, some schools have begun rolling out the GRE as a testing alternative to the LSAT. LSAC processes academic credentials for an average of 85,000 law school applicants annually, provides essential software and information for admission offices and applicants, conducts educational conferences for law school professionals and prelaw advisors, sponsors and publishes research, funds diversity and other outreach grant programs, and publishes LSAT preparation books and websites and law school guides, among many other services.



United Labour Party (New Zealand)

The United Labour Party (ULP) of New Zealand was an early centre-left to left-wing political party. Founded in 1912, it represented the more moderate wing of the labour movement. In 1916 it joined with other political groups to establish the modern Labour Party.

The United Labour Party has its origins in the first Labour Party, a distinct organisation from the modern one. The first Labour Party had been established in 1910 after the perceived failure of its predecessor, the Independent Political Labour League. The Labour Party represented the moderate wing of the labour movement, with the Socialist Party representing the more radical faction.

By 1912 there was growing recognition that the division of the labour movement was costing votes, and a "unity conference" was called. The Socialists and the associated Federation of Labour (the "Red Feds") refused to attend, however, saying that they would continue to advocate their more hard-line positions. As such, the Unity Conference consisted only of the Labour Party, various moderate trade unions, and independent labour candidates.

At the conclusion of the conference, it was agreed that the Labour Party, the moderate unions, and a number of independents would together form a new party. The new group was called the United Labour Party. The outcome of the conference was slightly disappointing for its organisers, as it had been hoped that the Socialists would join, but hopes for the new party were nevertheless high.

Later the same year, the Waihi miners' strike occurred. The labour movement was split, with hard-liners praising the strikers and moderates condemning the action as dangerous and misguided. The United Labour Party took the latter path, believing that cautious negotiation was more effective than militant action. The strike was eventually suppressed by the government of William Massey, with one miner being killed.

The strike created much disunity in the labour movement, and many believed that active measures were necessary to bring the movement closer together. As such, another "Unity Conference" was called in 1913. This time, the Socialist Party was willing to attend. After extensive negotiations, it was decided that the labour movement should speak with a single voice, and that the United Labour Party and the Socialist Party should merge. The new party would be called the Social Democratic Party. The union elements of the United Labour Party would be merged with the Socialist-affiliated Federation of Labour to produce the new United Federation of Labour.

Some members of the United Labour Party did not accept the decision to merge, however. Of particular concern to them was a clause in the Social Democratic Party's charter that obliged it to support strikes in certain circumstances. These members decided to remain outside the Social Democrats, and continued to use the United Labour label. They became unofficially known as the United Labour Party Remnant. The Remnant officially repudiated the more Marxist tendencies that the Social Democrats had inherited from the Socialist Party, and promoted arbitration as a better alternative to strike action. The Remnant considered itself to be vindicated when, later in the year, the Social Democrats were thrown into disarray by a heavy-handed government response to dockworkers' and miners' strikes. In the 1914 elections, the United Labour Party Remnant won three seats in Parliament, with the victorious candidates being Alfred Hindmarsh, Bill Veitch, and Andrew Walker while the Social Democrats won two seats, and a labour-aligned independent John Payne won another seat.

Despite the differences between the United Labour Party Remnant and the Social Democrat Party, the two worked together in Parliament after the 1914 election. Alfred Hindmarsh of the United Labour Party served as the leader of the six labour-aligned MPs. Gradually, this increased co-operation caused the ULP Remnant and the SDP to conclude that full unification was not impossible, and in 1916, the two finally came together (along with various independents) to form the Labour Party, which still survives today.



.nf

.nf is the Internet country code top-level domain (ccTLD) for Norfolk Island. While there is no rule requiring a local presence to register domains in this TLD, the pricing is significantly higher than most other domains, which has discouraged its use. Although registrations at the second level are the most expensive, they are still more common than third-level registrations, and most names in use are for sites relating to Norfolk Island.

.nf is a member of CoCCA, a group of country-code domains making use of common registry and/or dispute resolution services.

These second-level domains are available for third-level registrations, with no restriction on who can register them. .com.nf and .net.nf parallel the .com and .net TLDs, while some of the others appear to be based on proposed new TLDs from the late 1990s which were never implemented (other than the eventual use of .info and com.nf).


Norfolk Island Data Services has also reserved:


A .co.nf second-level domain exists which is commonly misinterpreted as the real commercial second-level domain for the island. The domain is run by a web-hosting provider called biz.nf.

As of 2 September 2019, .co.nf was unavailable and a notice was posted on the control panel of the website hosting stating that the registry has suspended the domain, and replaced it with the .c1.biz subdomain.

Les Darcy

James Leslie Darcy (28 October 189524 May 1917) was an Australian boxer. He was a middleweight, but held the Australian Heavyweight Championship title at the same time.

Les Darcy was the 2003 Inductee for the Australian National Boxing Hall of Fame Old Timers category and was the first to be elevated to Legend status in 2009.

Les Darcy was born near Maitland, New South Wales. He started boxing as an amateur at age fifteen and quickly turned professional. He won his first sixteen fights before challenging the veteran Bob Whitelaw for the Australian welterweight title. Darcy lost the twenty-round decision but, in a rematch, knocked Whitelaw out in five rounds.

Darcy graduated from regional bouts to fighting in Sydney Stadium, in Rushcutters Bay, and promoters began to import talent to challenge him. He lost his first two fights in Sydney, one by decision and one by foul, to America's Fritz Holland.
The next year Darcy faced another American, Jeff Smith, in what was considered a contest for the Australian world middleweight title. When Darcy complained of a low blow at the end of the fifth round, the referee believed that Darcy did not want to continue and awarded the decision to Smith. In a rematch, Darcy was awarded the victory when Smith punched him in the groin.

As Australian world middleweight champ, Darcy defeated such top-flight visiting Americans as Eddie McGoorty, Billy Murray, Jimmy Clabby, George Chip, George "KO" Brown, and Buck Crouse, as well as knocking out Smith and Holland in rematches. Darcy's opponents are said to have admired his courage, stamina, and punching power. In 1916, Darcy knocked Harold Hardwick out to capture the Australian heavyweight title.
Darcy became embroiled in the politics of conscription during World War I, and left Australia for the United States to avoid the aggravation. He died on 24 May 1917 from septicaemia and medical complications, which was speculated to be from dental work he received to replace teeth that had been knocked out during a bout.

After his death, Darcy's embalmed body was returned to Australia, where an estimated half-million people paid their respects. His brother Frank, also a boxer who showed many of the attributes of his brother, including pluck, died on 9 May 1919 from influenza, and was buried in the Catholic Cemetery, East Maitland.

Darcy was inducted into the International Boxing Hall of Fame in 1993, the World Boxing Hall of Fame in October 1998, and the Australian National Boxing Hall of Fame in 2003.

In 2001, Raffaele Marcellino's opera "The Flight of Les Darcy", with libretto by Robert Jarman, premiered at the "10 Days on the Island" festival in Hobart. The character of Darcy has no singing role but is portrayed by a dancer, and draws on the story that he played the violin to prepare himself for fights.


Pictures held and digitised as part of the Arnold Thomas boxing collection by the National Library of Australia 



<br>Died

Brens

Brens is the name of several communes in France:


Bressolles

Bressolles is the name of several communes in France:


Vicente de Lima

Vicente Lenílson de Lima (born June 4, 1977) is a Brazilian sprinter specializing in the 100 metres, 200 metres, and the 4×100 metres relay.

De Lima represented Brazil at the 2000 Summer Olympics in Sydney. The 37.90 seconds were not enough to beat the 37.61 seconds of the United States, but De Lima, Edson Ribeiro, André da Silva and Claudinei da Silva managed to finish before the Cuban team who timed 38.04 seconds. At the 2003 World Championships he and his teammates won the silver medal at the 4x100 metres relay. At the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing he competed at the 100 metres sprint and placed 3rd in his heat, just 0.06 after Usain Bolt and 0.02 after Daniel Bailey in a time of 10.26 seconds. He qualified for the second round in which he ran slower with 10.31, resulting in a sixth place and elimination for the semi-finals. Together with José Carlos Moreira, Sandro Viana and Bruno de Barros he also competed at the 4x100 metres relay. In their qualification heat they placed fourth behind Trinidad and Tobago, Japan and the Netherlands. Their time of 39.01 was the seventh out of sixteen participating nations in the first round and they qualified for the final. There they sprinted to a time of 38.24 seconds, the fourth time after the Jamaican, Trinidad and Japanese teams.

De Silva would retroactively be awarded the bronze medal for the 4 × 100 metres relay at the 2008 Summer Olympics following the demotion of the Jamaican team in 2017 for Nesta Carter's failed anti-doping test.



Brion

Brion or Brión may refer to:






Cerdon

Cerdon is the name of several communes in France:


It is also a pink sparkling wine from grapes originating in the village of the Ain department. 

Pebco Three

The Pebco Three were three black South African anti-apartheid activists – Sipho Hashe, Champion Galela, and Qaqawuli Godolozi – who were abducted and subsequently murdered in 1985 by members of the South African security police.

After an increase in the cost of living for the Black population in Port Elizabeth – following a 100% rent fee price hike in the late 1970s – the residents of Port Elizabeth decided to organise themselves and form an organisation that would challenge socio-economic injustices that were meted out on Black people including the apartheid regime. On the 10 October 1979, after having officially established the Port Elizabeth Black Civic Organisation (PEBCO), a public meeting was held where it was decided that a protest against the increase in rent, transport, fuel and lighting, township services charges and food costs be held. 

PEBCO's immediate aims and demands were: to fight for equal rights for all people of Port Elizabeth; to fight all discriminatory legislation enacted by the government and local authorities; to seek participation in decision making on all matters affecting the people of South Africa; to fight for the granting of the right to Blacks to buy land under freehold title at any place of their choice; and to resist any attempt, direct or indirect, to deprive Blacks of their South African citizenship. Their fundamental aim included the creation of one municipality for the whole of Port Elizabeth, therefore rejecting the system of community councils and separate municipalities for Blacks and Whites.

The 1980s proved to be a volatile period for activism in Port Elizabeth and as such, leaders of PEBCO were detained for short stints from time to time. In 1980, five of its leaders were detained, including Thozamile Botha, the founding member, who in the previous year – 1979 – was dismissed at the Ford Company in New Brighton for his political involvement and organising workers on site. He soon left the country in May 1980 to join the ANC in exile, leaving his comrade Qaqawuli Godolozi as PEBCO's new president. Five years later, on 8 May 1985, three members – Sipho Hashe, Champion Galela, and Qaqawuli Godolozi – disappeared from the airport in Port Elizabeth, South Africa. This was due to the fact that PEBCO had now affiliated itself with the United Democratic Front (UDF), which was believed by some at the time to be an internal wing of the then-banned African National Congress (ANC). As a result of the three's disappearance, the Consumer Boycott Committee organised a huge consumer boycott which began in July 1985. Although it was strongly suspected that the Security Police had something to do with the three activists' disappearance, nothing was known of their fate until November 1997.

On 11 November, former Security Police Officer Colonel Gideon Nieuwoudt, while applying for amnesty during a Truth and Reconciliation Commission hearing, confessed to participating in the beating, robbery, and murder of the PEBCO Three. According to his testimony, Nieuwoudt lured the three men by having a paid police informant pose as a British embassy official interested in providing a cash donation to PEBCO call Sipho Hashe at his home. The informant convinced Sipho and his two friends to come to the airport to pick up the donation. (Nieuwoudt later refused to name the informant for fear of his safety.) The three men were apprehended by members of the Security Police and taken to an abandoned police station on a farm at Post Chalmers, near Cradock. They were then interrogated, stripped of their possessions, beaten, sedated, and finally strangled. The bodies were burned and the remains were thrown into the nearby Fish River. Eugene de Kock a former head of section C1 at the Vlakplaas farm north of Pretoria where many of these atrocities occurred – in his submission to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission (TRC) about the death of the PEBCO Three – admits to this and writes that in late 1985 there began an altercation between two members of his Vlakplaas team, sergeant Joe Mamasela and warrant officer Gert Beeslaar who had been involved in an operation in Port Elizabeth in which the PEBCO Three were murdered.

Also incriminated in the case were former policemen Johan Martin Van Zyl and Johannes Koole. Van Zyl voluntarily surrendered to police in Port Elizabeth on 11 February 2004. He had been out of the country on murder and three counts of assault to do grievous bodily harm. The trial was set for 12 October but has since been postponed by the defence, pending aTruth and Reconciliation Commission review of the 1989 Motherwell Bombing in which Nieuwoudt was also involved. The TRC refused to grant amnesty to the three perpetrators Van Zyl, Nieuwoudt and Lotz, citing that the three had failed to make full disclosure in the case of the PEBCO Three.



.hm

.hm is the Internet country code top-level domain (ccTLD) of the Heard and McDonald Islands, uninhabited islands in the southern Indian Ocean under the sovereign control of Australia. Although .hm gets a small amount of use, Australia uses the .aq domain (for Antarctica) for its sites related to the islands themselves. As a result, no .hm website is related to the location.

The .hm registry was added in July 1997. Registration services are provided by the HM Domain Registry via registry.hm.

Domain registration is directly at the second level, and is managed by the HM Domain Registry. Any entity can register an .hm domain.


Anglican Diocese of Birmingham

The Diocese of Birmingham is a diocese founded in 1905 in the Church of England's Province of Canterbury, covering the north-west of the traditional county of Warwickshire, the south-east of the traditional county of Staffordshire and the north-east of the traditional county of Worcestershire (now the central section of the West Midlands and small parts of south Staffordshire, north Warwickshire and north Worcestershire) in England.

The see is in the centre of the City of Birmingham, where the seat of the diocese is located at the Cathedral Church of Saint Philip.

The 18th-century parish church of Saint Philip in Birmingham was elevated to cathedral status in 1905 when the see was founded, on 13 January 1905. Previously the area had been part of the Diocese of Worcester.

Besides the diocesan Bishop of Birmingham (Michael Volland) and the Bishop suffragan of Aston (Anne Hollinghurst; which see was created in 1954), there are three retired bishops resident in (or near) the diocese who are licensed to serve as honorary assistant bishops:

Since 1994, alternative episcopal oversight (for parishes in the diocese who reject the ministry of women priests) is provided by the provincial episcopal visitor, the Bishop suffragan of Oswestry (since 2023 Paul Thomas), who is licensed as an honorary assistant bishop of the diocese in order to facilitate his work there.

The former deaneries of Yardley and Bordesley were merged in 2000. Central Birmingham was known as Birmingham City until 1996 and then Birmingham City Centre until 2004.

<nowiki>*</nowiki>including Cathedral

"Last fully updated 8 September 2018."

In December 2018 the diocese was criticised for its use of a Non-disclosure Agreement (NDA) in relation to an abuse case. The survivor described the ten-year process since her first complaint as "haphazard" and claimed she was warned by an unnamed bishop not to talk to the media as it wouldn't be "very godly". The diocese carried out an independent review which delivered damning findings about the handling of her case by the (then) Bishop of Birmingham, David Urquhart, and then forced the survivor to sign the NDA before she was permitted to see the review into her own case. The Archbishop of Canterbury, Justin Welby, had previously questioned the legitimacy of these agreements in March 2018 at the Independent Inquiry into Child Sexual Abuse The Bishop of Buckingham, Alan Wilson, commenting on the scandal said it was the fourth "corrupt and destructive" non-disclosure agreement (NDA) that had come to his attention since September.

He said he was unable to share details of the other cases but that some were "complete shockers". The Diocese of Birmingham said the NDA had been used to ensure that those who read the report did not share information provided by other contributors who wanted to remain anonymous. A Church of England spokesperson stated that guidance would be sent to all dioceses to discourage use of these agreements. The bishop and the diocese apologised to the survivor and her husband.




Agrology

Agrology (from Greek , "agros", "field, tilled land"; and , "-logia") is the branch of soil science dealing with the production of crops. The use of the term is most active in Canada. Use of the term outside Canada is sporadic but significant. The term appears especially well established in Russia and China, with agrologists on university faculty lists and agrology curricula.

Agrology is synonymous with agricultural science when used in Canada, is nearly synonymous with the U.S. term agronomy, and has a meaning related to agricultural soil science when used outside Canada.

The term agrologist was coined by Dr. J. B. Harrington and adopted in 1946 to fill the need in Canada to have a term to denote "provincial agriculturalist". The title of Professional Agrologist is conferred on persons with at least a bachelor's degree in agriculture and who can demonstrate the qualities needed to responsibly teach, practise, or conduct experiments and research in the agricultural sciences. According to the Agricultural Institute of Canada website, an agrologist can also hold a degree in a field related to agriculture, or in some provinces pass rigorous prescribed examinations to attain a professional designation.

Agrology is a regulated profession in all Canadian provinces. Agrology designations are managed by separate governing bodies in each province, with each operating under its own legislation. Agrology refers to agricultural science and agricultural economics when used in Canada; however, the definition is not limited application of science to agriculture. Because of the extensive history of agricultural research into land and water resources, the definition in Canada includes applications science to management and conservation of land and water resources, and habitat. The Registrars of Professional Agrologists across Canada adopted the following definition of Agrology in May 2007: "Agrology is the practice of bioresource sciences to provide knowledge and advice to support the development of the agriculture sector and the health of the society, environment, and economy."

Outside of Canada, the term agrology is synonymous with soil science and is not in common usage in English-speaking countries.

Two national member societies (Canadian, American) of the International Union of Soil Sciences (IUSS) maintain and publish glossaries of scientific terms. Other soil science societies defer to the American glossary. The term agrology is not in use. Edaphology or crop edaphology in combination with soil management would be the preferred approach used by soil scientists to concisely describe soil science as it applies to crop production.

, no dictionary definition of agrology is yet consistent with the Canadian use of the term and dictionary definitions fall into one of four categories.

The root agr- can't be represented as meaning soil. 

Soil from Latin sŏlum ("soli", genitive) means "agricultural land" like "humus i.e." on the floor.

Agr- from Latin ăger ("agri", genitive) means "agricultural property" like "praedium e.g." the land of lord X. 

Anyway, the root agr/ăger comes through the Ancient Greek "georgike" (γεωργική) - the "Georgics" is a poem by Latin poet Virgil - from the Egyptian hieroglyph 𓍅 "GRG" and/or "GR" (U17 U+13345 Gardiner) meaning "to have, hold, possess" probably to initially change streams and irrigate the fields. 

Nevertheless, considering some Ancient Greek terms as Edaphology (from edafos, ἔδαφος), Pedology (from pedon, πέδον) some people believe the word georgeo (γεωργέω) means "who takes care of earth" because of ὠρεύω.






Sydney FC

Sydney Football Club is an Australian professional soccer club based in Sydney, New South Wales. It competes in the country's premier men's competition, A-League Men, under licence from Australian Professional Leagues (APL). The club was founded in 2004 and entered the A-League as one of the eight original teams for the inaugural 2005–06 season. 

Sydney FC is the most supported and the most successful professional soccer club in Australia. The Sky Blues have won five A-League Men Championships, four A-League Men Premierships, two Australia Cup titles and one OFC Champions League title. The club has also appeared in the AFC Champions League on seven occasions, making the Round of 16 in 2016. The club experienced its most successful period from 2016 to 2020, when Graham Arnold and Steve Corica led the club to a combined three Championships and three Premierships, as well as an Australia Cup.

Before the 2018–19 season, the club's home ground was Allianz Stadium in Moore Park. When the NSW Government announced that the stadium would be redeveloped in the lead up to the 2019 New South Wales state election, Sydney FC played its home matches at the neighbouring Sydney Cricket Ground, along with the suburban Jubilee Oval and Leichhardt Oval grounds. In October 2022, the club returned to the newly built Allianz Stadium in Moore Park. The clubs training and administration facility in North Ryde, known as Sky Park, was completed in 2023.

As the only A-League team in the city for the first seven years of its existence, the club's fans hail from all across the Sydney Metropolitan Area. Sydney's main supporter group is known as 'The Cove', named after the original title given to the colonial settlement of Sydney, Sydney Cove. The club has rivalries with Melbourne Victory, known as The Big Blue, and the Western Sydney Wanderers, named the Sydney Derby. Alex Brosque is the club's all time top goal scorer, having scored 83 goals. Rhyan Grant has the most appearances for the club, having played 327 games.

The first steps towards the foundation of Sydney FC were taken in April 2004 when Soccer New South Wales (now Football NSW) announced its intention to bid for a licence in the new A-League competition. The bid was lodged with the Australian Soccer Association (now Football Australia) on 19 July, challenged only by a consortium headed by Nick Politis, known as the "Sydney Blues", for Sydney's place in the 'one team per city' competition. A public row broke out between the two bidders after reports that the ASA were set to vote in favour of Sydney FC, causing Politis to withdraw his support for a team, and leaving Sydney FC as the only candidate remaining.

Sydney FC was officially launched as a member of the new 8-team A-League on 1 November 2004, with a 25% stake in the club held by Soccer NSW, the remainder privately owned. Walter Bugno was announced as the inaugural chairman of the club. On 11 December 2004, Soccer NSW announced that it would pull out of its involvement with Sydney FC amid concerns over part owner Frank Lowy's autocratic style in establishing the club and lack of consultation with Soccer NSW on key Sydney FC issues. These included the choice of the Sydney Football Stadium over Parramatta Stadium as the team's home ground, and the erosion of Soccer NSW's initial 100 per cent involvement to just 25 per cent.

By February 2005, Sydney FC had filled 16 of its allowed 20 squad positions—attracting Socceroos Alvin Ceccoli, Clint Bolton, Steve Corica and David Zdrilic as well as youth internationals Justin Pasfield, Mark Milligan, Wade Oostendorp, Iain Fyfe and Jacob Timpano. German Pierre Littbarski was signed as head coach, assisted by former Norwich City player Ian Crook. Sydney FC played its first ever match against Manly United on 25 March 2005, winning 6–1. Shortly after, Sydney FC set off on a tour to the United Arab Emirates to play against local teams FC Hatta, Al Ain and Al Jazira, winning all three. While in Dubai, Sydney FC announced that it had agreed to terms with former Manchester United player Dwight Yorke as the club's "marquee player"– one paid outside of the $1.5million salary cap— for two seasons.

Sydney FC's first competitive match was against Queensland Roar at Central Coast Stadium in Gosford as part of the 2005 Australian Club World Championship Qualifying Tournament. After winning 3–0, Sydney went on to defeat Perth Glory and Central Coast Mariners to qualify for the 2005 Oceania Club Championship, held in Tahiti. Despite an early scare against New Zealand club Auckland City, Sydney FC won all of its matches and qualified for the 2005 FIFA Club World Championship in Japan. The start of the 2005 A-League Pre-Season Challenge Cup marked Sydney FC's first match at Allianz Stadium, as well as Dwight Yorke's first appearance for the club. Yorke scored the first goal of Sydney FC's 3–1 win which stretched its unbeaten run to 9 competitive matches (15 including friendlies). Upon reaching the semi-finals, Sydney's unbeaten run finally ended at 11 with Perth Glory midfielder Nick Ward scoring in injury time to inflict the new club's first ever loss.

Sydney FC's first season was ultimately a success. Finishing second behind Adelaide United they went on to defeat Central Coast Mariners 1–0 in the 2006 A-League Grand Final with Steve Corica scoring in the second half of the game. However, the club's success wouldn't last long, with German manager Pierre Littbarski leaving the club after refusing to accept a lower salary and inaugural marquee player Dwight Yorke being signed by Premier League club Sunderland. Former English international Terry Butcher was signed as Sydney FC's new coach for 2006–07. However it was regarded as an overall failure, with Sydney playing poorly despite the signing of Alex Brosque and Benito Carbone as a Guest player. Sydney also had 3 points deducted during the season, after it was found that they had breached the Salary cap, involving player David Zdrillic. Despite the off field problems, Sydney managed to scrape into the finals series, however they lost in the semi-final to Newcastle Jets. Although Butcher led the club into the finals, Sydney fans were unhappy with his tactics. In the end Butcher and Sydney FC went their separate ways at the end of the season. Sydney FC would go on to sign Branko Čulina for its 2007 AFC Champions League campaign, where they finished second in the group, one point behind ultimate champions and J-League heavyweights Urawa Red Diamonds. Despite the ACL success, Sydney FC's start to the 2007–08 season was poor, and the club sacked him, replacing him with former Adelaide United manager John Kosmina. Sydney FC played well for the rest of the season but were knocked out in the finals by Brisbane Roar. Kosmina couldn't repeat the success of the previous season, replacing Brazilian international Juninho with Socceroos hero John Aloisi on a million dollar contract. The club also unveiled Newcastle Jets championship winners Mark Bridge and Stuart Musialik as well as Socceroo Simon Colosimo for the 2008–09 season. The season did not live up to expectations even with these key signings. Aloisi didn't perform very well during the season and came under heavy fire. So too did manager Kosmina, whose tactics were seen as controversial. His relationship with the media often became angry and frustrated which didn't help causes. Many players fell out of favour with the coach, including Steve Corica and Clint Bolton. For the first time in the club's history, they failed to make the Finals. As a result Kosmina was fired when Russian billionaire David Traktovenko became owner in March 2009.

The fresh change at the club was about to bear fruit, when Sydney announced they had signed Czech Republic manager Vítězslav Lavička. Lavicka completely changed the structure of the club, and for its first time turning it into a serious, European style soccer club. He kept faith in Steve Corica and John Aloisi and several others who had threatened to walk out, and as a result, Sydney FC won its first premiership. Sydney made it to the Grand Final of the fifth season of the A-League after defeating Wellington Phoenix in the preliminary final. The Grand Final was played against Melbourne Victory at Etihad Stadium in Melbourne. Sydney took the lead after 61 minutes through a Mark Bridge header, just seconds after Melbourne had a goal disallowed for offside. Melbourne equalised through Adrian Leijer in the 81st minute, and the game went to a penalty shootout with no goals scored in extra time. Melbourne skipper Kevin Muscat missed his penalty, with his shot hitting the post. Sydney FC won the Grand Final 4–2 on penalties which handed the club its second Hyundai A-League Championship.

Sydney FC's title defence did not go smoothly. The club lost key players from its championship-winning side including Steve Corica (retired), Karol Kisel (return to Europe), Simon Colosimo, John Aloisi, and Clint Bolton (all Melbourne Heart). The club however picked up the services of former Socceroo Nick Carle from his stint in England with Crystal Palace. This wasn't enough to steer the team in the right direction. The club was winless for the first ten rounds of the competition. Sydney FC managed to pick up a few points over the next few rounds but another five-game losing streak ensured they would not qualify for the finals competition, finishing ninth. The third season under Lavicka began with the major signing of Blackburn Rovers player Brett Emerton on a three-year deal. The signing was significant in that Emerton became the first player to directly exchange the FA Premier League for the A-League by terminating his Rovers contract one year early. The season however, only provided minimal success as the club scraped through to the finals series with a 3–2 win over Newcastle Jets in the final round of the regular season. Before the end of the season the club announced that head coach Lavicka's contract would not be renewed for the following season.

The 2012–13 season was one of high drama. There was a new head coach Ian Crook and a high turnover of players in the off season. The expectations changed from a year of rebuilding to title contenders when the club acquired the services of international superstar Alessandro Del Piero. He signed on for $2 million per year and became the highest-paid player ever in the A-League.

After only six weeks into the regular season Sydney were forced to find a new coach with the shock resignation of Crook. He cited the role was "a constant burden" and was adversely affecting his health. Frank Farina was confirmed as Crook's successor for the season two games into Steve Corica's interim spell. During the January transfer window, Farina bolstered his defensive stocks with Socceroos captain Lucas Neill and Brazilian Tiago Calvano joining the team. The pair made nil significant impact and with a 3–1 loss away from home to Brisbane Roar, Sydney were unable to pick up a vital point that would have seen them play in the finals, finishing seventh.

For the 2013–14 pre season, the club became the first club in A-League history to tour in Europe, as Sydney toured in Venice, Italy, where the club played against Del Piero's first professional club, Padova, Udinese Calcio, Vicenza Calcio, A.S. Cittadella, Venezia and Reggiana. Sydney won half of these six games however upon returning home lost five consecutive friendly games in the lead up to the season proper. Two-thirds of the way into the season and with Sydney FC only accumulating 4 points from 8 games, fans began to express concerns over the vision for the club. Banners at the club's home game against Adelaide included sentiments like "We want Farina gone." There was also a mass exodus from the club's active supporter group, The Cove. The club then held a fan forum to receive questions and communicate the direction of the club. During the last nine rounds, Sydney FC only lost two games making the finals. The club lost to Melbourne Victory in the first week of the finals. This marked the end of the Frank Farina reign.

On 8 May 2014, Sydney FC announced its new head coach for the 2014–15 A-League season. With retirements to Brett Emerton in January and Terry McFlynn, and the contract expirations of marquee player Alessandro Del Piero, foreign player Ranko Despotović and former Socceroo Richard Garcia, there was a lot of experience to be filled by the club. Arnold announced his first signing on 12 May 2014, acquiring the services of his former Mariner winger Bernie Ibini-Isei. Sydney FC then announced signings of prolific A-League goalscorer Shane Smeltz and Socceroo Alex Brosque. After months of searching Arnold found his new marquee man in Austria national football team captain Marc Janko. On 8 October 2014, Brosque was announced as captain for the 2014–15 A-League season, alongside vice-captains Sasa Ognenovski and Nikola Petković. Sydney FC's season began with the highly anticipated match-up against the newly re-branded Melbourne City and guest superstar David Villa. Whilst not starting the game, Villa came on early in the second half to claim the equalising goal, the result ending 1–1. Sydney FC continued on an eight-game undefeated streak that ended when Perth Glory came from behind to score two goals in the final seven minutes to claim victory at Allianz Stadium. The following week saw another thrilling Big Blue in Melbourne ending 3–3. Sydney FC struggled for form as they moved closer to the January break for the 2015 Asian Cup, not scoring in four consecutive matches. During this break, Sydney FC were able to bolster their stocks, signing Senegalese internationals Mickaël Tavares and Jacques Faty as injury replacement players. Upon resumption, Sydney FC posted 19 (out of a possible 21) points in the next seven rounds. Whilst slipping up twice at home to Melbourne City and Adelaide United (with scores of 0–1 in both games) during the final six rounds, Sydney FC managed to win all four other games away from home to finish second on the ladder with 50 points for the season. By the end of the regular season, Sydney FC had broken many records including a record club home season attendance (41,213 vs. Western Sydney Wanderers FC) and a league record number of away games undefeated in a season, as well as becoming the first club to score three or more goals in five consecutive games.<ref name="Sydney FC 2014/15"></ref> Marquee Marc Janko also set his own A-League record for most consecutive goalscoring appearances with seven. After having the first week of the finals off, Sydney FC met Adelaide in the semi-finals at home. A brace from Alex Brosque set Sydney up for a 4–1 win. Ultimately, Sydney FC were outplayed in the 2015 A-League Grand Final, defeated by Melbourne Victory 3–0 at Melbourne Rectangular Stadium.

The following season was significantly less successful, finishing seventh in the league despite the star power of marquee Filip Hološko, and Serbian playmaker Miloš Ninković. However, Arnold coached the Sky Blues through a tough Asian Champions League group, finishing first and defeating defending champions Guangzhou Evergrande 2–1 at Allianz. Sydney progressed to the knockout stages for the first time, losing on away goals to Chinese side Shandong Luneng with Hao Junmin scoring a 90th-minute equaliser to finish the Sky Blues continental hopes.

Arnold reformed Sydney for the 2016–17 season, beginning with the signings of Socceroos centreback Alex Wilkinson, and leftback Michael Zullo both from Melbourne City. Joshua Brillante joined the Sky Blues on a three-year deal, keeping him at the Harbour City until 2019. The goalkeeping ranks were soon bolstered by the signing of Danny Vukovic, the A-League's most capped player who also held a record A-League clean sheet tally. Bernie Ibini-Isei also rejoined the club on loan from Club Brugge, following a horrific leg injury. The biggest signing however was that of Brazilian striker Bobô on a one-year marquee deal, rejoining his former Beşiktaş teammate Filip Holosko. The season started with a 4–0 win over rivals Western Sydney in the Sydney Derby with new striker Bobô scoring on debut. They went on a six-game winning streak from this, conceding one goal. The club also reached the 2016 FFA Cup Final for the first time, losing to Melbourne City 1–0, in a highly controversial match.

This did not affect the momentum however, with Arnold's men going 19 games unbeaten before losing to arch rivals Western Sydney Wanderers in the Sydney Derby. Despite this setback, Sydney FC marched on yet again, winning the Premier's Plate with four games to spare and breaking numerous A-League records, including: most competition points, most wins in a season, fewest goals conceded, most clean sheets and best goal difference. Marquee striker Bobô ended the regular season as top scorer with 15 goals, narrowly missing Marc Janko's record of 16. The club qualified for the 2018 AFC Champions League after finishing first, which was their fourth Asian Champions League campaign.

They finished the season as double winners – winning the 2017 A-League Grand Final 4–2 (1–1 AET) on penalties against Melbourne Victory at their former home ground, Allianz Stadium. The winning penalty was scored by Johnny Warren Medallist Miloš Ninković who re-signed for a following year the next day, before also being named player of the year at the club's awards night.

The Sky Blues went on a successful FFA Cup run in 2017, starting with an 8–0 thumping of Northern Territory amateur side Darwin Rovers, with Bobô scoring a club record equalling 4 goals in the match. The following round they played NPL2 side Canterbury Bankstown, winning 3–0 in a fairly scrappy match, with goals from Carney, Bobô, and a debut goal from new signing Adrian Mierzejewski in injury time to put them through to the quarter finals. Sydney drew Melbourne City, marking the third battle between the two in the cup. An early goal from Jordy Buijs put Sydney up 1–0, before a second half goal from captain Alex Brosque sealed the win at Leichhardt Oval. In the semi-finals, they faced yet another Melbourne side, with a trip to Lakeside Stadium to play South Melbourne booked. The Sky Blues ran out 5–1 winners, with a brace from Bobô sealing their date with destiny in the 2017 FFA Cup Final to play Adelaide United. The final was played at Sydney Football Stadium, only the second time it had hosted an FFA Cup match. The Harbour City Originals opened the scoring on 20 minutes, as Milos Ninkovic latched onto a through ball, before sliding past a defender and poking a shot past goalkeeper Paul Izzo. The slender one-goal lead only had them in front until an equaliser by Nikola Mileusnic got Adelaide back into the game. The game was forced into extra time, before Bobô scored a header on 111 minutes to win the FFA Cup for Sydney FC.

The 2017—18 season proved to be successful after the FFA Cup win, with the Sky Blues becoming the first ever club to win back-to-back premierships in the A-League era, and the first in Australian national league history since Melbourne Knights.

With Graham Arnold being chosen to take over the Australian national team coaching role after the 2018 World Cup, his time at the club ended when his team were defeated 3–2 by Melbourne Victory, after extra time in a semi-final of the A-League finals series of 2017/18.

Steve Corica became the ninth permanent head coach of Sydney FC when his tenure was officially announced on 16 May 2018. The announcement followed his ongoing thirteen year involvement with the club, signing on as a player in the inaugural 2005/06 season. After his retirement in 2010, Corica served his time as staff member for the club in various roles of assistant coach, youth team coach and the caretaker first team coach for two games in 2012. The off-season would prove be a crucial first test for Corica in terms of recruitment for some key positions. It had already been announced that key players from prior seasons including Dutch defender Jordy Buijs, former Socceroos Luke Wilkshire, David Carney and Matt Simon had all left the club as well as youth product Anthony Kalik returning to Europe as his loan deal expired. After the re-signing of current captain and club legend Alex Brosque within the first week of Corica's tenure as manager things appeared to be going well for Corica. On 7 July 2018, after weeks of speculation, the club officially confirmed the exit of Johnny Warren Medalist Adrian Mierzejewski and the newly re-signed Golden Boot winner, Bobô, leaving big holes to fill in attack. In the following weeks after Bobô and Mierzejewski closed the door on their times at Sydney, the club announced the signings of former English Premier League star Adam Le Fondre and Dutch midfielder Siem de Jong on loan from Ajax. Fellow Dutchman Jop van der Linden was also revealed to be joining Sydney FC on a one year deal.

This was the first season Sydney temporarily moved to Jubilee Oval while their home ground, Allianz Stadium, was under renovation. The team played their home matches at Jubilee, the Sydney Cricket Ground and also at Leichhardt Oval during the 2018–19 season.

The 2018–19 season was a successful campaign for Sydney FC, as they finished second in the regular season with 52 points, eight points behind premiers Perth Glory. In the 2018 FFA Cup, Sydney FC reached the final for the third consecutive year. They defeated Rockdale City Suns, Cairns FC, Avondale FC, and local rivals Western Sydney Wanderers 3–0 in the semi-finals, before facing Adelaide United in the final for the second consecutive season. Sydney FC lost at Hindmarsh Stadium 2–1 in the final after a brace from Mark Viduka Medalist Craig Goodwin, with Le Fondre scoring Sydney's only goal of the night.

In the finals series, Sydney FC thumped Melbourne Victory 6–1 in the semi-finals, thanks to goals from Aaron Calver, Alex Brosque, an own goal from Leigh Broxham, Adam Le Fondre and Miloš Ninković equalling the record for the largest margin of victory in The Big Blue. Sydney then travelled to Perth for the 2019 Grand Final, defeating Perth Glory in the grand final after a dramatic penalty shootout, which ended 4–1 thanks to mid-season signing Reza Ghoochannejhad scoring the decisive penalty and Andrew Redmayne saving two penalties.

Overall, the 2018–19 season was largely a success for Steve Corica's first season in charge and the team's first season away from Allianz Stadium. They finished in the top two in all domestic competitions. However, their performance in the 2019 AFC Champions League was disappointing, as they failed to progress from the group stage. Finishing at the bottom of their group, with just three points from six matches.

On 7 April 2021, Sydney FC became the first A-League club to record 200 wins with a 1–0 win over Perth Glory.

Sydney FC moved into their newly rebuilt Sydney Football Stadium in Moore Park ahead of the 2022-23 season, with their return match to the venue coming in a round 1 Big Blue against arch rivals Melbourne Victory, losing 2-3 in a game impacted by heavy rain. Sydney made the semi-finals that season, having finished the season in fifth but having defeated Western Sydney Wanderers in an away derby Elimination Final. Sydney FC managed a 1-1 draw at home in the first leg of the semi final against Melbourne City, but were comprehensively beaten 4-0 in the second leg at AAMI Park in Melbourne.

The 2023-24 season started with success for Sydney FC, winning the 2023 Australia Cup with a 3-1 victory over Brisbane Roar in the final at home. However, a poor start to the A-League season which saw Sydney FC lose their first three matches without registering a goal, and languishing on the bottom of the table, saw Corica resign as Sydney FC coach after 5 full seasons in charge, 3 weeks after lifting the Australia Cup.

The day after the mutual resignation of Steve Corica, Sydney FC appointed another former player as their new head coach, Ufuk Talay.

The primary club colour of Sydney FC is sky blue, which represents the state colour of New South Wales. The secondary club colour is navy blue, with additional contrasting colours of orange and white, however the colour orange does not feature in the club's 2017 redesign of the crest.

The current Sydney FC badge was released on 17 May 2017 and is a reworking of a design by Liam Johnson on behalf of and submitted by the club's supporter group, The Cove. The crest features the Sydney Opera House in white pictured in front of a sky-blue backdrop on top of a navy blue base featuring the Commonwealth Star. The Opera House represents an iconic landmark of Sydney, the sky-blue represents the club's primary colour and the state colour of New South Wales, and the Commonwealth Star, also found on the Australian Flag, is a symbol representing the Federation of Australia.

The initial Sydney FC badge was created and used since the club's founding in 2004. It featured a soccer ball set centrally in a stylised crest shape. Above the ball was the shape of three shells of the Sydney Opera House, and below that was the Commonwealth Star.

There is a silver star atop the badge with the numeral five written inside it, representing the number of championships the club has won.

Sydney FC plays its home matches at the newly constructed Sydney Football Stadium. The team moved into the stadium for the 2022–23 A-League Mens season. Their first match at the stadium was against the club's fierce rivals, Melbourne Victory on 8 October 2022 in front of 21,840 supporters. Sydney lost the match 2–3.

The home ground was built as a replacement for the original Sydney Football Stadium. This stadium was built in 1988 to be the premium "rectangular field" for rugby league matches. It was also used for soccer and rugby union for major matches and domestic competition. The stadium was then demolished in 2019 to be rebuilt into a boutique, world class venue. It had been the venue for Australian international matches (notably World Cup Qualifier against Argentina in 1993). The stadium's capacity was stated at 41,159 prior to renovations in 2007, although the attendance of the 2006 A-League grand final exceeded this number by over 500. The stated capacity prior to demolition was 45,500. Sydney FC's final game at the stadium was a 2–3 extra time loss to Melbourne Victory in the 2017–18 A-League Semifinal, in which former Sky Blue player, Terry Antonis scored an incredible solo goal for the match-winner.

Prior to the current season, for four years whilst the new stadium was being built between the 2018–19 and 2021–22 seasons, Sydney played its home games out of two stadiums, Leichhardt Oval and Jubilee Oval. The Sydney Cricket Ground located in Moore Park was used in its first season of this redevelopment period. With a capacity of 46,000, it was used for the club's major fixtures during their time away from their traditional home, although this was eventually abandoned until the Sydney Derby on 23 May 2021.

Sydney FC have played matches at other Sydney venues. Parramatta Stadium in western Sydney was the venue for an AFC Champions League match against Indonesian football side Persik Kediri in April 2007 when the SFS was unavailable due to an NRL match being played there. A friendly match against Los Angeles Galaxy was played at ANZ Stadium in November 2007 due to its greater capacity, and drew a crowd of 80,295. The club has also played regular season games there against Perth Glory in 2012, and Newcastle Jets and Melbourne City in 2016. Sydney played one home game at WIN Stadium in Wollongong on 3 January 2015 against Newcastle Jets. They also played at Campbelltown Stadium against Perth Glory in the 2011–12 A-League season. In 2020, Sydney used CommBank Stadium as its home venue for the 2019–20 A-League final series. In the semifinal, Sydney defeated Perth Glory 2–0 and in the Grand Final they defeated Melbourne City 1–0 after extra time, via a Rhyan Grant goal.

On 17 May 2017, the club and SCG Trust agreed to a ten-year extension of the lease.

Sydney FC's primary training ground is at Macquarie University in North Ryde, called Sky Park. It also hosts the clubs Women team, as well as all academy players, male and female. They also have use of the sports and aquatic centre for post match recovery sessions. Occasionally Sydney FC have been seen after home games having recovery sessions at local beaches such as Coogee Beach, Bondi Beach, and Maroubra.

As they were the only A-League team from Sydney until 2012, Sydney FC draws support from across the metropolitan region, and as a result is one of the most heavily supported clubs in the Sydney Metropolitan region. The largest and main supporter group of Sydney FC is known as "The Cove", and were originally located at the Paddington (northern) end of Allianz Stadium in bays 22–26. The name came from the original name given to the colonial settlement of Sydney—Sydney Cove.

Cove members attend every home match and also travel as a group around the country to support the team at away matches. As a vocal group, The Cove demonstrates its support by singing football chants, wearing club colours, standing up, waving flags and holding banners. On 7 July 2006, Australian rock singer Jimmy Barnes recorded a club song entitled 'Sydney FC for Me' with 25 members of The Cove singing back-up vocals. It was released prior to the start of the 2006–07 season.

The Cove was directly involved the creation of the modern Sydney FC badge, with them putting forward designs and ideas which carried over to the finished product.


Rhyan Grant holds the record for Sydney FC appearances, having played 327 first-team matches between 2008 and 2024. The record for a goalkeeper is held by Andrew Redmayne, with 214 appearances.

The club's all-time top goalscorer in all competitions is Alex Brosque with 83 goals. Adam Le Fondre has scored the second most goals with 73 goals whilst in third is Bobô with 71 goals.

Sydney FC's highest home attendance for a league match was 41,213, recorded on 18 October 2014 at the Sydney Football Stadium against the Western Sydney Wanderers in the Sydney Derby. The highest home attendance in any fixture is 80,295 recorded on 27 November 2007 for a friendly match against LA Galaxy at Stadium Australia.

"Named club captains for the season only. Does not include acting captains when club captain was unavailable or not selected."

On 21 December 2009, Sydney FC established an academy to develop young players. The main goal of the academy was stated as to produce better players by providing technical and tactical knowledge, as well as to identify potential new talent that could represent Sydney in the National Youth League and A League in future. This began a continued commitment from Sydney to invest in and develop junior talent for the benefit of grassroots soccer. The initial 26 players were drawn from the NSW State League clubs and consisted of players aged 14–18 years old. They started training with the academy at Macquarie University.

The club's most recent manager was Steve Corica. The club's previous manager was Graham Arnold, who is the clubs most successful manager, managed the club from August 2014 to 2018. There have been nine permanent and one caretaker manager of Sydney FC since the appointment of the first professional manager, Pierre Littbarski in 2005.

On 16 March 2015, Sydney FC inducted eight members into its inaugural Hall of Fame at the club's 10-year anniversary lunch. Additional inductees are added to the hall of fame at the annual end of season Sky Blue Ball.

In April 2015, Sydney FC also announced its Team of the Decade at the annual end of season awards night, the Sky Blue Ball.





Ty Templeton

Tyrone Templeton is a Canadian comic book artist and writer who has drawn a number of mainstream titles, TV-associated titles, and his own series.

Templeton first received attention for "Stig's Inferno" (Vortex Comics), now a cult favourite, which detailed the journey of its lead character into Hell in a parody of Dante's "The Divine Comedy". Templeton recalled that after reading the three books of "The Divine Comedy", "I fell in love with them as stories. It took a bit to get past the language translations, but for a year or so, I was reading different versions, off and on, as my reading on subways and buses, getting to and from school." Templeton first transferred this inspiration into comic book form with the intent of making it a strip in his campus newspaper, but ended up shelving the project until Vortex publisher William P. Marks suggested that he make it into a series. According to Marks, of the five series that Vortex was publishing at the time, "Stig's Inferno" was the most consistently produced on schedule.

He has gone on to do titles for Marvel Comics, DC Comics, Bongo Comics, and Moonstone Books, including "Batman Adventures", "The Simpsons" and many others. He also created his own graphic novel, "Bigg Time", published by DC Comics' mature readers imprint, Vertigo. He was recently editor of an independent Canadian comic company, Mr. Comics. Recent work includes writing and drawing stories for DC's "Batman 66", based on the 1960s television series. He teaches classes in comic book writing and drawing, known as "Ty Templeton's Comic Book Boot Camp".

Templeton was born on May 9, 1962. He is the brother of internet pioneer and entrepreneur Brad Templeton, and son of Canadian celebrities Charles Templeton and Sylvia Murphy. He lives in Ontario, Canada.

On June 14, 2021, Templeton announced that he had been diagnosed with stage-three colorectal cancer; on October 13, 2022, he announced that he was cancer-free.




Kings Hill

Kings Hill is a civil parish in the borough of Tonbridge and Malling in Kent, England. It is one of several new villages built in Kent since the 1950s (other examples including Vigo and New Ash Green). Development started in 1989 near West Malling, on land previously occupied by RAF West Malling. The plan was for a multi-purpose site of both residential and office/business space.

Parts of the 2007 Channel 4 drama series "Cape Wrath" were shot in the village.

Liberty Property Trust carried out the principal development of the site, commencing on the old West Malling airfield site in 1989. The ultimate aim is to have some 2,750 homes and 2 million square feet (186,000 m²) of commercial properties. As of 2010, 2000 homes have been built along with of business space. The development precipitated a major expansion of the A228 which passes the village.

The oldest parts of Kings Hill are around Worcester Avenue and Discovery Drive. Phase 2 is around Beacon Avenue to the north and there is also a Phase 3

Construction of houses and other buildings is set to continue in Kings Hill as Kent County Council have purchased new land for building. In May 2010 plans were unveiled for the re-development of the old airfield's derelict control tower (now a listed building) and the surrounding area, which, as of 2016, now plays host to a Costa Coffee and an office for Liberty staff.

Many of the roads in Kings Hill are named after varieties of apple, a fruit which has been grown in Kent for centuries, including Bovarde Avenue, Braeburn Way, Discovery Drive, Melrose Avenue, Pippin Way, Winston Avenue and Worcester Avenue. Others pay homage to the site's past use as an RAF WWII aerodrome, with names such as Typhoon Road, Mosquito Road, Hurricane Road, Spitfire Road, Beaufighter Road, Javelin Road, Lancaster Way, Lysander Road, Meteor Road and Mustang Road.

There are three primary schools in the estate (Kings Hill Primary, the Discovery School and Valley Invicta).

Other facilities include Kings Hill Sports Park, an Asda superstore, a Little Waitrose, an Aldi, a Shepherd Neame pub named "The Spitfire", a doctor's surgery, a veterinary surgery, opticians, pharmacist, traditional and eastern restaurants, takeaways, cafes, two churches and a David Lloyd Leisure health club.

Kings Hill is served by St Gabriel's Church of England church, which currently meets in the Discovery School. Kings Hill falls predominantly within the ecclesiastical parishes of Mereworth and West Malling. In 2003 the Diocese of Rochester appointed the first full-time resident minister to meet the pastoral needs of the growing business and residential community. In 2015 they appointed their second full-time minister.

The development features a number of major sculptures commissioned by the developers. On the roundabout between the business park and the residential area is "A different ball game" by Kevin Atherton which consists of a diameter reflective ball being pushed in different directions by three life-size bronze figures which were cast from local people. On the A228 roundabout to the north of the business park is a tall obelisk style sculpture called "L'Ambiente" created by Enzo Torcoletti. Smaller sculptures on the site include a statue depiction of a tug of war game on the roundabout near to Kings Hill Primary and memorials to Group Captain Peter Townsend and Bill Rouse, late chairman of the site's developers.

Kings Hill has bus links to Maidstone, Tonbridge, Tunbridge Wells and Chatham, and most services are run by Arriva Southern Counties. From West Malling railway station there are trains to London, Maidstone and Ashford.

As well as the road links there are further footpath and bridleway links to Wateringbury and East Malling.

A number of major organisations have offices in Kings Hill's business park including:

The 2004 "Wealth of the Nation" report listed the Kings Hill postcode sector (ME19 4), as having the highest average income and the highest proportion of households earning greater than £100,000 per annum in Great Britain, although the postcode did not appear in the 2006 report.

At the 2011 UK census the Kings Hill electoral ward had a population of 7,770, an increase of 157% from that in 2001. The ethnicity was 93.4% white, 2.1% mixed race, 3.3% Asian, 0.6% black and 0.6% other. The place of birth of residents was 90.8% United Kingdom, 0.5% Republic of Ireland, 1.5% other Western European countries, and 7.2% elsewhere. Religion was recorded as 62.7% Christian, 0.9% Muslim, 0.4% Buddhist, 0.7% Hindu, 0.2% Sikh and 0.1% Jewish. 28.7% were recorded as having no religion while 6.0% did not state their religion.

The economic activity of residents aged 16–74 was 47.6% in full-time employment, 14.6% in part-time employment, 11.9% self-employed, 2.5% unemployed, 2.6% students with jobs, 3.4% students without jobs, 8.7% retired, 6.5% looking after home or family, 1.3% permanently sick or disabled and 0.9% economically inactive for other reasons. Primary industries of employment of residents were retail and motor trade 14.7%, finance and insurance 14.7% construction 11.7%, scientific and technical 9.5% and manufacturing 8.7%. Compared with national figures, the ward had a relatively high proportion of workers in finance and real estate. There were a relatively low proportion in agriculture, education, construction, hotels and restaurants. Of the ward's residents aged 16–74, 36.8% had a higher education qualification or the equivalent, compared with 27.4% nationwide.

Kings Hill Cricket Club was established in 2006 to make use of the new cricket pitch opposite the Discovery School. The club played its inaugural match against Town Malling Cricket Club in September 2006 at the historic Old County Ground, West Malling. Chris Blackham captained the team to their first win against Snodland in early 2007. In January 2008 the club adopted the de Havilland Mosquito aircraft as its badge in memory of the role West Malling airfield played during the Second World War as a night fighter station. The Kings Hill Ground hosted its first game, again versus Town Malling on 17 July 2010, with former English international cricketer Derek Underwood on hand to perform the opening ceremony. The junior development program did start to grow. Gaining A star cricket coaching program.

Kings Hill Football Club (KHFC) was established in 2003 to provide football for the increasing numbers of children within Kings Hill. The club has over 400 players across 32 teams of all ages from children to veterans and includes female teams. The junior and youth sections of the club feature 2 or 3 teams in each age group (Elite, Colts and Development teams) to provide the appropriate level of football for their players. The men's 1st team (established for the 2014/15 season) plays in the Kent County League; its mascot is young disabled fundraiser Tony Hudgell. The men's reserves team plays in the Maidstone & District Football League. For the 2014/15 season the club has introduced a girls Player development Centre (PDC) with the aim of providing quality coaching to girls from Kings Hill and beyond. The club now hosts "Walking Football" which allows less mobile players to continue enjoying the game. In September 2013 the club moved to a new home ground, Kings Hill Sports Park, a facility run and maintained by Kings Hill Parish Council. The park features five professionally laid, high-quality grass football pitches, a floodlit full-size Artificial turf pitch (which also hosts rugby training), and a pavilion with eight changing rooms, bar and social area. As of September 2014 76% of KHFC players reside in Kings Hill.

Kings Hill also has a golf club, founded in 1995, with a course designed by David Williams. Nearby Manor Park Country Park provides more open space and walking trails.

Kings Hill Wheelers cycling club, founded 2015. Mixed ability cycling club, social rides up to sportive distances. Meeting point at Waitrose car park two to four times a week.



Pratt &amp; Whitney R-1340 Wasp

The Pratt & Whitney R-1340 Wasp is an aircraft engine of the reciprocating type that was widely used in American aircraft from the 1920s onward. It was the Pratt & Whitney aircraft company's first engine, and the first of the famed Wasp series. It was a single-row, nine-cylinder, air-cooled, radial design, and displaced 1,344 cubic inches (22 L); bore and stroke were both 5.75 in (146 mm). A total of 34,966 engines were produced.

As well as numerous types of fixed-wing aircraft, it was used to power helicopters, the Agusta-Bell AB.102 and the Sikorsky H-19, and a class of airship, the K-class blimp.

In 2016, it received designation as a Historic Engineering Landmark from the American Society of Mechanical Engineers.

"Note:" R for Radial and 1340 for 1340 cubic inch displacement.





