The Board of Governors is pleased to submit its Monetary Policy Report to the Congress pursuant to section 2B of the Federal Reserve Act. Economic activity in the United States expanded at a moderate rate in the second half of 2011 following an anemic gain in the first half, and the moderate pace of expansion appears to have continued into the opening months of 2012. Activity was held down in the first half of 2011 by temporary factors, particularly supply chain disruptions stemming from the earthquake in Japan and the damping effect of higher energy prices on consumer spending. As the effects of these factors waned over the second half of the year, economic activity picked up. Conditions in the labor market have improved since last summer, with an increase in the pace of job gains and a noticeable reduction in the unemployment rate. Meanwhile, consumer price infla- tion has stepped down from the temporarily high levels observed over the first half of 2011, as commodity and import prices retreated and as longer-term inflation expectations remained stable. Looking ahead, growth is likely to be modest during the coming year, as several factors appear likely to continue to restrain activity, including restricted access to credit for many house- holds and small businesses, the still-depressed housing market, tight fiscal policy at all levels of government, and some slowing in global economic growth. In light of these conditions, the Federal Open Mar- ket Committee (FOMC) took a number of steps dur- ing the second half of 2011 and early 2012 to provide additional monetary policy accommodation and thereby support a stronger economic recovery in the context of price stability. These steps included modify- ing the forward rate guidance included in postmeeting statements, increasing the average maturity of the Fed- eral Reserve’s securities holdings, and shifting the rein- vestment of principal payments on agency securities from Treasury securities to agency-guaranteed mortgage-backed securities (MBS). participants in financial markets focused on the fiscal and banking crisis in Europe. Concerns regarding the potential for spillovers to the U.S. economy and finan- cial markets weighed on investor sentiment, contribut- ing to significant volatility in a wide range of asset prices and at times prompting sharp pullbacks from risk-taking. Strains eased somewhat in a number of financial markets in late 2011 and early this year as investors seemed to become more confident that Euro- pean policymakers would take the steps necessary to address the crisis. The more positive market sentiment was bolstered by recent U.S. data releases, which pointed to greater strength, on balance, than investors had expected. Nonetheless, market participants report- edly remain cautious about risks in the financial system, and credit default swap spreads for U.S. finan- cial institutions have widened, on net, since early last summer. After rising at an annual rate of just ¾ percent in the first half of 2011, real gross domestic product (GDP) is estimated to have increased at a 2¼ percent rate in the second half.1 The growth rate of real consumer spend- ing also firmed a bit in the second half of the year, although the fundamental determinants of household spending improved little: Real household income and wealth stagnated, and access to credit remained tight for many potential borrowers. Consumer sentiment has rebounded from the summer’s depressed levels but remains low by historical standards. Meanwhile, real investment in equipment and software and exports posted solid gains over the second half of the year. In contrast, the housing market remains depressed, weighed down by the large inventory of vacant houses for sale, the substantial volume of distressed sales, and homebuyers’ concerns about the strength of the recov- ery and the potential for further declines in house prices. In the government sector, real purchases of goods and services continued to decline over the sec- ond half of the year. Labor market conditions have improved. The unem- ployment rate moved down from around 9 percent over the first eight months of 2011 to 8¼ percent in January 2012. However, even with this improvement, the jobless rate remains quite elevated. Furthermore, the share of the unemployed who have been jobless for more than six months, although down slightly from its peak, was still above 40 percent in January—roughly double the fraction that prevailed during the economic expansion of the previous decade. Meanwhile, private 1. The numbers in this report are based on the Bureau of Economic Analysis’s (BEA) advance estimate of fourth-quarter GDP, which was released on January 27, 2012. The BEA will release a revised estimate on February 29, 2012. payroll employment gains averaged 165,000 jobs per month in the second half of 2011, a bit slower than the pace in the first half of the year, but gains in December and January were more robust, averaging almost 240,000 per month. Consumer price inflation stepped down in the sec- ond half of 2011. After rising at an annual rate of 3½ percent in the first half of the year, prices for per- sonal consumption expenditures (PCE) rose just 1½ percent in the second half. PCE prices excluding food and energy also decelerated, rising at an annual rate of roughly 1½ percent in the second half of 2011, compared with about 2 percent in the first half. The decline in inflation was largely in response to decreases in global commodity prices following their surge early in 2011, as well as a restoration of supply chains for motor vehicle production that had been disrupted after the earthquake in Japan and some deceleration in the prices of imported goods other than raw commodities. The European fiscal and banking crisis intensified in the second half of the year. During the summer, the governments of Italy and Spain came under significant financial pressure and borrowing costs increased for many euro-area governments and banks. In early August, the European Central Bank (ECB) responded by resuming purchases of marketable debt securities. Although yields on the government debt of Italy and Spain temporarily moved lower, market conditions deteriorated in the fall and funding pressures for some governments and banks increased further. Over the second half of the year, European leaders worked toward bolstering the financial backstop for euro-area governments, reinforcing the fiscal discipline of those governments, and strengthening the capital and liquid- ity positions of banks. Additionally, the ECB made a significant injection of euro liquidity via its first three- year refinancing operation, and central banks agreed to reduce the price of U.S. dollar liquidity based on swap lines with the Federal Reserve. Since December, follow- ing these actions, yields on the debt of vulnerable European governments declined to some extent and funding pressures on European banks eased. A number of sources of investor anxiety—including the European crisis, concerns about the sustainability of U.S. fiscal policy, and a slowdown in global growth—weighed on U.S. financial markets early in the second half of 2011. More recently, these concerns eased somewhat, reflecting actions taken by global cen- tral banks as well as U.S. data releases that pointed to greater strength, on balance, than market participants had anticipated. Broad equity prices fell notably in August but subsequently retraced, and they are now little changed, on net, since early July. Corporate bond spreads remain elevated. Partly as a result of the for- ward guidance and ongoing maturity extension pro- gram provided by the Federal Reserve, market partici- pants expect the target federal funds rate to remain low for a longer period than they thought early last July, and Treasury yields have moved down significantly. Meanwhile, measures of inflation compensation over the next five years derived from yields on nominal and inflation-indexed Treasury securities are little changed, on balance, though the forward measure 5-to-10 years ahead remains below its level in the middle of last year. higher-credit-quality firms with access to capital mar- kets took advantage of generally attractive financing conditions to raise funds in the second half of 2011. On the other hand, for smaller firms without access to credit markets and those with less-solid financial situa- tions, borrowing conditions remained more challeng- ing. Reflecting these developments, investment-grade nonfinancial corporations continued to issue debt at a robust pace while speculative-grade issuance declined, as investors’ appetite for riskier assets diminished. Similar issuance patterns were evident in the market for syndicated loans, where investment-grade issuance continued to be strong while that of higher-yielding leveraged loans fell back. In addition, commercial and industrial (C&I) loans on banks’ books expanded strongly, particularly for larger domestic banks that are most likely to lend to big firms. According to the Janu- ary Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS), domestic banks eased terms on C&I loans and experienced increased loan demand during the fourth quarter of the year, the lat- ter development in part reflecting a shift in some bor- rowing away from European banks.2 By contrast, although credit supply conditions for smaller firms appear to have eased somewhat in the last several months, they remained tighter relative to historical norms than for larger firms. Commercial mortgage debt continued to decline through the third quarter of 2011, albeit at a more moderate pace than in 2010. Household debt appears to have declined at a slightly slower pace in the second half of 2011 than in the first half, with the continued contraction in mort- gage debt partially offset by growth in consumer credit. Even though mortgage rates continued to be near his- torically low levels, the volume of new mortgage loans remained muted. The smaller quantity of new mort- gage origination reflects potential buyers’ lack of either the down payment or credit history required to qualify 2. The SLOOS is available on the Federal Reserve Board’s website for these loans, and many appear reluctant to buy a house now because of concerns about their income prospects and employment status, as well as the risk of further declines in house prices. Delinquency rates on most categories of residential mortgages edged lower but stayed near recent highs, and the number of prop- erties in the foreclosure process remained elevated. Issuance of consumer asset-backed securities in the second half of 2011 ran at about the same rate as it had over the previous 18 months. A modest net frac- tion of SLOOS respondents to both the October and January surveys indicated that they had eased their standards on all categories of consumer loans. industry have edged up, on net, since mid-2011, as indicators of credit quality continued to show signs of improvement and banks trimmed noninterest expenses. Meanwhile, banks’ regulatory capital ratios remained at historically high levels, as authorities continued to take steps to enhance their regulation of financial insti- tutions. Nonetheless, conditions in unsecured inter- bank funding markets deteriorated. Strains were par- ticularly evident for European financial institutions, with funding costs increasing and maturities shorten- ing, on balance, as investors focused on counterparty credit risk amid growing anxiety about the ongoing crisis in Europe. Given solid deposit growth and mod- est expansion in bank credit across the industry, most domestic banks reportedly had limited need for unse- cured funding. Concerns about the condition of financial institu- tions gave rise to heightened investor anxiety regarding counterparty exposures during the second half of 2011. Responses to the December Senior Credit Officer Opinion Survey on Dealer Financing Terms, or SCOOS, indicated that dealers devoted increased time and attention to the management of concentrated credit exposures to other financial intermediaries over the previous three months, and 80 percent of dealers reported reducing credit limits for some specific coun- terparties.3 Respondents also reported a broad but moderate tightening of credit terms applicable to important classes of counterparties over the previous three months, importantly reflecting a worsening in general market liquidity and functioning as well as a reduced willingness to take on risk. In order to support a stronger economic recovery and help ensure that inflation, over time, is at levels consistent with its dual mandate, the FOMC provided additional monetary policy accommodation during the 3. The SCOOS is available on the Federal Reserve Board’s website second half of 2011 and early 2012. In August, the Committee modified its forward rate guidance, noting that economic conditions were likely to warrant excep- tionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through mid-2013. The FOMC decided at its Septem- ber meeting to extend the average maturity of its Treasury holdings, and to reinvest principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency MBS in agency MBS rather than in Treasury securities.4 Finally, at the Committee’s January 2012 meeting, the FOMC modified its forward guidance to indicate that it expected economic conditions to warrant exception- ally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through late 2014. The Committee noted that it would regularly review the size and composition of its securities hold- ings and is prepared to adjust those holdings as appro- priate to promote a stronger economic recovery in the context of price stability. Reserve took further steps to improve communications regarding its monetary policy decisions and delibera- tions. At the Committee’s January 2012 meeting, the FOMC released a statement of its longer-run goals and policy strategy in an effort to enhance the trans- parency, accountability, and effectiveness of monetary policy and to facilitate well-informed decisionmaking by households and businesses. The statement empha- sizes the Federal Reserve’s firm commitment to pursue its congressional mandate to promote maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates. To clarify how it seeks to achieve these objectives, the FOMC stated that inflation at the rate of 2 percent, as measured by the annual change in the PCE price index, is most consistent over the longer run with the Federal Reserve’s statutory mandate. While noting that the Committee’s assessments of the maxi- mum level of employment are necessarily uncertain and subject to revision, the statement indicated that the central tendency of FOMC participants’ current estimates of the longer-run normal rate of unemploy- ment is between 5.2 and 6.0 percent. It stressed that the Federal Reserve’s statutory objectives are generally complementary, but when they are not, the Committee will follow a balanced approach in its efforts to return both inflation and employment to levels consistent with its mandate. In addition, the January Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) provided information for the first time about FOMC participants’ individual assessments 4. Between the August 2010 and September 2011 FOMC meetings, principal payments from securities held on the Federal Reserve balance sheet had been reinvested in longer-term Treasury securities. of the appropriate timing of the first increase in the target federal funds rate given their view of the eco- nomic situation and outlook, as well as participants’ assessments of the appropriate level of the target fed- eral funds rate in the fourth quarter of each year through 2014 and over the longer run. The SEP also included qualitative information regarding individual participants’ expectations for the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet under appropriate monetary policy. The economic projections in the January SEP (pre- sented in Part 4 of this report) indicated that FOMC participants (the members of the Board of Governors and the presidents of the 12 Federal Reserve Banks) generally anticipated aggregate output to increase at a somewhat faster pace in 2012 than in 2011. Although the participants marked down their GDP growth pro- jections slightly compared with those prepared in November, they stated that the economic information received since that time showed continued gradual improvement in the pace of economic activity during the second half of 2011, as the influence of the tempo- rary factors that damped activity in the first half of the year subsided. However, a number of additional fac- tors, including ongoing weakness in the housing sector, modest growth in real disposable income, and the restraining effects of fiscal consolidation, suggested that the pace of the recovery would be modest in com- ing quarters. Participants also read the information on economic activity abroad, particularly in Europe, as pointing to weaker demand for U.S. exports. As these factors wane, FOMC participants anticipated that the pace of the economic expansion will gradually strengthen over the 2013–14 period, pushing the rate of increase in real GDP above their estimates of the longer-run rate of output growth. With real GDP expected to increase at a modest rate in 2012, the unemployment rate was projected to decline only a little this year. Participants expected further gradual improvement in labor market conditions over 2013 and 2014 as the pace of output growth picks up. They also noted that inflation expectations had remained stable over the past year despite fluctuations in headline inflation. Most participants anticipated that both headline and core inflation would remain subdued over the 2012–14 period at rates at or below the FOMC’s longer-run objective of 2 percent. With the unemployment rate projected to remain elevated over the projection period and inflation expected to be subdued, most participants expected that the federal funds rate would remain extraordi- narily low for some time. Six participants anticipated that, under appropriate monetary policy, the first increase in the target federal funds rate would occur after 2014, and five expected policy firming to com- mence during 2014. The remaining six participants judged that raising the federal funds rate sooner would be required to forestall inflationary pressures or avoid distortions in the financial system. All of the individual assessments of the appropriate target federal funds rate over the next few years were below the participants’ estimates of the longer-run level of the federal funds rate. Eleven of the 17 participants placed the target federal funds rate at 1 percent or lower at the end of 2014, while 5 saw the appropriate rate as 2 percent or higher. A sizable majority of participants continued to judge the level of uncertainty associated with their pro- jections for real activity and the unemployment rate as exceeding the average of the past 20 years. Many also attached a greater-than-normal level of uncertainty to their forecasts for inflation. As in November, many participants saw downside risks attending their fore- casts of real GDP growth and upside risks to their forecasts of the unemployment rate; most participants viewed the risks to their inflation projections as broadly balanced. Participants also reported their assessments of the values to which key macroeconomic variables would be expected to converge over the longer term under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. The cen- tral tendencies of these longer-run projections were 2.3 to 2.6 percent for real GDP growth and 5.2 to 6.0 percent for the unemployment rate. In light of the 2 percent inflation that is the objective included in the statement of longer-run goals and policy strategy adopted at the January meeting, the range and central tendency of participants’ projections of longer-run inflation were all equal to 2 percent. Real gross domestic product (GDP) increased at an annual rate of 2¼ percent in the second half of 2011, according to the advance estimate prepared by the Bureau of Economic Analysis, following growth of less than 1 percent in the first half (figure 1). Activity was held down in the first half of the year by temporary factors, particularly supply chain disruptions stemming from the earthquake in Japan and the damping effect of higher energy prices on consumer spending. As the effects of these factors waned over the second half of the year, the pace of economic activity picked up. But growth remained quite modest compared with previ- ous economic expansions, and a number of factors appear likely to continue to restrain the pace of activ- ity into 2012; these factors include restricted access to credit for many households and small businesses, the depressed housing market, tight fiscal policy, and the spillover effects of the fiscal and financial difficulties in Europe. The fiscal and banking crisis in Europe was a pri- mary focus of financial markets over the course of the second half of 2011 and early 2012. Growing concerns regarding the potential for spillovers to the U.S. economy and financial markets weighed on investor sentiment, contributing to significant volatility in a wide range of asset prices. Nonetheless, developments in financial markets have been mixed, on balance, since July. Unsecured dollar funding markets became signifi- cantly strained, particularly for European institutions, though U.S. institutions generally did not appear to face substantial funding difficulties. Risk spreads on corporate debt stayed elevated, on net, but yields on corporate bonds generally moved lower. Broad equity prices, which declined significantly in July and August, subsequently returned to levels near those seen in early July. Credit conditions for most large nonfinancial firms were accommodative and corporate profit growth remained strong. Conditions in the labor market have improved since last summer. The pace of private job gains has increased, and the unemployment rate has moved lower. Nonetheless, at 8¼ percent, the jobless rate is still quite elevated. Meanwhile, consumer price infla- tion stepped down from the higher levels observed over the first half of last year, as commodity and import prices retreated while longer-term inflation expecta- tions remained stable (figure 2). In response to a pace of economic growth that was somewhat slower than expected, the Federal Reserve provided additional monetary policy accommodation during the second half of 2011 and early 2012. Partly as a result, Treasury yields moved down significantly, and market participants pushed out the date at which they expect the federal funds rate to move above its current target range of 0 to ¼ percent and built in 1. Change in real gross domestic product, 2005–11 2. Change in the chain-type price index for personal consumption expenditures, 2005–11 Excluding food and energy NOTE: Here and in subsequent figures, except as noted, change for a given period is measured to its final quarter from the final quarter of the preceding period. NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through December 2011; changes are from one year earlier. Real personal consumption expenditures (PCE) rose at an annual rate of about 2 percent in the second half of 2011, following a rise of just 1½ percent in the first half of the year (figure 3). Part of the spending gain was attributable to a fourth-quarter surge in purchases of motor vehicles following very weak spending last spring and summer stemming from the damping effects of the earthquake in Japan on motor vehicle supply. Even with the step-up, however, PCE growth was mod- est compared with previous business cycle recoveries. This subpar performance reflects the continued weak- ness in the underlying determinants of consumption, including sluggish income growth, sentiment that remains relatively low despite recent improvements, the lingering effects of the earlier declines in household wealth, and tight access to credit for many potential borrowers. With consumer spending subdued, the sav- ing rate, although down from its recent high point, remained above levels that prevailed prior to the reces- sion (figure 4). Real income growth is currently estimated to have been very weak in 2011. After rising 2 percent in 2010, aggregate real disposable personal income (DPI)— personal income less personal taxes, adjusted for price changes—was essentially flat in 2011 (figure 5). The wage and salary component of real DPI, which reflects 3. Change in real personal consumption expenditures, 2005–11 NOTE: The data are quarterly and extend through 2011:Q4. SOURCE: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis. 4. Personal saving rate, 1988–2011 NOTE: The data are quarterly and extend through 2011:Q4. SOURCE: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis. both the number of hours worked and average hourly wages adjusted for inflation, rose at an annual rate of 1 percent in 2011. The increase in real wage and salary income reflected the continued, though tepid, recover- ies in both employment and hours worked; in contrast, hourly pay was little changed in real terms. The ratio of household net worth to DPI dropped back a little in the second half of 2011, reflecting fur- ther declines in house prices and equity values (figure 6). The wealth-to-income ratio has hovered close to 5 in recent years, roughly the level that pre- vailed prior to the late 1990s, but well below the highs recorded during the boom in house prices in the mid- 2000s. Consumer sentiment, which dropped sharply last summer, has rebounded since then; nevertheless, 5. Change in real disposable personal income and in real wage and salary disbursements, 2005–11 NOTE: Change is from December to December. The real wage and salary disbursements series is nominal wage and salary disbursements deflated by the personal consumption expenditures deflator. 6. Wealth-to-income ratio, 1988–2011 NOTE: The data are quarterly and extend through 2011:Q3. The wealth- to-income ratio is the ratio of household net worth to disposable personal income. these gains only moved sentiment back to near the top of the range that has prevailed since late 2009 (figure 7). Household debt—the sum of both mortgage and consumer debt—continued to move lower in the sec- ond half of 2011. Since peaking in 2008, household debt has fallen a total of 5 percent. The drop in debt in the second half of 2011 reflected a continued contrac- tion in mortgage debt that was only partially offset by a modest expansion in consumer credit. Largely due to the reduction in overall household debt levels in 2011, the debt service ratio—the aggregate required principal 7. Consumer sentiment indexes, 1998–2012 NOTE: The Conference Board data are monthly and extend through January 2012; the series is indexed to equal 100 in 1985. The Thomson Reuters/University of Michigan data are monthly and extend through February 2012; the series is indexed to equal 100 in 1966. and interest payment on existing mortgages and con- sumer debt relative to income—also decreased further and now is at a level last seen in 1994 and 1995 (figure 8). second half of 2011, at an annual rate of about 4½ percent, has been driven primarily by an increase in nonrevolving credit, which accounts for about two- thirds of total consumer credit and is composed mainly of auto and student loans. Revolving consumer credit (primarily credit card lending), while continuing to lag, appeared to pick up somewhat toward the end of the year. The increase in consumer credit is consis- tent with recent responses to the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS). Indeed, modest net fractions of banks in both the October and January surveys reported that they had eased standards on all major categories of consumer loans, and that demand had strengthened for auto and credit cards loans on balance. However, data on credit card solicitations suggest that lenders in that area are primarily interested in pursuing higher-quality borrowers. Indicators of consumer credit quality generally improved. Delinquency rates on credit card loans moved down in the second half of 2011 to the low end of the range observed in recent decades. Delinquencies and charge-offs on nonrevolving consumer loans also generally improved. Moreover, a majority of respon- dents to the January SLOOS reported that they expect further improvement in the quality of credit card and other consumer loans this year. 8. Household debt service, 1984–2011 NOTE: The data are quarterly and extend through 2011:Q3. Debt service payments consist of estimated required payments on outstanding mortgage and consumer debt. Interest rates on consumer loans held fairly steady, on net, in the second half of 2011 and into 2012. Inter- est rates on new-auto loans continued to be quite low, while rates on credit card loans remained stubbornly high. Indeed, spreads of credit card interest rates to the two-year Treasury yield are very elevated. the second half of 2011 was in line with that of the previous 18 months. Securities backed by auto loans continued to dominate the market, while issuance of credit card ABS remained weak, as growth of credit card loans has remained subdued and most major banks have chosen to fund such loans on their balance sheets. Yields on ABS and their spreads over comparable-maturity swap rates were little changed, on net, over the second half of 2011 and early 2012 and remained in the low range that has prevailed since early 2010 (figure 9). Activity in the housing sector remains depressed by historical standards (figure 10). Although affordability has been boosted by declines in house prices and his- torically low interest rates for conventional mortgages, many potential buyers either lack the down payment and credit history to qualify for loans or are discour- aged by ongoing concerns about future income, employment, and the potential for further declines in house prices. Yet other potential buyers—even those with sufficiently good credit records to qualify for a 9. Spreads of asset-backed securities yields over rates on comparable-maturity interest rate swaps, 2007–12 NOTE: The data are weekly and extend through February 23, 2012. The spreads shown are the yields on two-year fixed-rate asset-backed securities less rates on two-year interest rate swaps. 10. Private housing starts, 1998–2012 NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through January 2012. SOURCE: Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. mortgage insured by one of the housing government- sponsored enterprises (GSEs)—continue to face diffi- culty in obtaining mortgage financing. Moreover, much of the demand that does exist has been chan- neled to the abundant stock of relatively inexpensive, vacant single-family houses, thereby limiting the need for new construction activity. Given the magnitude of the pipeline of delinquent and foreclosed homes, this factor seems likely to continue to weigh on activity for some time. tion activity have been slightly more encouraging. In particular, from July 2011 to January 2012, new single- family homes were started at an average annual rate of about 455,000 units, up a bit from the pace in the first half of 2011. In the multifamily market, demand for apartments appears to be increasing and vacancy rates have fallen, as families who are unable or unwilling to purchase homes are renting properties instead. As a result, starts in the multifamily sector averaged about 200,000 units at an annual rate in the second half of 2011, still below the 300,000-unit rate that had pre- vailed for much of the previous decade but well above the lows recorded in 2009 and early 2010. House prices, as measured by several national indexes, fell further over the second half of 2011 (figure 11). One such measure with wide geographic coverage—the CoreLogic repeat-sales index—fell at an annual rate of about 6 percent in the second half of the year. House prices are being held down by the same factors that are restraining housing construction: the high number of distressed sales, the large inventory of unsold homes, tight mortgage credit conditions, and lackluster demand. The inventory of unsold homes likely will remain high for some time, given the large 11. Prices of existing single-family houses, 2001–11 NOTE: The data are monthly and extend into 2011:Q4. Each index has been normalized so that its peak is 100. Both the CoreLogic price index and the FHFA index (formerly calculated by the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight) only. The S&P/Case-Shiller index reflects all arm’s-length sales transactions in selected metropolitan areas. number of homes that are already in the foreclosure pipeline or could be entering the pipeline in the coming months. As a result of the cumulative decline in house prices over the past several years, roughly one in five mortgage holders owe more on their mortgages than their homes are worth. Indicators of credit quality in the residential mort- gage sector continued to reflect strains on homeowners confronting depressed home values and high unem- ployment. In December, serious delinquency rates on prime and near-prime loans stood at 5 percent and 13 percent for fixed- and variable-rate loans, respec- tively (figure 12). While delinquencies on variable-rate mortgages for both prime and subprime borrowers have moved down over the past two years, delinquen- cies on fixed-rate mortgages have held steady at levels near their peaks in early 2010.5 Meanwhile, delin- quency and charge-off rates on second-lien mortgages held by banks also are at elevated levels, and they have declined only slightly from their peaks. closure process remained elevated in 2011. This high level partly reflected the difficulties that mortgage ser- vicers continued to have with resolving deficiencies in their foreclosure procedures. Resolution of these issues could eventually be associated with a sustained increase in the pace of completed foreclosures as ser- vicers work through the backlog of severely delinquent loans. 5. A mortgage is defined as seriously delinquent if the borrower is 90 days or more behind in payments or the property is in foreclosure. 12. Mortgage delinquency rates, 2000–11 Fixed rate Fixed rate NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through December 2011 for prime and near prime and through November 2011 for subprime. Delinquency rate is the percent of loans 90 days or more past due or in foreclosure. Interest rates on fixed-rate mortgages fell steadily during the second half of 2011 and in early 2012 (figure 13), though not as much as Treasury yields, leaving spreads to Treasury securities of comparable maturities wider. The ability of potential borrowers to obtain mortgage credit for purchase transactions or refinancing continued to be limited. In part, the low level of mortgage borrowing reflected characteristics of the would-be borrowers, most prominently the wide- spread incidence of negative equity and unemploy- ment. In addition, credit supply conditions remained tight. Indeed, it appeared that some lenders were reluc- tant to extend mortgages to borrowers with less-than- pristine credit even when the resulting loans would be eligible for purchase or guarantee by GSEs.6 One manifestation of this constriction was the fact that the distribution of credit scores among borrowers who succeed in obtaining mortgages had shifted up signifi- cantly (figure 14). As a result of these influences, the pace of mortgage applications for home purchase declined, on net, over the second half of 2011 and remains very sluggish. The same factors also appear to have limited refinancing activity, which remains sub- dued compared with the large number of households 6. For example, only about half of lenders reported to LoanSifter data services that they would offer a conventional fully documented mortgage with a 90 percent loan-to-value ratio for borrowers with FICO scores of 620. 13. Mortgage interest rates, 1995–2012 Fixed rate NOTE: The data, which are weekly and extend through February 22, 2012, are contract rates on 30-year mortgages. that would potentially benefit from the low rates avail- able to high-quality borrowers. The outstanding stock of mortgage-backed securi- ties (MBS) guaranteed by the GSEs was little changed, on net, over the second half of 2011. The securitization market for mortgage loans not guaranteed by a housing-related GSE or the Federal Housing Adminis- tration continued to be essentially closed. Real spending by businesses for equipment and soft- ware (E&S) rose at an annual rate of about 11 percent over the second half of 2011, a pace that was a bit 14. Credit scores on new prime mortgages, 2003–11 NOTE: The data, which include purchase mortgages only, are monthly and faster than in the first half (figure 15). Much of this strength was recorded in the third quarter. Spending growth dropped back in the fourth quarter, to 5 per- cent, likely reflecting—among other influences— heightened uncertainty of business owners about global economic and financial conditions. Although spending by businesses for high-tech equipment has held up reasonably well, outlays for a broad range of other E&S slowed appreciably. More recently, however, indicators of business sentiment and capital spending plans generally have improved, suggesting that firms may be in the process of becoming more willing to undertake new investments. After tumbling throughout most of 2009 and 2010, real investment in nonresidential structures other than drilling and mining turned up last spring, rising at a surprisingly brisk pace in the second and third quarters of 2011. However, investment dropped back in the fourth quarter. Conditions in the sector remain diffi- cult: Vacancy rates are still high, prices of existing structures are low, and financing conditions for build- ers are still tight. Spending on drilling and mining structures also dropped back in the fourth quarter, but 15. Change in real business fixed investment, 2005–11 Structures excluding mining and drilling Mining and drilling outlays in this category should continue to be sup- ported by elevated oil prices and advances in technol- ogy for horizontal drilling and hydraulic fracturing. Real inventory investment stepped down a bit in the second half of 2011 (figure 16). Stockbuilding outside of motor vehicles increased at a modest pace, and sur- veys suggest that firms are generally comfortable with their own, and their customers’, current inventory positions. In the motor vehicle sector, inventories were drawn down in the second half, as the rise in sales out- paced the rebound in production following the supply disruptions associated with the earthquake in Japan last spring. Operating earnings per share for S&P 500 firms contin- ued to rise in the third quarter of 2011, increasing at a quarterly rate of nearly 10 percent. Fourth-quarter earnings reports by firms in the S&P 500 published through late February indicate that this measure has remained at or near its pre-crisis peaks throughout the second half of 2011. which had been rising rapidly since 2008, increased further in the second half of 2011. This relatively strong profit growth contributed to the continued robust credit quality of nonfinancial firms in the sec- ond half of 2011. Although the ratio of liquid assets to total assets on the balance sheets of nonfinancial cor- porations edged down in the third quarter, it remained 16. Change in real business inventories, 2005–11 Billions of chained (2005) dollars, annual rate at a very high level, and the aggregate ratio of debt to assets—a measure of corporate leverage—stayed low. With corporate balance sheets in generally healthy shape, credit rating upgrades once again outpaced downgrades, and the bond default rate for nonfinancial firms remained low. In addition, the delinquency rate on commercial and industrial (C&I) loans at commer- cial banks continued to decline and stood at around 1½ percent at year-end, a level near the low end of its historical range. Most banks responding to the January SLOOS reported that they expected further improve- ments in the credit quality of C&I loans in 2012. Borrowing by nonfinancial corporations continued at a reasonably robust pace through the second half of 2011, particularly for larger, higher-credit-quality firms (figure 17). Issuance of investment-grade bonds pro- gressed at a strong pace, similar to that observed in the first half of the year, buoyed by good corporate credit quality, attractive financing conditions, and an improv- ing economic outlook. In contrast to higher-grade bonds, issuance of speculative-grade bonds dropped in the second half of the year as investors’ appetite for riskier assets waned. In the market for syndicated loans, investment-grade issuance moved up in the sec- ond half of 2011 from its already strong first-half pace, while issuance of higher-yielding syndicated leveraged loans weakened (figure 18). C&I loans on banks’ books grew steadily over the second half of 2011. Banks reportedly competed aggressively for higher-rated credits in the syndicated leveraged loan market, and some nonfinancial firms reportedly substituted away from bond financing because of volatility in bond spreads. In addition, according to the SLOOS, some domestic banks gained 17. Selected components of net financing for nonfinancial businesses, 2005–11 NOTE: The data for the components except bonds are seasonally adjusted. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Board, flow of funds data. 18. Syndicated loan issuance, by credit quality, 2005–11 NOTE: Leveraged loans are loans rated BB+ or lower, or unrated loans with interest rates that have a significant spread to the London interbank offered rate, or LIBOR. The level of the spread required for a loan to be labeled a leveraged loan varies according to market conditions and is currently business from customers that shifted away from Euro- pean banks. Although domestic banks reported little change, on net, in lending standards for C&I loans (figure 19), they reduced the spreads on these loans as well as the costs of credit lines. Banks that reported having eased their credit standards or terms for C&I loans over the second half of 2011 unanimously cited increased competition from other banks or nonbank sources of funds as a factor. 19. Change in standards and demand for commercial and industrial loans, 1991–2012 NOTE: The data are drawn from a survey generally conducted four times per year; the last observation is from the January 2012 survey, which covers 2011:Q4. Each series is a composite index that represents the net percentage of commercial and industrial loans on domestic respondents’ balance sheets for which banks reported tighter lending standards or stronger loan demand over the past three months, with weights based on Call Report data. The shaded bars indicate periods of business recession as defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research. Borrowing conditions for smaller businesses contin- ued to be tighter than those for larger firms, and their demand for credit remained relatively weak. However, some signs of easing began to emerge. Surveys con- ducted by the National Federation of Independent Business showed that the net fraction of small busi- nesses reporting that credit had become more difficult to obtain relative to the previous three months declined, on balance, during the second half of 2011 (figure 20). Moreover, the January 2012 SLOOS found that terms for smaller borrowers had continued to ease, and about 15 percent of banks, on net, reported that demand for C&I loans from smaller firms had increased, the highest reading since 2005. Indeed, C&I loans held by regional and community banks—those not in the 25 largest banks and likely to lend mostly to middle-market and small firms—advanced at about a 6 percent annual rate in the second half of 2011, up from a 2½ percent pace in the first half. Commercial mortgage debt has continued to decline, albeit at a more moderate pace than during 2010. Commercial real estate (CRE) loans held on banks’ books contracted further in the second half of 2011 and early 2012, though the runoff appeared to ebb somewhat in 2011. That slowing is more or less consis- tent with recent SLOOS responses, in which moderate net fractions of domestic banks reported that demand for such loans had strengthened. In the January survey, banks also reported that, for the first time since 2007, they had raised the maximum loan size and trimmed 20. Net percentage of small businesses that reported more difficulty in obtaining credit, 1990–2012 NOTE: The data are drawn from a survey conducted monthly and are seasonally adjusted; the last observation is from the January 2012 survey, which covers December 2011. The data represent the proportion of borrowers who sought credit in the past three months that reported more difficulty in obtaining credit less the proportion that reported more ease in obtaining credit. spreads of rates on CRE loans over their cost of funds during the past 12 months. By contrast, life insurance companies reportedly increased their holdings of CRE loans, especially of loans issued to higher-quality bor- rowers. Although delinquency rates on CRE loans at commercial banks edged down further in the fourth quarter, they remained at high levels, especially on loans for construction and land development; delin- quencies on loans held by life insurance companies remained extraordinarily low, as they have done for more than a decade (figure 21). Vacancy rates for most types of commercial properties are still elevated, exert- ing downward pressure on property prices and impair- ing the performance of CRE loans. Conditions in the market for commercial mortgage- backed securities (CMBS) worsened somewhat in the second half of the year. Risk spreads on highly rated tranches of CMBS moved up, on balance, and about half of the respondents to the December Senior Credit Officer Opinion Survey on Dealer Financing Terms (SCOOS) indicated that liquidity conditions in the markets for such securities had deteriorated somewhat. Issuance of CMBS slowed further, but did not halt 21. Delinquency rates on commercial real estate loans, 1991–2012 NOTE: The data for commercial banks and life insurance companies are quarterly and extend through 2011:Q4 and 2011:Q3, respectively. The data for commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) are monthly and extend through January 2012. The delinquency rates for commercial banks and CMBS are the percent of loans 30 days or more past due or not accruing interest. The delinquency rate for life insurance companies is the percent of loans 60 days or more past due or not accruing interest. completely. Delinquency rates on CRE loans in CMBS pools held steady just below 10 percent. In the corporate equity market, gross issuance dropped significantly in the third quarter amid sub- stantial equity market volatility, but it retraced a part of that decline in the fourth quarter as some previously withdrawn issues were brought back to the market. Net equity issuance continued to decline in the third quarter, reflecting the continued strength of cash- financed mergers and share repurchases (figure 22). The deficit in the federal unified budget remains very wide. The budget deficit for fiscal year 2011 was $1.3 trillion, or 8½ percent of nominal GDP—a level comparable with deficits recorded in 2009 and 2010 but sharply higher than the deficits recorded prior to the onset of the financial crisis and recession. The bud- get deficit continued to be boosted by spending that was committed by the American Recovery and Rein- vestment Act of 2009 (ARRA) and other stimulus policy actions as well as by the weakness of the economy, which has reduced tax revenues and increased payments for income support. Tax receipts rose 6½ percent in fiscal 2011. However, the level of receipts remained very low; indeed, at around 15½ percent of GDP, the ratio of receipts to national income is only slightly above the 60-year lows 22. Components of net equity issuance, 2005–11 NOTE: Net equity issuance is the difference between equity issued by domestic companies in public or private markets and equity retired through share repurchases, domestic cash-financed mergers, or foreign takeovers of U.S. firms. Equity issuance includes funds invested by private equity partnerships and stock option proceeds. recorded in 2009 and 2010 (figure 23). The rise in rev- enues in fiscal 2011 was the result of a robust increase of more than 20 percent in individual income tax pay- ments that reflected strong final payments on 2010 income. Social insurance tax receipts fell about 5 per- cent in fiscal 2011, held down by the temporary 2 per- centage point reduction in payroll taxes enacted in 2010. Corporate taxes also fell around 5 percent in 2011, with the decline largely the result of legislation providing more-favorable tax treatment for some busi- ness investment. In the first four months of fiscal 2012, total tax receipts increased 4 percent relative to the comparable year-earlier period. Total federal outlays rose 4 percent in fiscal 2011. Much of the increase relative to last year is attributable to the earlier unwinding of the effects of financial transactions, such as the repayments to the Treasury of obligations for the Troubled Asset Relief Program, which temporarily lowered measured outlays in fiscal 2010. Excluding these transactions, outlays were up about 2 percent in 2011. This small increase reflects reductions in both ARRA spending and unemploy- ment insurance payments as well as a subdued pace of defense and Medicaid spending. By contrast, net inter- est payments rose sharply, reflecting the increase in federal debt. Spending has remained restrained in the current fiscal year, with outlays (adjusted to exclude financial transactions) down about 5 percent in the first four months of fiscal 2012 relative to the comparable year-earlier period. As measured in the national income and product accounts (NIPA), real federal expenditures on con- sumption and gross investment—the part of federal 23. Federal receipts and expenditures, 1991–2011 NOTE: The receipts and expenditures data are on a unified-budget basis and are for fiscal years (October through September); gross domestic product (GDP) is for the four quarters ending in Q3. spending that is a direct component of GDP—de- creased at an annual rate of about 3 percent in the sec- ond half of 2011, a little less rapidly than in the first half of the year (figure 24). Defense spending fell at an annual rate of about 4 percent in the second half of the year, a somewhat sharper pace of decline than in the first half, while nondefense purchases were unchanged over this period. Federal debt surged in the second half of 2011, after the debt ceiling was raised in early August by the Bud- get Control Act of 2011.7 Standard and Poor’s (S&P), which had put the U.S. long-term sovereign credit rat- ing on credit watch negative in June, downgraded that rating from AAA to AA+ following the passage of the act, citing the risks of a continued rise in federal gov- ernment debt ratios over the medium term and declin- ing confidence that timely fiscal measures necessary to place U.S. public finances on a sustainable path would be forthcoming. Other credit rating agencies subse- quently posted a negative outlook on their rating of U.S. sovereign debt, on similar grounds, but did not change their credit ratings. These actions do not appear to have affected participation in Treasury auc- tions, which continued to be well subscribed. Demand for Treasury securities was supported by market par- ticipants’ preference for the relative safety and liquidity 7. On May 16, the federal debt reached the $14.294 trillion limit, and the Secretary of the Treasury declared a “debt issuance suspen- sion period” for the Civil Service Retirement and Disability Fund, permitting the Treasury to redeem a portion of existing Treasury securities held by that fund as investments and to suspend issuance of new Treasury securities to that fund as investments. The Treasury also began suspending some of its daily reinvestment of Treasury securities held as investments by the Government Securities Invest- ment Fund of the Federal Employees’ Retirement System Thrift Savings Plan. 24. Change in real government expenditures on consumption and investment, 2005–11 of such securities. Bid-to-cover ratios were within his- torical ranges, and indicators of foreign participation remained near their recent levels. Federal debt held by the public, as a percentage of GDP, continued to rise in the third quarter, reaching about 68 percent (figure 25). State and local governments remain under significant fiscal strain. Since July, employment in the sector has declined by an average of 15,000 jobs per month, just slightly under the pace of job losses recorded for the first half of 2011. Meanwhile, reductions in real con- struction expenditures abated after a precipitous drop in the first half of 2011. As measured in the NIPA, real state and local expenditures on consumption and gross investment decreased at an annual rate of about 2 per- cent in the second half of 2011, a somewhat slower pace of decline than in the first half of the year (figure 24). State and local government revenues appear to have increased modestly in 2011. Notably, at the state level, third-quarter tax revenues rose 5½ percent over the year-earlier period, with the majority of the states experiencing gains. However, this increase in tax rev- enues was partly offset by a reduction in federal stimu- lus grants. Tax collections have been less robust at the local level. Property tax receipts have been roughly flat, on net, since the start of 2010 (based on data through the third quarter of 2011), reflecting the downturn in home prices. Furthermore, many localities have experi- 25. Federal government debt held by the public, 1960–2011 NOTE: The data for debt are as of year-end; the observation for 2011 is an estimate. The corresponding values for gross domestic product (GDP) are for Q4 at an annual rate. Excludes securities held as investments of federal government accounts. enced a decrease in grants-in-aid from their state government. Issuance of long-term securities by state and local governments moved up in the second half of 2011 to a pace similar to that seen in 2009 and 2010. Issuance had been subdued during the first half of the year, in part because the expiration of the Build America Bonds program led to some shifting of financing from 2011 into late 2010. Yields on state and local government securities declined in the second half of 2011 and into 2012, reaching levels near the lower end of their range over the past decade, but they fell to a lesser degree than yields on comparable-maturity Treasury securities. The increase in the ratio of municipal bond yields to Treas- ury yields likely reflected, in part, continued concern regarding the financial health of state and local govern- ments. Indeed, credit default swap (CDS) indexes for municipal bonds rose, on balance, over the second half of 2011 but have narrowed somewhat in early 2012. Credit rating downgrades outpaced upgrades in the second half of 2011, particularly in December, follow- ing the downgrade of a municipal bond guarantor.8 Real exports of goods and services rose at an annual rate of 4¾ percent in the second half of 2011, boosted by continued growth in overall foreign economic activ- ity and the lagged effect of declines in the foreign exchange value of the dollar earlier in the year (figure 26). Exports of aircraft and consumer goods registered some of the largest gains. The increase in export demand was concentrated in the emerging mar- ket economies (EMEs), while exports to the euro area declined toward the end of the year. With growth of economic activity in the United States moderate during the second half of 2011, real imports of goods and services rose at only about a 3 percent annual rate, down from about 5 percent in the first half. Import growth was weak across most trading partners in the second half of last year, with the notable exception of imports from Japan, which grew significantly after dropping sharply in the wake of the March earthquake. Altogether, net exports contributed about ¼ per- centage point to real GDP growth in the second half of 8. Downgrades to bond guarantors can affect the ratings of all municipal securities guaranteed by those firms, as the rating of a security is the higher of either the published underlying security rating or the rating of the entity providing the guarantee. 26. Change in real imports and exports of goods 2011, as export growth outpaced import growth. At an annual rate, the current account deficit in the third quarter of 2011 (the latest available data) was $441 bil- lion, or about 3 percent of nominal GDP, a touch nar- rower than the $470 billion deficit recorded in 2010 (figure 27). Oil prices moved down, on net, over the second half of last year. The spot price of West Texas Intermediate (WTI) crude oil, which jumped to $110 per barrel last April after a near-complete shutdown of Libyan oil production, subsequently reversed course and declined sharply to an average of just under $86 per barrel in September. The prices of other major benchmark crude oils also fell over this period, although by less than the spot price of WTI (figure 28). The drop in oil prices through September likely was prompted by the winding down of the conflict in Libya as well as grow- ing concern about the strength of global growth as the European sovereign debt crisis intensified, particularly toward the end of summer. From September to Janu- ary of this year, the price of oil from the North Sea (the Brent benchmark) was essentially flat as the poten- tial implications of increased geopolitical tensions— most notably with Iran—have offset ongoing concern over the strength of global demand and a faster-than- expected rebound in Libyan oil production. In Febru- ary, the price of Brent moved higher, both with increasing optimism regarding the outlook for global growth as well as a further heightening of tensions with Iran. The spot price of WTI crude oil also 27. U.S. trade and current account balances, 2003–11 NOTE: The data are quarterly. For the trade account, the data extend through 2011:Q4; for the current account, they extend through 2011:Q3. GDP is gross domestic product. increased in February, though by less than Brent, fol- lowing a relatively rapid rise over the final three months of last year.9 After peaking early in 2011, prices of many non-oil commodities also moved lower during the remainder of 2011. Despite moving up recently, copper prices remain well below their early 2011 level. In agricultural markets, corn and wheat prices ended 2011 down about 20 percent from their relatively high levels at the end of August as global production reached record levels. In early 2012, however, corn prices edged up on worries about dry growing conditions in South America. After increasing at an annual rate of 6½ percent in the first half of 2011, prices of non-oil imported goods were flat in the second half. Fluctuations in prices of imported finished goods (such as consumer goods and capital goods) were moderate. 9. The more rapid rise of WTI than other grades of crude oil at the end of 2011 reflects the narrowing of a discount that had opened up between WTI and other grades earlier in the year. Throughout most of 2011, continued increases in the supply of oil, primarily from Canada and North Dakota, available to flow into Cushing, Okla- homa (the delivery point for the WTI crude oil), and the lack of transportation infrastructure to pass the supplies on to global markets, depressed the price of WTI relative to other grades of crude oil. In mid-November, however, plans were announced to reverse the flow of a key pipeline that currently transports crude oil from the Gulf Coast into Cushing. By raising the possibility of alleviating the supply glut of crude oil in the Midwest, the announcement of this flow reversal has led spot WTI prices to rise to a level that is more in line with the price of other grades of crude oil. 28. Prices of oil and nonfuel commodities, 2007–12 NOTE: The data are monthly. The oil price is the spot price of Brent crude oil, Feb- ruary 1–24, 2012. The price of nonfuel commodities is an index of 45 primary-commodity prices and extends through January 2012. the Commodity Research Bureau; is Total U.S. net national saving—that is, the saving of U.S. households, businesses, and governments, net of depreciation charges—remains extremely low by his- torical standards (figure 29). After having reached 4 percent of nominal GDP in 2006, net national saving dropped over the subsequent three years, reaching a low of negative 2½ percent in 2009. Since then, the national saving rate has increased on balance: In the third quarter of 2011 (the latest quarter for which data are available), net national saving was negative ½ per- cent of nominal GDP. The recent contour of the sav- ing rate importantly reflects the pattern of federal bud- get deficits, which widened sharply in 2008 and 2009, but have edged down as a share of GDP since then. National saving will likely remain relatively low this year in light of the continuing large federal budget deficit. If low levels of national saving persist over the longer run, they will likely be associated with both low rates of capital formation and heavy borrowing from abroad, limiting the rise in the standard of living of U.S. residents over time. Conditions in the labor market have improved some of late. Private payroll employment gains averaged 29. Net saving, 1991–2011 NOTE: The data are quarterly and extend through 2011:Q3. Nonfederal saving is the sum of personal and net business saving and the net saving of state and local governments. GDP is gross domestic product. 165,000 jobs per month in the second half of 2011, a bit slower than the pace in the first half of the year, but gains in December and January were more robust, averaging almost 240,000 per month (figure 30). The unemployment rate, which hovered around 9 percent for much of last year, is estimated to have moved down noticeably since September, reaching 8¼ percent in January, the lowest reading in almost three years (figure 31). Although the recent decline in the jobless rate is encouraging, the level of unemployment remains very elevated. In addition, long-duration joblessness contin- ues to account for an especially large share of the total. Indeed, in January, 5½ million persons among those counted as unemployed—about 43 percent of the total—had been out of work for more than six months, 30. Net change in private payroll employment, 2005–12 NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through January 2012. SOURCE: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. 31. Civilian unemployment rate, 1978–2012 NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through January 2012. SOURCE: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. figures that were only a little below record levels (figure 32). Moreover, the number of individuals who are working part time for economic reasons—another indicator of the underutilization of labor—remained roughly twice its pre-recession value. Labor productivity growth slowed last year. Productiv- ity had risen rapidly in 2009 and 2010 as firms strove to cut costs in an environment of severe economic stress. In 2011, however, with operations leaner and work- forces stretched thin, firms needed to add labor inputs to achieve the desired output gains, and output per 32. Long-term unemployed, 1978–2012 NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through January 2012. The series shown is the percentage of total unemployed persons who have been unemployed for 27 weeks or more. hour in the nonfarm business sector rose only ½ per- cent (figure 33). Increases in hourly compensation remained subdued in 2011, restrained by the wide margin of labor market slack (figure 34). The employment cost index, which measures both wages and the cost to employers of pro- viding benefits, for private industry rose just 2¼ per- cent in nominal terms in 2011. Nominal compensation per hour in the nonfarm business sector—derived from the labor compensation data in the NIPA—is esti- mated to have increased only 1¾ percent in 2011, well below the average gain of about 4 percent in the years before the recession. Adjusted for the rise in consumer prices, hourly compensation was roughly unchanged in 2011. Unit labor costs rose 1¼ percent in 2011, as the rise in nominal hourly compensation outpaced that of labor productivity in the nonfarm business sector. In 2010, unit labor costs fell almost 1 percent. Consumer price inflation stepped down in the second half of 2011. After rising at an annual rate of 3½ per- cent in the first half of the year, the overall PCE chain- type price index increased just 1½ percent in the sec- ond half (figure 35). PCE prices excluding food and energy also decelerated in the second half of 2011, ris- ing at an annual rate of about 1½ percent, compared with roughly 2 percent in the first half. The recent con- tour of consumer price inflation has reflected move- ments in global commodity prices, which rose sharply 33. Change in output per hour, 1948–2011 NOTE: Nonfarm business sector. Change for each multiyear period is measured to the fourth quarter of the final year of the period from the fourth quarter of the year immediately preceding the period. 34. Measures of change in hourly compensation, 2001–11 NOTE: The data are quarterly and extend through 2011:Q4. For nonfarm business compensation, change is over four quarters; for the employment cost index (ECI), change is over the 12 months ending in the last month of each quarter. The nonfarm business sector excludes farms, government, nonprofit institutions, and households. The sector covered by the ECI used here is the nonfarm business sector plus nonprofit institutions. early in 2011 but have moved lower during the second half of the year. Information from the consumer price index and other sources suggests that inflation remained subdued through January 2012, although energy prices have turned up more recently. The index of consumer energy prices, which surged in the first half of 2011, fell back in the second half of the year. The contour mainly reflected the rise and sub- sequent reversal in the price of crude oil; however, gasoline prices started to rise again in February follow- ing a recent upturn in crude oil prices. Consumer natu- ral gas prices also fell at the end of 2011, as unseason- 35. Change in the chain-type price index for personal consumption expenditures, 2005–11 ably mild temperatures and increases in supply from new domestic wells helped boost inventories above typical levels. All told, the overall index of consumer energy prices edged lower during the second half of 2011, compared with an increase of almost 30 percent in the first half of the year. Consumer prices for food and beverages exhibited a similar pattern as that of energy prices. Prices for farm commodities rose briskly early last year, reflecting the combination of poor harvests in several countries that are major producers along with the emerging recovery in the global economy. These commodity price increases fed through to higher consumer prices for meats and a wide range of other more-processed foods. With the downturn in farm commodity prices late in the summer, the index of consumer food prices rose at an annual rate of just 3¾ percent in the second half of 2011 after increasing 6½ percent in the first half. energy and food have also slowed, on net, in recent months. Core PCE prices had been boosted in the spring and summer of 2011 by a number of transitory factors, including the pass-through of the first-half surge in prices of raw commodities and other imported goods and a boost to motor vehicle prices that stemmed from supply shortages following the earth- quake in Japan. As the impulse from these factors faded, core PCE price inflation stepped down so that, for 2011 as a whole, core PCE price inflation was just 1¾ percent. tations are down since the middle of 2011. Median year-ahead inflation expectations as reported in the Thomson Reuters/University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers (Michigan survey), which had risen sharply earlier in the year reflecting the run-up in energy and food prices, subsequently fell back as those prices decelerated (figure 36). Longer-term expectations have remained generally stable. In the Michigan survey, the inflation rate expected over the next 5 to 10 years was 2.9 percent in February, within the range that has pre- vailed over the past 10 years; in the Survey of Profes- sional Forecasters, conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, expectations for the increase in the price index for PCE over the next 10 years remained at 2¼ percent, in the middle of its recent range. Measures of inflation compensation derived from yields on nominal and inflation-indexed Treasury secu- rities declined early in the second half of 2011 at both medium-term and longer-term horizons, likely reflect- ing a worsening in the economic outlook and the 36. Median inflation expectations, 2001–12 NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through January 2012. SOURCE: Thomson Reuters/University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers. intensification of the European fiscal crisis. More recently, inflation compensation estimates over the next five years have edged back up, apparently reflecting investors’ more optimistic economic outlook, and is about unchanged, on net, for the period. However, the forward measure of five-year inflation compensation five years ahead remains about 55 basis points below its level in the middle of last year (figure 37). In light of the disappointing pace of progress toward meeting its statutory mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability, the Federal Open Mar- ket Committee (FOMC) took a number of steps to provide additional monetary policy accommodation during the second half of 2011 and early 2012. These steps included increasing the average maturity of the Federal Reserve’s securities holdings, shifting the reinvestment of principal payments on agency securi- ties from Treasury securities to agency-guaranteed MBS, and strengthening the forward rate guidance included in postmeeting statements. Financial markets were buffeted over the second half of 2011 and in early 2012 by changes in investors’ assessments of the ongoing European crisis as well as in their evaluation of the U.S. economic outlook. As a result, developments in financial market conditions have been mixed since July. Unsecured dollar funding markets, particularly for European institutions, became significantly strained, though domestic finan- cial firms generally maintained ready access to short- term unsecured funding. Corporate bond spreads remained elevated, on net, while broad equity prices 5-year (carry adjusted) NOTE: The data are daily and extend through February 24, 2012. Inflation compensation is the difference between yields on nominal Treasury securities and Treasury inflation-protected securities (TIPS) of comparable maturities, based on yield curves fitted by Federal Reserve staff to off-the-run nominal Treasury securities and on- and off-the-run TIPS. The 5-year measure is adjusted for the effect of indexation lags. were little changed, although they exhibited unusually high volatility. Partially reflecting additional monetary policy accommodation, Treasury yields moved down significantly. Similarly, investors pushed out the date at which they expect the federal funds rate to rise above its current target range, and they are currently antici- pating a more gradual pace of increase in the funds rate following liftoff than they did last July. In response to the steps taken by the FOMC to strengthen its forward guidance and provide additional support to the economic recovery, market participants pushed out further the date when they expect the fed- eral funds rate to first rise above its current target range of 0 to ¼ percent and scaled back their expecta- tions of the pace at which monetary policy accommo- dation will be removed. On balance, quotes on over- night index swap (OIS) contracts, as of late February, imply that investors anticipate the federal funds rate will rise above its current target range in the fourth quarter of 2013, about four quarters later than the date implied in July. Investors expect, on average, that the effective federal funds rate will be about 70 basis points by late 2014, roughly 165 basis points lower than anticipated in mid-2011.10 Yields on nominal Treasury securities declined sig- nificantly over the second half of 2011 (figure 38). The bulk of this decline occurred in late July and August, in part reflecting weaker-than-anticipated U.S. eco- nomic data and increased investor demand for the rela- tive safety and liquidity of Treasury securities amid an intensification of concerns about the situation in Europe. Following the FOMC announcement of the maturity extension program (MEP) at its September meeting, yields on longer-dated Treasury securities declined further, while yields on shorter-dated securi- ties held steady at very low levels.11 On net, yields on 2-, 5-, and 10-year Treasury notes have declined roughly 10, 65, and 110 basis points from their levels in mid-2011, respectively. The yield on the 30-year bond has dropped about 120 basis points. Though liquidity and functioning in money markets deteriorated nota- bly for several days at the height of the debt ceiling debate last summer, neither the downgrade of the U.S. long-term sovereign credit rating by S&P in August 10. When interest rates are close to zero, determining the point at which financial market quotes indicate that the federal funds rate will move above its current range can be complicated. The path described in the text is the mean of a distribution calculated from OIS rates. Alternatively, one can use similar derivatives to calculate the most likely, or “modal,” path of the federal funds rate, a measure that tends to be more stable. This alternative measure has also moved down, on net, since the middle of 2011, but it suggests a flatter over- all trajectory for the target federal funds rate, according to which the effective rate does not rise above its current target range through the end of 2015. 11. As of February 24, the Open Market Desk had sold $223 billion in shorter-term Treasury securities and purchased $211 billion in longer-term Treasury securities. Interest rates on Treasury securities at selected maturities, 2004–12 NOTE: The data are daily and extend through February 24, 2012. SOURCE: Department of the Treasury. nor the failure of the Joint Select Committee on Deficit Reduction to reach an agreement in November appeared to leave a permanent imprint on the Treasury market. Uncertainty about longer-term interest rates, as measured by the implied volatility on 10-year Treas- ury securities, moved sideways through most of the second half of 2011 and then declined late in the year and into 2012, reflecting improved sentiment in finan- cial markets following a number of policy actions by central banks and some signs of strengthening in the pace of economic recovery. Measures of market functioning suggest that the Treasury market has continued to operate smoothly since mid-2011 despite the S&P downgrade in August. Bid−asked spreads for most Treasury securities were roughly unchanged, though they have widened a bit, on net, for the 30-year bond since August. Dealer transaction volumes have remained within historically normal ranges. Conditions in unsecured short-term dollar funding markets deteriorated, on net, over the second half of 2011 and in early 2012 amid elevated anxiety about the crisis in Europe and its implications for European firms and their counterparties. Funding costs increased and tenors shortened dramatically for European insti- tutions throughout the third and into the fourth quar- ter. Funding pressures eased somewhat late in the year following the European Central Bank’s (ECB) first injection of euro liquidity via a three-year refinancing operation and the reduction of the price of U.S. dollar liquidity offered by the ECB and other central banks; they subsequently eased further following the passage of year-end. On balance, spreads of London interbank offered rates (LIBOR) over comparable-maturity OIS rates—a measure of stress in short-term bank funding markets—have widened considerably since July, par- ticularly for tenors beyond one month, though they have moved down since late last year. Indeed, through- out much of the third and fourth quarters, many Euro- pean institutions were reportedly unable to obtain unsecured dollar funding at tenors beyond one week. Additionally, more-forward-looking measures of inter- bank funding costs—such as the spread between a three-month forward rate agreement and the rate on an OIS contract three to six months ahead—moved up considerably in the second half of 2011 and have only partially retraced in 2012 (figure 39). Despite the pres- sures faced by European financial institutions, U.S. firms generally maintained ready access to short-term unsecured funding markets. Against a backdrop of solid deposit growth and modest expansion in bank credit across the industry, most domestic banks report- edly had limited need for unsecured funding. Pressures were also evident in the commercial paper (CP) market. Issuance in the United States of unse- cured financial CP and negotiable certificates of deposit by entities with European parents declined sig- nificantly in the second half of 2011. By contrast, the pace of issuance by U.S. firms edged down only slightly, on net, over the period. On balance, spreads of rates on unsecured A2/P2 commercial paper over equivalent maturity AA-rated nonfinancial CP rose a bit for both overnight and 30-day tenors. AA-rated asset-backed CP spreads increased more notably over the second half of 2011 but largely retraced following year-end (figure 40). In contrast to unsecured dollar funding markets, signs of stress were largely absent in secured short- term dollar funding markets. For example, in the mar- ket for repurchase agreements (repos), bid−asked spreads for most collateral types were little changed. In addition, despite a seasonal dip around year-end, vol- umes in the triparty repo market were largely stable on balance. That said, the composition of collateral pledged in the repo market moved further away from equities and fixed-income collateral that is not eligible for open market operations, shifting even more heavily toward Treasury and agency securities as counterparty 39. LIBOR minus overnight index swap rate, 2007–12 NOTE: The data are daily and extend through February 24, 2012. An overnight index swap (OIS) is an interest rate swap with the floating rate tied to an index of daily overnight rates, in this case the effective federal funds rate. At maturity, the two parties to the swap agreement exchange, on the basis of the agreed notional amount, the difference between interest accrued at the fixed rate and interest accrued by averaging the floating, or index, rate. The U.S. dollar (USD) spread is calculated from a London interbank offered rate (LIBOR) forward rate agreement (FRA) three to six months in the future and the implied forward OIS rate for the same period. 40. Commercial paper spreads, 2007–12 NOTE: The data are weekly and extend through February 22, 2012. Commercial paper yield spreads are for an overnight maturity and are expressed relative to the AA nonfinancial rate. concerns became more evident. Respondents to the SCOOS in both September and December noted a continued increase in demand for funding across col- lateral types but reported a general tightening in credit terms under which several securities types are financed. In addition, market participants reportedly became somewhat less willing to fund riskier collateral types at longer tenors as year-end approached. However, year- end pressures remained muted overall, with few signs of dislocations in either secured or unsecured short- term markets, and conditions in term funding markets have improved in early 2012. Money market funds, a major provider of funds to short-term funding markets such as those for CP and for repo, experienced significant outflows across fund categories in July, as investors’ focus turned to the deteriorating situation in Europe and to the debt ceil- ing debate in the United States. Those outflows largely shifted to bank deposits, resulting in significant pres- sure on the regulatory leverage ratios of a few large banks. However, investments in money market funds rose, on net, over the remainder of 2011, with the com- position of those increases reflecting the general tone of increased risk aversion, as government-only funds faced notable inflows while prime funds experienced steady outflows. Market sentiment toward the banking industry declined rapidly early in the second half of 2011 as investors turned their focus on exposures to European sovereigns and financial institutions and on the pos- sible spillover effects of the European crisis. Some large U.S. institutions also remained significantly exposed to legal risks stemming from their mortgage banking operations and foreclosure practices.12 More recently, however, investor sentiment has improved somewhat following the actions of central banks and incoming data suggesting a somewhat better economic outlook in the United States. On balance, equity prices for banking organizations (figure 41) have completely retraced their declines from last summer, while CDS spreads (figure 42)—which reflect investors’ assess- ments of and willingness to bear the risk that these institutions will default on their debt obligations—have declined from their peaks reached in the fall, but not all the way back to mid-2011 levels. Measures of bank profitability edged up, on net, in recent quarters but remained well below the levels that prevailed before the financial crisis began (figure 43). Although profits at the largest institutions were sup- ported over that period by reductions in noninterest expenses, net interest margins remained very low, capi- tal markets revenues were subdued, loan loss provi- sions are still somewhat elevated relative to pre-crisis 12. On February 9, it was announced that the federal government and 49 state attorneys general had reached a $25 billion agreement with the nation’s five largest mortgage servicers to address mortgage loan servicing and foreclosure abuses. The agreement does not prevent state and federal authorities from pursuing criminal enforce- ment actions related to this or other conduct by the servicers or from punishing wrongful securitization conduct; it also does not prevent any action by individual borrowers who wish to bring their own lawsuits. 41. Equity price index for banks, 2009–12 NOTE: The data are daily and extend through February 24, 2012. SOURCE: Standard & Poor’s. 42. Spreads on credit default swaps for selected U.S. banking organizations, 2007–12 Large bank holding companies NOTE: The data are daily and extend through February 24, 2012. Median spreads for six bank holding companies and nine other banks. norms, and a few banks booked large reserves for liti- gation risks associated with their mortgage portfolios. Indicators of credit quality at commercial banks continued to show signs of improvement. Aggregate delinquency and charge-off rates moved down, though they remained quite elevated on residential mortgages and both residential and commercial construction loans. Loss provisioning has leveled out in recent quar- ters near the upper end of its pre-crisis range. None- theless, in the January SLOOS, a large fraction of the respondents indicated that they expect credit quality to improve over the next 12 months for most major loan 43. Profitability of bank holding companies, 1998–2011 NOTE: The data are quarterly and extend through 2011:Q4. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Board, FR Y-9C, Consolidated Financial The Federal Reserve’s responsibility for promoting ﬁnancial stability stems from its role in supervising and regulating banks, operating the nation’s pay- ments system, and serving as the lender of last resort. In the decades prior to the ﬁnancial crisis, ﬁnancial stability policy tended to be overshad- owed by monetary policy, which had come to be viewed as the principal function of central banks. However, in the aftermath of the ﬁnancial crisis, ﬁnancial stability policy has taken on greater promi- nence and is now generally considered an equally critical responsibility of central banks. As such, the Federal Reserve has made signiﬁcant organizational changes and taken other actions to improve its ability to understand and address systemic risk. In addition, its statutory role in maintaining ﬁnancial stability has been expanded by the Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 (Dodd–Frank Act). One key feature of the Dodd–Frank Act is its macroprudential orientation, as reﬂected in many of the provisions to be implemented by the Federal Reserve and other ﬁnancial regulators. The macro- prudential approach to regulation and supervision still pays close attention to the safety and sound- ness of individual ﬁnancial institutions, but it also takes into account the linkages among those enti- ties and the condition of the ﬁnancial system as a whole. To implement the macroprudential approach, the Dodd–Frank Act established the multiagency Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC), which is tasked with promoting a more comprehensive approach to monitoring and miti- gating systemic risk. The Federal Reserve is one of 10 voting members of the FSOC. categories if economic activity progresses in line with consensus forecasts. Credit provided by domestic banks—the sum of loans and securities—increased moderately in the sec- ond half of 2011, its first such rise since the first half of 2008. Bank credit grew as holdings of agency MBS expanded steadily and most major loan categories exhibited improvement in the second half of the year. The expansion was consistent with recent SLOOS responses indicating that lending standards and loan terms eased somewhat and that demand for loans from businesses and households increased, on net, in the second half of 2011. In particular, C&I loans showed persistent and considerable strength over the second half of 2011 and into early 2012. Loans to nonbank financial institutions, a category that tends to be vola- A signiﬁcant aspect of the macroprudential approach is the heightened focus on entities whose failure or ﬁnancial distress could result in outsized destabilizing effects on the rest of the system. Under the Dodd–Frank Act, the Federal Reserve is responsible for the supervision of all sys- temically important ﬁnancial institutions (SIFIs), which include both large bank holding companies and nonbank ﬁnancial ﬁrms designated by the FSOC as systemically important. Even before the Dodd–Frank Act was enacted, the Federal Reserve was making organizational changes to facilitate the incorporation of systemic risk considerations into the supervisory process. Notably, it created the Large Institution Supervision Coordinating Com- mittee (LISCC) to bring an interdisciplinary and cross-ﬁrm perspective to the supervision of large, complex ﬁnancial institutions; the LISCC acts to ensure that the ﬁnancial positions of these large institutions are strong enough to withstand adverse shocks. A similar body has been set up to help in the oversight of systemically important ﬁnancial market utilities. The Federal Reserve has also established the Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research (OFS) to help the Federal Reserve more effectively monitor the ﬁnancial system and develop policies for mitigating systemic risks. The OFS’s function is to coordinate and analyze information bearing on ﬁnancial stability from a wide range of perspectives and to place the supervision of individual institu- tions within a broader macroeconomic and ﬁnancial context. In addition, the Federal Reserve works with other U.S. agencies and international bodies on a range of issues to strengthen the ﬁnancial system. tile, also grew rapidly over that period as did holdings of agency MBS. Consumer loans held by banks edged up in the third and fourth quarters. Those increases offset ongoing declines in commercial real estate and home equity loans, both of which remained very weak. Regulators continued to take steps to strengthen their oversight of the financial industry. In particular, a variety of measures mandated by the Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 are being, or are soon to be, implemented, includ- ing enhanced capital and liquidity requirements for large banking organizations, annual stress testing, additional risk-management requirements, and the development of early remediation plans (see the box “Financial Stability at the Federal Reserve”). As part of those efforts, the Federal Reserve began annual Systemic ﬁnancial risks can take several forms. Some risks can be described as structural in nature because they are associated with structural features of ﬁnancial markets and thus are largely indepen- dent of economic conditions; these include, for example, the risk posed by a SIFI whose failure can have outsized effects on the ﬁnancial system or the degree to which money market mutual funds are susceptible to liquidity pressures. Other risks can be described as cyclical in nature and include, for example, elevated asset valuations and excessive credit growth that arise in buoyant economic times but can unwind in destabilizing ways should condi- tions change. Attentiveness to both types of risk is critical in the monitoring of systemic risk and the formulation of appropriate macroprudential policy responses. The Federal Reserve has taken steps to identify structural vulnerabilities in the ﬁnancial system and to devise policies to mitigate the associated risks. For example, in December 2011, the Board released a proposal to strengthen the regulation and super- vision of large bank holding companies and sys- temically important nonbank ﬁnancial ﬁrms. The proposal comprises a wide range of measures, including risk-based capital and leverage require- ments, liquidity requirements, stress tests, single- counterparty credit limits, and early remediation requirements. In addition, in October 2011, the Board approved a ﬁnal rule to implement the reso- lution plan (living will) requirement of the Dodd– Frank Act, which is intended to reduce the likeli- hood that the failure of a SIFI—should it occur— reviews of the capital plans for U.S. bank holding com- panies with total consolidated assets of $50 billion or more under its Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review program. Going into those reviews, reported regulatory capital ratios of U.S. banking institutions generally remained at historically high levels over the second half of 2011. Concerns about the condition of European financial institutions, coupled with periods of heightened atten- tion paid to U.S. securities dealers, raised investor anxi- ety regarding counterparty exposure to dealers during the second half of 2011. Indeed, responses to the December SCOOS suggested that dealers devoted increased time and attention to the management of concentrated credit exposures to dealers and other financial intermediaries over the previous three months would cause serious damage to the ﬁnancial system. In all of its rulemaking responsibilities, the Federal Reserve is attentive to the international dimension of ﬁnancial regulation. It is also working with its regulatory counterparts to improve the quality and timeliness of ﬁnancial data. The Federal Reserve is likewise moving forward to address cyclical systemic risks. To identify such risks, it routinely monitors a number of items—in- cluding, for example, measures of leverage and maturity mismatch at ﬁnancial intermediaries—and looks for signs of a credit-induced buildup of sys- temic risk. In addition, it conducts regular stress tests of the nation’s largest banking ﬁrms; these tests are based on detailed conﬁdential data about the balance sheets of the ﬁrms and provide a com- prehensive, rigorous assessment of how the ﬁrms’ ﬁnancial conditions would likely evolve over a multiyear period under adverse economic and ﬁnancial scenarios. Meanwhile, efforts are under way to evaluate and develop new macroprudential tools that could help limit future buildups of cycli- cal systemic risk. In summary, the Federal Reserve has taken a series of actions to implement the relevant provi- sions of the Dodd–Frank Act and to meet its broader ﬁnancial stability responsibilities in a timely way. The Federal Reserve has made impor- tant changes to its organizational structure to sup- port a macroprudential approach to supervision and regulation, and it has instituted processes for identifying and responding to sources of systemic risk. (figure 44).13 In addition, survey respondents reported that they had reduced aggregate credit limits for cer- tain specific institutions. Investors appeared to be par- ticularly concerned about the stability of funding in the event of financial market stress because most dealer firms are highly reliant on short-term secured funding. Respondents to the December SCOOS reported a broad but moderate tightening of credit terms appli- cable to important classes of counterparties over the previous three months. This tightening was especially evident for hedge fund clients and trading real estate 13. Following the failure of a primary dealer, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York implemented a risk-management program that required primary dealers to post margin on forward-settling agency MBS transactions. 44. Net percentage of dealers reporting increased attention to exposure to other dealers, 2010–11 NOTE: The data are drawn from a survey conducted four times per year; the last observation is from the December 2011 survey, which covers 2011:Q4. Net percentage equals the percentage of institutions that reported increasing attention (“increased considerably” or “increased somewhat”) minus the percentage of institutions that reported decreasing attention (“decreased considerably” or “decreased somewhat”). investment trusts (figure 45).14 The institutions that reported having tightened credit terms pointed to a worsening in general market liquidity and functioning and a reduced willingness to take on risk as the most important reasons for doing so. Indeed, for each type of collateral covered in the survey, notable net frac- tions of respondents reported that liquidity and func- tioning in the underlying asset market had deteriorated over the previous three months. Dealers reported that the demand for funding most types of securities con- tinued to increase over the previous three months, par- ticularly the demand for term funding with a maturity greater than 30 days, which increased for all security types. Net investment flows to hedge funds in the third and fourth quarters were reportedly significantly smaller than in the first half of the year as hedge funds mark- edly underperformed the broader market in 2011. Information from a variety of sources suggests that the use of dealer-intermediated leverage has declined, on balance, since mid-2011. Indeed, while the use of dealer-intermediated leverage was roughly unchanged for most types of counterparties according to Septem- ber and December SCOOS respondents, about half of those surveyed indicated that hedge funds’ use of financial leverage, considering the entire range of 14. Trading real estate investment trusts invest in assets backed by 45. Net percentage of dealers reporting a tightening of price terms, by counterparties, 2010–11 NOTE: The data are drawn from a survey conducted four times per year; the last observation is from the December 2011 survey, which covers 2011:Q4. Prior to the September 2011 survey, hedge funds and trading real estate investment trusts (REITs) were grouped together with private equity firms and others as private pools of capital. Net percentage equals the percentage of terms (“tightened that reported considerably” or “tightened somewhat”) minus the percentage of institutions that reported easing terms (“eased considerably” or “eased somewhat”). tightening transactions with such clients, had decreased somewhat. On net since July of last year, yields on investment- grade corporate bonds have declined notably, while those on speculative-grade corporate debt posted mixed changes. However, reflecting a decline in inves- tor risk-taking amid concerns about the European situ- ation and heightened volatility in financial markets, spreads of these yields to those on comparable- maturity Treasury securities widened notably in the third quarter and have only partly retraced since that time (figure 46). In the secondary market for leveraged loans, the average bid price dropped in line with the prices of other risk assets in August but has recovered since then, as institutional investors—which include collateralized loan obligations, pension funds, insur- ance companies and other funds investing in fixed- income instruments—have reportedly continued to exhibit strong appetites for higher-yielding leveraged loans against a backdrop of little new supply of such loans (figure 47). Liquidity in that market has recov- ered recently after a sharp deterioration during the summer. Broad equity prices are about unchanged, on bal- ance, since mid-2011 but exhibited an unusually high level of volatility (figure 48). Equity markets fell 46. Spreads of corporate bond yields over comparable NOTE: The data are daily and extend through February 24, 2012. The spreads shown are the yields on 10-year bonds less the 10-year Treasury yield. SOURCE: Derived from smoothed corporate yield curves using Merrill sharply in late July and early August in response to concerns about the European crisis, the U.S. debt ceil- ing debate, and a possible slowdown in global growth. Equity prices roughly retraced these losses during the fourth quarter of 2011 and early 2012, reflecting some- what better-than-expected economic data in the United States as well as actions taken by major central banks to mitigate the financial strains in Europe. Nonetheless, equity prices have remained highly sensitive to news regarding developments in Europe. Implied volatility for the S&P 500 index, calculated from option prices, 47. Secondary-market bid prices for syndicated loans, 2007–12 NOTE: The data are daily and extend through February 24, 2012. SOURCE: LSTA/Thomson Reuters Mark-to-Market Pricing. 48. Stock price index, 1995–2012 NOTE: The data are daily and extend through February 24, 2012. SOURCE: Dow Jones Indexes. ramped up in the third quarter of 2011 but has since reversed much of that rise (figure 49). Amid heightened stock market volatility over the course of the second half of 2011, equity mutual funds experienced sizable outflows. Loan funds, which invest primarily in LIBOR-based syndicated leveraged loans, also experienced outflows as retail investors responded to loan price changes following indications that the Federal Reserve would keep interest rates lower for longer than previously anticipated. With declining yields on fixed-income securities boosting the perfor- mance of bond mutual funds, these funds, including speculative-grade and municipal bond funds, attracted net inflows (figure 50). NOTE: The data are weekly and extend through the week ending February 24, 2012. The series shown—the VIX—is the implied 30-day volatility of the S&P 500 stock price index as calculated from a weighted average of options prices. 50. Net flows into mutual funds, 2006–11 NOTE: The data exclude reinvested dividends and are not seasonally adjusted. The M2 monetary aggregate expanded at an annual rate of about 12 percent over the second half of 2011 (figure 51).15 The rapid growth in M2 appears to be the result of increased demand for safe and liquid assets due to concerns about the European situation, com- bined with a very low level of interest rates on alterna- tive short-term investments. In addition, a number of regulatory changes have likely boosted M2 of late. In particular, unlimited insurance by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) of onshore non- interest-bearing deposits has made these deposits increasingly attractive at times of heightened volatility and uncertainty in financial markets. In addition, the change in the FDIC assessment base in April 2011 added deposits in domestic banks’ offshore offices, eliminating some of the benefits to banks of booking deposits abroad and apparently leading, in some cases, to a decision to rebook some of these deposits 15. M2 consists of (1) currency outside the U.S. Treasury, Federal Reserve Banks, and the vaults of depository institutions; (2) traveler’s checks of nonbank issuers; (3) demand deposits at commercial banks (excluding those amounts held by depository institutions, the U.S. government, and foreign banks and official institutions) less cash items in the process of collection and Federal Reserve float; (4) other checkable deposits (negotiable order of withdrawal, or NOW, accounts and automatic transfer service accounts at depository insti- tutions; credit union share draft accounts; and demand deposits at thrift institutions); (5) savings deposits (including money market deposit accounts); (6) small-denomination time deposits (time depos- its issued in amounts of less than $100,000) less individual retirement account (IRA) and Keogh balances at depository institutions; and (7) balances in retail money market funds less IRA and Keogh balances at money market funds. 51. M2 growth rate, 2005–11 NOTE: For definition of M2, see text note 15. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Board, Statistical Release H.6, “Money Stock onshore. Indeed, liquid deposits, the single largest component of M2, grew at an annual rate of 20 per- cent in the second half of 2011.16 The currency compo- nent of the money stock grew at an annual rate of 7 percent over the second half of 2011, a bit faster than the historical average but a slower pace than in the first half of the year. The monetary base—which is equal to the sum of currency in circulation and the reserve balances of depository institutions held at the Federal Reserve—expanded at an annual rate of 3¾ percent in the second half of the year, as the rise in currency more than offset a slight decrease in reserve balances.17 The size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet remained at a historically high level throughout the second half of 2011 and into early 2012, and stood at about $2.9 trillion as of February 22. The small rise of about $61 billion since July largely reflected increases in temporary U.S. dollar liquidity swap balances with the ECB, which were partially offset by a decline in securities holdings (table 1). Holdings of U.S. Treasury securities grew $32 billion over the second half of 2011, as the proceeds from paydowns of agency debt and agency MBS were reinvested in longer-term Treas- ury securities until the FOMC decision in September to switch the reinvestment of those proceeds to agency MBS; total holdings of MBS declined into the fall. The subsequent small increase in MBS holdings reflects the 16. Regulation Q, which had prohibited the payment of interest on demand deposits, was repealed by the Board on July 14. This repeal may have also contributed, in a small way, to the growth in M2. 17. The MEP that was announced at the September FOMC meet- ing was designed to increase the average maturity of the Federal Reserve’s securities holdings while leaving the quantity of reserve balances roughly unchanged. 1. Selected components of the Federal Reserve balance sheet, 2010–12 Selected assets Support of critical institutions Net portfolio holdings of Maiden Lane LLC, Maiden Lane II LLC, and Maiden Lane III LLC1 ....... Credit extended to American International Group, Inc. ............................................... Preferred interests in AIA Aurora LLC and ALICO Holdings LLC ................................... Selected liabilities NOTE: LLC is a limited liability company. 1. The Federal Reserve has extended credit to several LLCs in conjunction with efforts to support critical institutions. Maiden Lane LLC was formed to acquire certain assets of The Bear Stearns Companies, Inc. Maiden Lane II LLC was formed to purchase residential mortgage-backed securities from the U.S. securities lending reinvest- ment portfolio of subsidiaries of American International Group, Inc. (AIG). Maiden Lane III LLC was formed to purchase multisector collateralized debt obligations on which the Financial Products group of AIG has written credit default swap contracts. 2. Includes only MBS purchases that have already settled. ... Not applicable. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Board, Statistical Release H.4.1, “Factors Affecting Reserve Balances of Depository Institutions and Condition Statement of Federal Reserve reinvestment of maturing agency debt into MBS. Agency debt declined about $14 billion over the entire period. The composition of Treasury holdings also changed over this period as a result of the implementa- tion of the MEP. As of February 24, 2012, the Open Market Desk at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (FRBNY) had purchased $211 billion in Treas- ury securities with remaining maturities of 6 to 30 years and sold $223 billion in Treasury securities with maturities of 3 years or less. from the Maiden Lane II portfolio in early 2012 through two competitive processes conducted by the FRBNY’s investment manager.18 such as the primary credit facility, continued to be minimal. Loans outstanding under the Term Asset- Backed Securities Loan Facility declined and stood just below $8 billion in late February. On November 30, 2011, in order to ease strains in In the second half of 2011 and early 2012, the Fed- eral Reserve reduced some of its exposure to lending facilities established during the financial crisis to sup- port specific institutions. The portfolio holdings of Maiden Lane LLC, Maiden Lane II LLC, and Maiden Lane III LLC—entities that were created during the crisis to acquire certain assets from the Bear Stearns Companies, Inc., and American International Group, Inc., or AIG, to avoid the disorderly failures of those institutions—declined, on net, primarily as a result of asset sales and principal payments. Of note, the FRBNY sold assets with a face amount of $13 billion global financial markets and thereby mitigate the effects of such strains on the supply of credit to U.S. households and businesses, the Federal Reserve announced coordinated actions with other central banks to enhance their capacity to provide liquidity 18. On January 19, 2012, the FRBNY announced the sale of assets with a face amount of $7.0 billion from the Maiden Lane II LLC portfolio through a competitive process. On February 8, 2012, the FRBNY announced the sale of additional assets with a face amount of $6.2 billion from the Maiden Lane II LLC portfolio, also through a competitive process. Proceeds from these two transactions will enable the repayment of the entire remaining outstanding balance of the senior loan from the FRBNY to Maiden Lane II LLC. support to the global financial system.19 The FOMC authorized an extension of the existing temporary U.S. dollar liquidity swap arrangements through Feb- ruary 1, 2013, and the rate on these swap arrangements was reduced from the U.S. dollar OIS rate plus 100 basis points to the OIS rate plus 50 basis points. The lower cost spurred increased use of those swap lines; the outstanding amount of dollars provided through the swap lines rose from zero in July to roughly $108 billion in late February. On the liability side of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet, reserve balances held by depository institutions declined roughly $40 billion in the second half of 2011 and early 2012 while Federal Reserve notes in circula- tion increased roughly $57 billion. The Federal Reserve conducted a series of small-scale reverse repurchase transactions involving all eligible collateral types and its expanded list of counterparties. The Federal Reserve also continued to offer small-value term depos- its through the Term Deposit Facility. In July of last year, the Treasury reduced the balance of its Supple- mentary Financing Account at the Federal Reserve from $5 billion to zero. In the second half of the year, financial market devel- opments abroad were heavily influenced by concerns about the heightened fiscal stresses in Europe and the resultant risks to the global economic outlook. Foreign real GDP growth stepped up in the third quarter, as Japan rebounded from the effects of its March earth- quake and tsunami, leading to an easing of supply chain disruptions. In contrast, recent data indicate that foreign economic growth slowed in the fourth quarter, as activity in the euro area appears to have contracted and as flooding in Thailand weighed on growth in sev- eral economies in Asia. The foreign exchange value of the dollar has risen since July about 31∕2 percent on a trade-weighted basis against a broad set of currencies (figure 52). Most of the appreciation occurred in September as market par- 19. The Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the Bank of Japan, the European Central Bank, the Federal Reserve, and the Swiss National Bank coordinated this action. In addition, as a contingency measure, the FOMC agreed to establish similar tempo- rary swap arrangements with these five central banks to provide liquidity in any of their currencies if necessary. 52. U.S. dollar nominal exchange rate, broad index, 2007–12 NOTE: The data, which are in foreign currency units per dollar, are daily. The last observation for the series is February 24, 2012. The broad index is a weighted average of the foreign exchange values of the U.S. dollar against the currencies of a large group of the most important U.S. trading partners. The index weights, which change over time, are derived from U.S. export shares and from U.S. and foreign import shares. ticipants became increasingly pessimistic about the situation in Europe. Safe-haven flows buoyed the yen and the Swiss franc, and in response, the Bank of Japan and the Swiss National Bank separately inter- vened to counter further appreciation of their curren- cies (figure 53). bond yields for Canada, Germany, and the United Kingdom fell over 100 basis points to record lows, 53. U.S. dollar exchange rate against selected major currencies, 2010–12 NOTE: The data, which are in foreign currency units per dollar, are daily. The last observation for each series is February 24, 2012. 54. Yields on benchmark government bonds in selected NOTE: The data, which are for 10-year bonds, are daily. The last observation for each series is February 24, 2012. driven by safe-haven flows as well as a deteriorating global outlook (figure 54). By contrast, sovereign bond spreads for Greece rose steeply, and Spanish and Ital- ian sovereign spreads over German bunds also increased (figure 55). Prices of other risky assets were very volatile over the period as market participants reacted to news about the crisis. (See the box “An Update on the European Fiscal Crisis.”) As sovereign funding pressures spread to Italy and Spain in July and August and as concerns also mounted regarding U.S. fiscal policy and the durability of the global recovery, equity prices in the advanced foreign economies (AFEs) generally plunged 55. Government debt spreads for peripheral European economies, 2009–12 NOTE: The data are weekly. The last observation for each series is February 24, 2012. The spreads shown are the yields on 10-year bonds less the 10-year German bond yield. 56. Equity indexes in selected advanced foreign economies, 2009–12 56. Equity indexes in selected advanced foreign economies, 2009–12 July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. NOTE: The data are daily. The last observation for each series is (figure 56). Those equity markets remained quite vola- tile but largely depressed through early December, when market sentiment seemed to take a more con- certed turn for the better. Although most AFE equity indexes remain below their mid-summer levels, they have risen markedly in the past two months. Emerging markets equity prices followed a path similar to those in the AFEs (figure 57). Emerging markets bond and equity funds experienced large outflows during periods 57. Aggregate equity indexes for emerging market economies, 2009–12 July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. NOTE: The data are daily. The last observation for each series is February 24, 2012. The Latin American economies are Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, and Peru; the emerging Asian economies are China, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Pakistan, the Philippines, South Korea, Taiwan, and Thailand. SOURCE: Bloomberg. The European ﬁscal crisis intensiﬁed in the second half of 2011, as concerns over ﬁscal sustainability spread to additional euro-area economies amid weakening economic growth prospects and missed ﬁscal targets. European ﬁnancial institutions also faced sharply reduced access to funds, given their large exposures to vulnerable sovereigns. In response, policymakers took steps to improve ﬁscal balances, bolster the region’s ﬁnancial backstop, and address liquidity shortages for banks. On bal- ance, market conditions have improved somewhat since December, but concerns about a possible Greek default and the adequacy of the ﬁnancial backstop for other vulnerable economies have kept yields on sovereign debt elevated and funding for European ﬁnancial institutions limited. The crisis began in smaller euro-area countries with high ﬁscal deﬁcits or debt and vulnerable banking systems. In 2010 and the ﬁrst half of 2011, governments in Greece, Ireland, and Portugal suf- fered reduced access to market funding and required ﬁnancial assistance from the European Union (EU) and the International Monetary Fund (IMF). Last July, sovereign spreads over German bunds rose markedly for Italy and Spain, as eco- nomic growth disappointed, doubts increased over political commitment to ﬁscal consolidation, and calls for the restructuring of Greek sovereign debt rattled investor conﬁdence. The deterioration of ﬁnancial conditions led to heightened political ten- sions in vulnerable economies, contributing to leadership changes in Greece, Italy, and Spain later in the fall. Financial stresses spread quickly to European banks with large exposures to Italy, Spain, and the other vulnerable economies, and access to funding became limited for all but the shortest maturities and strongest institutions. In turn, concerns over the potential ﬁscal burdens for governments, should they need to recapitalize ﬁnancial institu- of heightened concerns about the European crisis, but inflows have resumed more recently. Euro-area bank stock prices underperformed the broader market, as concerns about the health of Euro- pean banks intensified over the second half of 2011. The CDS premiums on the debt of many large banks in Europe rose substantially, reflecting market views of increased risk of default (figure 58). Quarterly earnings for many banks were reduced by write-downs on Greek debt. Although only eight banks failed the European Banking Authority (EBA) European Union–wide stress test in July, concerns about the capi- tions, caused sovereign yields to rise sharply in the fall for other euro-area countries, including Austria, Belgium, and France. European leaders responded to these develop- ments with a number of policy measures. In July, amid the growing realization that Greece would need further ﬁnancial assistance, EU and IMF offi- cials announced plans for a second rescue pack- age, including a call for limited reduction in the value of the debt held by private creditors. In Feb- ruary 2012, in response to Greece’s faltering ﬁscal performance and plunging output, the Greek gov- ernment and its creditors agreed on an enhanced rescue package, including a larger reduction in pri- vate creditors’ claims. The Greek government and its creditors are now working to put in place the private-sector debt exchange and the new official- sector support program before a large debt amorti- zation payment comes due in mid-March. In recent months, European authorities have also made progress on plans to improve ﬁscal gover- nance within the region. EU members (excluding the United Kingdom and Czech Republic) have agreed on the text of a new ﬁscal compact treaty designed to strengthen ﬁscal rules, surveillance, and enforcement. Among other measures, this treaty will require countries to legislate national ﬁscal rules, which should generally limit structural ﬁscal deﬁcits to ½ percent of gross domestic prod- uct. The treaty is expected to be signed in March, after which national parliaments must ratify it and implement the required legislation. Leaders also took a number of steps to increase the size of the ﬁnancial backstop for the euro area. The ﬂexibility, scope, and effective lending capac- ity of the €440 billion European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF), designed to support vulnerable gov- ernments, were increased. Authorities also moved up the introduction of the European Stability Mechanism (ESM), a permanent €500 billion lend- tal adequacy of large European banks persisted. Partly in response to these concerns, the EBA announced in October that banks would be required to put in place a temporary extraordinary capital buffer by June 2012, boosting their core Tier 1 risk-based capital ratio to 9 percent. As market sentiment about European banks deteriorated over the period, their access to unsecured dollar funding diminished, particularly at tenors beyond one week. (See the box “U.S. Dollar Funding Pressures and Dollar Liquidity Swap Arrangements.”) European banks also faced pressure in euro funding markets. As banks’ willingness to lend excess liquidity ing facility, to July 2012, about a year earlier than originally planned. This March, euro-area leaders will consider lifting the €500 billion ceiling on the combined lending of the EFSF and the ESM. In addition, European officials called for an expansion of the IMF’s lending capacity and pledged a joint contribution of €150 billion toward that goal. Finally, to improve the functioning of sovereign debt markets, the European Central Bank (ECB) resumed purchases of euro-area marketable debt in August, reportedly including the debt of Italy and Spain. Policymakers also took steps to support ﬁnancial markets and institutions affected by the sovereign crisis. To improve transparency and bolster the abil- ity of European banks to withstand losses on sover- eign holdings, the European Banking Authority (EBA) conducted a second stress test of large EU ﬁnancial institutions, the results of which were released in mid-July, along with detailed informa- tion about banks’ exposures to borrowers in EU countries. Market concerns about bank capital per- sisted, however, and in October, the EBA announced that large banks would be required to build up “exceptional and temporary” capital buf- fers to meet a core Tier 1 capital ratio of 9 percent and cover the cost of marking sovereign exposures to market by the end of June 2012. In December, the EBA disclosed that the aggregate required capi- tal buffer for large banks would be €115 billion if risk-weighted assets were to remain at the levels they had reached at the end of September 2011. The banks submitted their capital plans to their national supervisors for approval, and the EBA has now summarized these plans. Excluding the Greek banks and three other institutions that will be recapitalized separately by national authorities, the remaining 62 banks intend to create capital buffers equivalent to €98 billion, about 25 percent larger than their required buffers, and they plan to use direct capital measures (such as retaining to one another decreased, the cost of obtaining fund- ing in the market rose, and banks relied more heavily on the ECB for funding. The first three-year refinanc- ing operation, held by the ECB on December 21, led to a significant injection of new liquidity, and funding conditions in Europe seemed to improve gradually in the weeks that followed. Short-term euro interbank rates declined, euro-area shorter-duration sovereign bond yields fell sharply, and both governments and banks were able to raise funds more easily. earnings, issuing new shares, and converting hybrid instruments to common equity) to achieve €75 bil- lion of their buffer. The remainder of the buffer will be generated by measures that reduce risk- weighted assets—primarily selling assets and switching from the standardized to the advanced approach to measure risk weights. These measures will be subject to supervisory agreement. To address spillovers to U.S. dollar funding mar- kets from stresses in Europe, in late November the Federal Reserve, the ECB, and four other major central banks agreed to reduce the fee on draws on their dollar liquidity swap lines and extend the duration of such facilities. In early December, the ECB announced a reduction in its policy interest rate and its reserve requirement, an easing of rules on collateral for ECB reﬁnancing operations, and the provision of three-year reﬁnancing to banks to improve their funding situation. Banks borrowed €489 billion at the new facility in December, rais- ing the total amount of outstanding ECB reﬁnanc- ing operations by roughly €200 billion. A second three-year liquidity operation is scheduled for the end of February. The improved availability of dollar and euro funds late in the year, against the background of the other policies being employed to address the crisis, appears to have partly allayed market con- cerns about banks as well as governments in vul- nerable euro-area countries. Over the past two months, European banks have seen improvements in their access to funding, and in vulnerable econo- mies, credit spreads on the banks and spreads on government bonds have generally declined. Never- theless, signiﬁcant risks remain as Europeans struggle to implement the new Greek program and debt exchange, meet targets for budgets and bank capital, and expand the ﬁnancial backstop. Over the longer term, the region must meet the difficult chal- lenges of achieving sustained ﬁscal consolidation, stimulating growth, and improving competitiveness. Financial flows in the second half of 2011 reflected heightened concerns about risk and the pressures in currency markets resulting from the European crisis. Based on data for the third quarter and monthly indi- cators for the fourth quarter (not shown), foreign pri- vate investors flocked to U.S. Treasury securities as a safe-haven investment while selling U.S. corporate securities, especially in months when appetite for risk 58. Credit default swap premiums for banks in selected European countries, 2011–12 NOTE: The data are daily. The last observation for each series is February 24, 2012. Credit default swaps are on bank senior debt and weighted by bank total assets. was particularly weak (figure 59). U.S. investors also pulled back from investments in Europe, significantly reducing deposits with European banks and selling securities from euro-area countries. Overall, U.S. pur- chases of foreign securities edged down in the third quarter (figure 60). The large purchases of Treasury securities domi- nated total private financial flows in the third quarter, a pattern that likely continued in the fourth quarter. Net flows by banks located in the United States were small, but these flows masked large offsetting movements by foreign- and U.S.-owned banks. U.S. branches of European banks brought in substantial funds from 59. Net foreign purchases of U.S. securities, 2007–11 NOTE: Other U.S. securities include corporate equities and bonds, agency 60. Net U.S. purchases of foreign securities, 2007–11 indicate a balance of payments outflow associated with positive U.S. purchases of foreign securities. affiliates abroad over the course of 2011, building reserve balances in the first half of the year and cover- ing persistent declines in U.S. funding sources. In con- trast, U.S. banks, subject to less-severe market stress, sent funds abroad to meet strong dollar demand. Inflows from foreign official institutions slowed notably in the second half of 2011 (figure 61). A num- ber of advanced countries acquired some U.S. assets, seeking to counteract upward pressure on their curren- cies by purchasing U.S. dollars in foreign exchange markets. However, inflows from official institutions in the EMEs trended down significantly in 2011, espe- cially in the third and fourth quarters when the 61. U.S. net financial inflows, 2007–11 Private (including banking) U.S. official Foreign official NOTE: U.S. official flows include the foreign currency acquired when foreign central banks draw on their swap lines with the Federal Reserve. SOURCE: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis. strength of the dollar led to reductions in their inter- vention activity. The intensification of the euro-area sovereign debt cri- sis was accompanied by a widespread slowing of eco- nomic activity in the AFEs. In the euro area, financial tensions increased despite the various measures announced by European leaders to combat the crisis. Real GDP contracted in the euro area at the end of last year according to preliminary estimates, and spill- overs from the euro area likely contributed to the fourth-quarter GDP decline in the United Kingdom. In Japan, economic activity rebounded rapidly from the disruptions of the March earthquake and tsunami but dipped again in the last quarter of 2011 as exports slumped. In Canada, elevated commodity prices and a resilient labor market have supported economic activ- ity, but the export sector is showing signs of weakening. Survey indicators suggest that conditions improved somewhat around the turn of the year, with wide- spread upticks in different countries’ purchasing man- agers indexes. However, uncertainty about the resolu- tion of the euro-area crisis continues to affect investors’ sentiment, while trade and financial spill- overs weigh on activity for all of the AFEs. Twelve-month headline inflation remained elevated in most of the AFEs through the end of 2011, largely 62. Change in consumer prices for major foreign economies, 2007–12 NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through January 2012 for Canada, the euro area, and the United Kingdom and through December 2011 for Japan; the percent change is from one year earlier. reflecting the run-up in commodity prices earlier last year and, in some countries, currency depreciation and increases in taxes (figure 62). However, underlying inflation pressures remained contained and, in recent months, inflation rates have begun to turn down, reflecting weaker economic activity and, as in the United States, declines in commodity prices since last spring. As with output, inflation performance differs significantly across countries. Twelve-month headline inflation currently ranges from 3.6 percent in the United Kingdom, partly due to hikes in utility prices, to slightly negative in Japan, where deflation resumed toward the end of 2011 as energy price inflation mod- erated. Several foreign central banks in the AFEs eased monetary policy in the second half of last year (figure 63). The ECB cut its policy rate 50 basis points in the fourth quarter, bringing the main refinancing rate back to 1 percent, where it was at the beginning of the year. At its December meeting, the ECB also expanded its provision of liquidity to the banking sec- tor by introducing two three-year longer-term refi- nancing operations, reducing its reserve ratio require- ment from 2 percent to 1 percent, and easing its collateral requirements. The Bank of England has held the Bank Rate at 0.5 percent but announced a £75 bil- lion expansion of its asset purchase facility in October and a further £50 billion increase in February that will bring total asset holdings to £325 billion upon its completion in May 2012. The Bank of Japan also expanded its asset purchase program, raising it from 63. Official or targeted interest rates in selected advanced foreign economies, 2008–12 NOTE: The data are daily and extend through February 24, 2012. The data shown are, for Canada, the target for the overnight rate; for the euro area, the minimum bid rate on main refinancing operations; for Japan, the target for the call rate; and, for the United Kingdom, the official Bank Rate. SOURCE: The central bank of each area or country shown. As the euro-area crisis intensiﬁed, European banks faced greater dollar funding pressures. Many Euro- pean banks were especially vulnerable to changes in investor sentiment through their reliance on short-term dollar-denominated funding. As market sentiment deteriorated, European banks’ access to medium- and long-term dollar funding markets diminished markedly, with many unable to obtain unsecured dollar funding at maturities exceeding one week. The pullback of U.S. money market funds (MMFs) from liabilities of euro-area banks beginning in mid-2011 (ﬁgure A) was an important part of the run-off of short-term dollar funds, although MMFs were not the only investors to reduce their exposures to European banks. As a result, many European banks faced higher dollar funding costs. For example, the cost for euro-area banks to obtain three-month dollar funding through the foreign exchange (FX) swap market rose as ﬁnancial pressures increased. The cost of dollar funding through this market (the black line in ﬁgure B), as banks borrow euros at the euro Lon- don interbank offered rate (LIBOR) and swap into dollars in the FX swap market, rose from 40 basis points early last summer to about 200 basis points in late November. NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through November 2011. Other Europe consists of Denmark, Liechtenstein, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom. Although the effects of these dollar funding strains are difficult to gauge, they pose substantial risks for the U.S. economy. Large European banks borrow heavily in dollars partly because they are active in U.S. markets, purchasing government and corporate securities as well as making loans to U.S. households and businesses. A possible response to dollar funding strains, along with heightened capi- tal requirements, might be for European banks to sell their dollar assets or refrain from further dollar lending, which could in turn result in a reduction of the credit they supply to U.S. ﬁrms and households while also reducing credit to European and other foreign ﬁrms involved in trade with the United States. Therefore, further stresses on European banks could spill over to the United States by weighing on business and consumer activity, restraining our exports, and adding to pressures on U.S. ﬁnancial markets and institutions. ¥15 trillion to ¥20 trillion in October and then to ¥30 trillion in February. and the floods in Thailand impeded supply chains. In the second half of last year, concerns about the global economy prompted EME authorities either to put monetary policy tightening on hold or, in several cases—such as Brazil, China, Indonesia, and Thai- land—to loosen monetary policy. Many EMEs experienced a slowdown in economic growth in the third quarter of last year relative to the pace seen in the first half. Both earlier policy tighten- ing, undertaken amid concerns about overheating, and weakening external demand weighed on growth. How- ever, third-quarter growth in China and Mexico remained strong, supported by robust domestic demand. Recent data indicate that the slowdown con- tinued and broadened in the fourth quarter, as the financial crisis in Europe softened external demand In China, real GDP growth stepped down to an annual rate of about 8 percent in the fourth quarter. Retail sales and fixed-asset investment slowed a touch but continued to grow briskly, reflecting solid domestic demand. But net exports exerted a small drag on growth, as weak external demand damped exports. Twelve-month headline inflation moderated to about 4½ percent in January, as food prices retreated from earlier sharp rises. With growth slowing and inflation on the decline, Chinese authorities reversed the course NOTE: The data are daily. The last observation for each series is February 24, 2012. Three-month dollar funding through the foreign exchange (FX) swap market assumes that banks first pay euro LIBOR (London interbank offered rate) to obtain euro funding. To address strains in dollar funding markets, the Federal Reserve, the European Central Bank (ECB), and the central banks of Canada, Japan, Switzer- land, and the United Kingdom announced an of monetary policy toward easing by lowering the reserve requirement for large banks 100 basis points, to 20.5 percent. In 2011, the Chinese renminbi appreci- ated 4½ percent against the dollar and about 6 percent on a real trade-weighted basis; the latter measure gauges the renminbi’s value against the currencies of China’s major trading partners and adjusts for differ- ences in inflation rates. In Mexico, economic activity accelerated in the sec- ond and third quarters as domestic demand expanded robustly. However, incoming indicators, such as tepid growth of exports to the United States, point to a agreement on November 30 to revise, extend, and expand the U.S. dollar swap lines. The revised- agreement lowered the price of dollar funding pro- vided through the swaps (the red line in ﬁgure B) to a rate of 50 basis points over the dollar overnight index swap rate, a reduction of 50 basis points in the rate at which the foreign central banks had been providing dollar loans since May 2010. revised pricing of the central bank swap lines helped strengthen the liquidity positions of Euro- pean and other foreign banks, thereby beneﬁting the United States by supporting the continued sup- ply of credit to U.S. households and businesses while mitigating other channels of risk. Draws on the swap lines, especially from the ECB, have been signiﬁcant. On December 7, at the ﬁrst three-month dollar tender under the new pricing scheme, the ECB allocated about $51 billion, a substantial increase over previous operations. As of February 24, the ECB, the Bank of Japan, and the Swiss National Bank had about $89 billion, $18 billion, and $0.5 billion outstanding, respectively, from their dollar swap line allotments, for a total of about $108 billion. In an indication that the swap lines have been effective at reducing overall dollar funding pressure, the cost of obtaining dollars in the FX swap market has dropped substantially since November 30. Dollar LIBOR, which measures dol- lar funding costs in the interbank market for U.S. and foreign institutions, has also declined over the past two months. slowdown in the fourth quarter. Mexican consumer price inflation rose sharply in the second half of the year, driven largely by rising food prices and the removal of electrical energy subsidies. In Brazil, in con- trast to most EMEs, GDP contracted slightly in the third quarter, but incoming indicators point to a return to growth in the fourth quarter, partly as a result of several rounds of monetary policy easing that began in August. As the direction of capital flows turned to a net outflow, Brazilian authorities loosened capital con- trols that had been introduced earlier in the face of massive inflows and associated fears of overheating. guaranteed mortgage-backed securities (MBS) rather than Treasury securities. To promote the Federal Open Market Committee’s (FOMC) objectives of maximum employment and price stability, the Committee maintained a target range for the federal funds rate of 0 to ¼ percent throughout the second half of 2011 and into 2012 (figure 64). With the incoming data suggesting a some- what slower pace of economic recovery than the Com- mittee had anticipated, and with inflation seen as set- tling at levels at or below those consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee took steps during the second half of 2011 and in early 2012 to provide additional monetary accommodation in order to sup- port a stronger economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, runs at levels consistent with its mandate. These steps included strengthening its forward rate guidance regarding the Committee’s expectations for the period over which economic con- ditions will warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate, increasing the average maturity of the Federal Reserve’s securities holdings through a program of purchases and sales, and reinvesting princi- pal payments on agency securities in agency- On August 1, the Committee met by videoconfer- ence to discuss issues associated with contingencies in the event that the Treasury was temporarily unable to meet its obligations because the statutory federal debt limit was not raised or in the event of a downgrade of the U.S. sovereign credit rating. Participants generally anticipated that there would be no need to make changes to existing bank regulations, the operation of the discount window, or the conduct of open market operations.20 With respect to potential policy actions, participants agreed that the appropriate response would depend importantly on the actual conditions in markets and should generally consist of standard operations. The information reviewed at the regularly scheduled FOMC meeting on August 9 indicated that the pace of 20. Members of the FOMC consist of the members of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System plus the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and 4 of the remaining 11 Reserve Bank presidents, who serve one-year terms on a rotating basis. Participants at FOMC meetings consist of the members of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and all 12 Reserve Bank presidents. 64. Selected interest rates, 2008–12 NOTE: The data are daily and extend through February 24, 2012. The 10-year Treasury rate is the constant-maturity yield based on the most actively traded securities. The dates on the horizontal axis are those of regularly scheduled Federal Open Market Committee meetings. the economic recovery had remained slow in recent months and that labor market conditions continued to be weak. In addition, revised data for 2008 through 2010 from the Bureau of Economic Analysis indicated that the recent recession had been deeper than previ- ously thought and that the level of real gross domestic product (GDP) had not yet regained its pre-recession peak by the second quarter of 2011. Moreover, down- ward revisions to first-quarter GDP growth and the slow growth reported for the second quarter indicated that the recovery had been quite sluggish in the first half of 2011. Private nonfarm payroll employment rose at a considerably slower pace in June and July than earlier in the year, and participants noted a deteriora- tion in labor market conditions, slower household spending, a drop in consumer and business confidence, and continued weakness in the housing sector. Infla- tion, which had picked up earlier in the year as a result of higher prices for some commodities and imported goods as well as supply chain disruptions resulting from the natural disaster in Japan, moderated more recently as prices of energy and some commodities fell back from their earlier peaks. Longer-term inflation expectations remained stable. U.S. financial markets were strongly influenced by developments regarding the fiscal situations in the United States and in Europe and by generally weaker-than-expected readings on economic activity, as foreign economic growth appeared to have slowed significantly. Yields on nomi- nal Treasury securities fell notably, on net, while yields on both investment- and speculative-grade corporate bonds fell a little less than those on comparable- maturity Treasury securities, leaving risk spreads wider. Broad U.S. stock price indexes declined significantly. Most members agreed that the economic outlook had deteriorated by enough to warrant a Committee response at the August meeting. Those viewing a shift toward more accommodative policy as appropriate generally agreed that a strengthening of the Commit- tee’s forward guidance regarding the federal funds rate, by being more explicit about the period over which the Committee expected the federal funds rate to remain exceptionally low, would be a measured response to the deterioration in the outlook over the intermeeting period. The Committee agreed to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and to state that economic conditions—including low rates of resource utilization and a subdued outlook for infla- tion over the medium run—are likely to warrant excep- tionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through mid-2013. That anticipated path for the fed- eral funds rate was viewed as appropriate in light of most members’ outlook for the economy. The data in hand at the September 20–21 FOMC meeting indicated that economic activity continued to expand at a slow pace and that labor market condi- tions remained weak. Consumer price inflation appeared to have moderated since earlier in the year as prices of energy and some commodities declined from their peaks, but it had not yet come down as much as participants had expected at previous meetings. Indus- trial production expanded in July and August, real business spending on equipment and software appeared to expand further, and real consumer spend- ing posted a solid gain in July. However, private non- farm employment rose only slightly in August, and the unemployment rate remained high. Consumer senti- ment deteriorated significantly further in August and stayed downbeat in early September. Activity in the housing sector continued to be depressed by weak demand, uncertainty about future home prices, tight credit conditions for mortgages and construction loans, and a substantial inventory of foreclosed and distressed properties. Financial markets were volatile over the intermeeting period as investors responded to somewhat disappointing news, on balance, regarding economic activity in the United States and abroad. Weak economic data contributed to rising expectations among market participants of additional monetary accommodation; those expectations and increasing concerns about the financial situation in Europe led to an appreciable decline in intermediate- and longer- term nominal Treasury yields. Fluctuations in inves- tors’ level of concern about European fiscal and finan- cial prospects also contributed to market volatility, particularly in equity markets, and spreads of yields on investment- and speculative-grade corporate bonds over those on comparable-maturity Treasury securities rose significantly over the intermeeting period, reach- ing levels last registered in late 2009. agreed that the outlook had deteriorated somewhat, and that there were significant downside risks to the economic outlook, including strains in global financial markets. As a result, the Committee decided that pro- viding additional monetary accommodation would be appropriate to support a stronger recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, was at a level consis- tent with the Committee’s dual mandate. Those view- ing greater policy accommodation as appropriate at this meeting generally supported a maturity extension program that would combine asset purchases and sales to extend the average maturity of securities held in the System Open Market Account without generating a substantial expansion of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet or reserve balances. Specifically, those members supported a program under which the Committee would announce its intention to purchase, by the end of June 2012, $400 billion of Treasury securities with remaining maturities of 6 years to 30 years and to sell an equal amount of Treasury securities with remaining maturities of 3 years or less. They expected this pro- gram to put downward pressure on longer-term inter- est rates and to help make broader financial conditions more accommodative. In addition, to help support conditions in mortgage markets, the Committee decided to reinvest principal received from its holdings of agency debt and agency MBS in agency MBS rather than continuing to reinvest those funds in longer-term Treasury securities as had been the Committee’s prac- tice since the August 2010 FOMC meeting. At the same time, the Committee decided to maintain its existing policy of rolling over maturing Treasury secu- rities at auction. In its statement, the Committee noted that it would continue to regularly review the size and composition of its securities holdings and that it was prepared to adjust those holdings as appropriate. The Committee also decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and to reaffirm its anticipation that economic conditions were likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through mid-2013. The information reviewed at the November 1–2 meeting indicated that the pace of economic activity strengthened somewhat in the third quarter, reflecting in part a reversal of the temporary factors that weighed on economic growth in the first half of the year. Global supply chain disruptions associated with the natural disaster in Japan had diminished, and the prices of energy and some commodities had come down from their recent peaks, easing strains on house- hold budgets and likely contributing to a somewhat stronger pace of consumer spending in recent months. Real equipment and software investment expanded appreciably, and real personal consumption expendi- tures (PCE) rose moderately in the third quarter. How- ever, real disposable income declined in the third quar- ter and consumer sentiment continued to be downbeat in October. In addition, labor market conditions remained weak as the pace of private-sector job gains in the third quarter as a whole was less than it was in the first half of the year. Overall consumer price infla- tion was more moderate than earlier in the year, as prices of energy and some commodities declined from their recent peaks, and measures of longer-run infla- tion expectations remained stable. Financial markets were quite volatile and investor sentiment was strongly influenced by prospects for Europe, as market partici- pants remained highly attuned to developments regarding possible steps to contain the fiscal and bank- ing problems there. Longer-term Treasury yields declined appreciably, on net, over the period, and yields on investment- and speculative-grade corporate bonds moved lower, leaving their spreads to Treasury securities slightly narrower. Although equity markets were volatile, broad U.S. equity price indexes ended the intermeeting period little changed. Most FOMC members anticipated that the pace of economic growth would remain moderate over coming quarters, with unemployment declining only gradually and inflation settling at or below levels consistent with the dual mandate. Moreover, the recovery was still seen as subject to significant downside risks, including strains in global financial markets. Accordingly, in the discussion of monetary policy, all Committee members agreed to continue the program of extending the aver- age maturity of the Federal Reserve’s holdings of secu- rities as announced in September. The Committee decided to maintain its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency MBS in agency MBS and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction. In addition, the Committee agreed to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and to reiterate its expectation that economic conditions were likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through mid-2013. Over subsequent weeks, financial markets appeared to become increasingly concerned that a timely resolu- tion of the European sovereign debt situation might not occur despite the measures that authorities there announced in October; pressures on European sover- eign debt markets increased, and conditions in Euro- pean funding markets deteriorated appreciably. The greater financial stress appeared likely to damp eco- nomic activity in the euro area and potentially to pose a risk to the economic recovery in the United States. On November 28, the Committee met by videocon- ference to discuss a proposal to amend and augment the Federal Reserve’s temporary liquidity swap arrangements with foreign central banks in light of the increased strains in global financial markets. The pro- posal included a six-month extension of the sunset date and a 50 basis point reduction in the pricing on the existing dollar liquidity swap arrangements with the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the Bank of Japan, the European Central Bank (ECB), and the Swiss National Bank. In addition, the proposal included the establishment, as a contingency measure, of swap arrangements that would allow the Federal Reserve to provide liquidity to U.S. institutions in for- eign currencies should the need arise. The proposal was aimed at helping to ease strains in financial markets and thereby to mitigate the effects of such strains on the supply of credit to U.S. households and businesses, thus supporting the economic recovery. Most partici- pants agreed that the proposed changes to the swap arrangements would represent an important demon- stration of the commitment of the Federal Reserve and the other central banks to work together to support the global financial system. At the conclusion of the dis- cussion, almost all members agreed to support the changes to the existing swap line arrangements and the establishment of the new foreign currency swap agreements. As of the December 13 FOMC meeting, the data indicated that U.S. economic activity had expanded moderately despite some apparent slowing in the growth of foreign economies and strains in global financial markets. Conditions in the labor market seemed to have improved somewhat, as the unemploy- ment rate dropped in November and private nonfarm employment continued to increase moderately. In October, industrial production rose, and overall real PCE grew modestly following significant gains in the previous month. However, revised estimates indicated that households’ real disposable income declined in the second and third quarters, the net wealth of house- holds decreased, and consumer sentiment was still at a subdued level in early December. Activity in the hous- ing market remained depressed by the substantial inventory of foreclosed and distressed properties and by weak demand that reflected tight credit conditions for mortgage loans and uncertainty about future home prices. Overall consumer price inflation continued to be more modest than earlier in the year, and measures of long-run inflation expectations had been stable. The risks associated with the fiscal and financial difficulties in Europe remained the focus of attention in financial markets over the intermeeting period and contributed to heightened volatility in a wide range of asset mar- kets. However, stock prices and longer-term interest rates had changed little, on balance, since the Novem- ber meeting. Members viewed the information on U.S. economic activity received over the intermeeting period as sug- gesting that the economy would continue to expand moderately. Strains in global financial markets contin- ued to pose significant downside risks to economic activity. Members also anticipated that inflation would settle, over coming quarters, at levels at or below those consistent with the Committee’s dual mandate. In the discussion of monetary policy for the period immedi- ately ahead, Committee members generally agreed that their overall assessments of the economic outlook had not changed greatly since their previous meeting. As a result, the Committee decided to continue the program of extending the average maturity of the Federal Reserve’s holdings of securities as announced in Sep- tember, to retain the existing policies regarding the reinvestment of principal payments from Federal Reserve holdings of securities, and to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent. While several members noted that the reference to mid- 2013 in the forward rate guidance might need to be adjusted before long, and a number of them looked forward to considering possible enhancements to the Committee’s communications, the Committee agreed to reiterate its anticipation that economic conditions were likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through mid-2013. The information reviewed at the January 24–25 meeting indicated that U.S. economic activity contin- ued to expand moderately, while global growth appeared to be slowing. Labor market indicators pointed to some further improvement in labor market conditions, but progress was gradual and the unem- ployment rate remained elevated. Household spending had continued to advance at a moderate pace despite diminished growth in real disposable income, but growth in business fixed investment had slowed. The housing sector remained depressed. Inflation had been subdued in recent months, there was little evidence of wage or cost pressures, and longer-term inflation expectations had remained stable. Meeting participants observed that financial conditions had improved and financial market stresses had eased somewhat during the intermeeting period: Equity prices were higher, volatility had declined, and bank lending conditions appeared to be improving. Participants noted that the ECB’s three-year refinancing operation had apparently resulted in improved conditions in European sovereign debt markets. Nonetheless, participants expected that global financial markets would remain focused on the evolving situation in Europe and they anticipated that further policy efforts would be required to fully address the fiscal and financial problems there. With the economy facing continuing headwinds and growth slowing in a number of U.S. export markets, members generally expected a modest pace of eco- nomic growth over coming quarters, with the unem- ployment rate declining only gradually. At the same time, members thought that inflation would run at lev- els at or below those consistent with the Committee’s dual mandate. Against this backdrop, members agreed that it would be appropriate to maintain the existing highly accommodative stance of monetary policy. They agreed to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent, to continue the program of extending the average maturity of the Federal Reserve’s holdings of securities as announced in Sep- tember, and to retain the existing policies regarding the reinvestment of principal payments from Federal Reserve holdings of securities. In light of the economic outlook, most members also agreed to indicate that the Committee expects to maintain a highly accommoda- tive stance for monetary policy and anticipates that economic conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through late 2014, longer than had been indicated in recent FOMC statements. The Committee also stated that it is pre- pared to adjust the size and composition of its securi- ties holdings as appropriate to promote a stronger eco- nomic recovery in a context of price stability. Transparency is an essential principle of modern cen- tral banking because it appropriately contributes to the accountability of central banks to the government and to the public and because it can enhance the effective- ness of central banks in achieving their macroeco- nomic objectives. To this end, the Federal Reserve pro- vides to the public a considerable amount of information concerning the conduct of monetary policy. Immediately following each meeting of the FOMC, the Committee releases a statement that lays out the rationale for its policy decision, and detailed minutes of each FOMC meeting are made public three weeks following the meeting. Lightly edited transcripts of FOMC meetings are released to the public with a five-year lag.21 Moreover, since last April, the Chair- man has held press conferences after regularly sched- uled two-day FOMC meetings. At the press confer- ences, the Chairman presents the current economic projections of FOMC participants and provides addi- tional context for its policy decisions. The Committee continued to consider additional improvements in its communications approach in the second half of 2011 and the first part of 2012. In a discussion on external communications at the Septem- ber 20–21 FOMC meeting, most participants indicated that they favored taking steps to increase further the transparency of monetary policy, including providing more information about the Committee’s longer-run policy objectives and the factors that influence the 21. FOMC statements, minutes, and transcripts, as well as other related information, are available on the Federal Reserve Board’s website at www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomc.htm. Committee’s policy decisions. Participants generally agreed that a clear statement of the Committee’s longer-run policy objectives could be helpful; some noted that it would also be useful to clarify the linkage between these longer-run objectives and the Commit- tee’s approach to setting the stance of monetary policy in the short and medium runs. Participants generally saw the Committee’s postmeeting statements as not well suited to communicate fully the Committee’s thinking about its objectives and its policy framework, and they agreed that the Committee would need to use other means to communicate that information or to supplement information in the statement. A number of participants suggested that the Committee’s periodic Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) could be used to provide more information about their views on the longer-run objectives and the likely evolution of monetary policy. discussed alternative monetary policy strategies and potential approaches for enhancing the clarity of their public communications, though no decision was made at that meeting to change the Committee’s policy strat- egy or communications. It was noted that many central banks around the world pursue an explicit inflation objective, maintain the flexibility to stabilize economic activity, and seek to communicate their forecasts and policy plans as clearly as possible. Many participants pointed to the merits of specifying an explicit longer- run inflation goal, but it was noted that such a step could be misperceived as placing greater weight on price stability than on maximum employment; conse- quently, some suggested that a numerical inflation goal would need to be set forth within a context that clearly underscored the Committee’s commitment to fostering both parts of its dual mandate. Most of participants agreed that it could be beneficial to formulate and pub- lish a statement that would elucidate the Committee’s policy approach, and participants generally expressed interest in providing additional information to the pub- lic about the likely future path of the target federal funds rate. The Chairman asked the subcommittee on communications, headed by Governor Yellen, to give consideration to a possible statement of the Commit- tee’s longer-run goals and policy strategy, and he also encouraged the subcommittee to explore potential approaches for incorporating information about par- ticipants’ assessments of appropriate monetary policy into the SEP.22 22. The subcommittee on communications is chaired by Governor At the December 13 FOMC meeting, participants further considered ways in which the Committee might enhance the clarity and transparency of its public com- munications. The subcommittee on communications recommended an approach for incorporating informa- tion about participants’ projections of appropriate future monetary policy into the SEP, which the FOMC releases four times each year. In the SEP, participants’ projections for economic growth, unemployment, and inflation are conditioned on their individual assess- ments of the path of monetary policy that is most likely to be consistent with the Federal Reserve’s statu- tory mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability, but information about those assessments has not been included in the SEP. Most participants agreed that adding their projections of the target fed- eral funds rate to the economic projections already provided in the SEP would help the public better understand the Committee’s monetary policy decisions and the ways in which those decisions depend on mem- bers’ assessments of economic and financial condi- tions. At the conclusion of the discussion, participants decided to incorporate information about their projec- tions of appropriate monetary policy into the SEP beginning in January. Following up on the Committee’s discussion of policy frameworks at its November meeting, the sub- committee on communications presented a draft state- ment of the Committee’s longer-run goals and policy strategy. Participants generally agreed that issuing such a statement could be helpful in enhancing the transpar- ency and accountability of monetary policy and in facilitating well-informed decisionmaking by house- holds and businesses, and thus in enhancing the Com- mittee’s ability to promote the goals specified in its statutory mandate in the face of significant economic disturbances. However, a couple of participants expressed the concern that a statement that was suffi- ciently nuanced to capture the diversity of views on the Committee might not, in fact, enhance public under- standing of the Committee’s actions and intentions. Participants commented on the draft statement, and the Chairman encouraged the subcommittee to make adjustments to the draft and to present a revised ver- sion for the Committee’s further consideration in January. communications presented a revised draft of a state- ment of principles regarding the FOMC’s longer-run goals and monetary policy strategy. Almost all partici- pants supported adopting and releasing the revised statement (see the box “FOMC Statement Regarding Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy”). It was noted that the proposed statement did not repre- sent a change in the Committee’s policy approach. Instead, the statement was intended to help enhance the transparency, accountability, and effectiveness of monetary policy. In addition, in light of the decision made at the December meeting, the Committee provided in the January SEP information about each participant’s assessments of appropriate monetary policy. Specifi- cally, the SEP included information about participants’ estimates of the appropriate level of the target federal funds rate in the fourth quarter of the current year and the next few calendar years, and over the longer run; the SEP also reported participants’ current projections of the likely timing of the appropriate first increase in the target rate given their projections of future eco- nomic conditions. The accompanying narrative described the key factors underlying those assessments and provided some qualitative information regarding participants’ expectations for the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. A number of participants suggested fur- ther possible enhancements to the SEP; the Chairman asked the subcommittee to explore such enhancements over coming months. Following careful deliberations at its recent meet- ings, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has reached broad agreement on the following principles regarding its longer-run goals and mon- etary policy strategy. The Committee intends to reaffirm these principles and to make adjustments as appropriate at its annual organizational meeting each January. The FOMC is ﬁrmly committed to fulﬁlling its statutory mandate from the Congress of promoting maximum employment, stable prices, and moder- ate long-term interest rates. The Committee seeks to explain its monetary policy decisions to the pub- lic as clearly as possible. Such clarity facilitates well-informed decisionmaking by households and businesses, reduces economic and ﬁnancial uncer- tainty, increases the effectiveness of monetary policy, and enhances transparency and account- ability, which are essential in a democratic society. Inﬂation, employment, and long-term interest rates ﬂuctuate over time in response to economic and ﬁnancial disturbances. Moreover, monetary policy actions tend to inﬂuence economic activity and prices with a lag. Therefore, the Committee’s policy decisions reﬂect its longer-run goals, its medium-term outlook, and its assessments of the balance of risks, including risks to the ﬁnancial system that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. price stability and moderate long-term interest rates and enhancing the Committee’s ability to pro- mote maximum employment in the face of signiﬁ- cant economic disturbances. The maximum level of employment is largely determined by nonmonetary factors that affect the structure and dynamics of the labor market. These factors may change over time and may not be directly measurable. Consequently, it would not be appropriate to specify a ﬁxed goal for employ- ment; rather, the Committee’s policy decisions must be informed by assessments of the maximum level of employment, recognizing that such assess- ments are necessarily uncertain and subject to revi- sion. The Committee considers a wide range of indicators in making these assessments. Informa- tion about Committee participants’ estimates of the longer-run normal rates of output growth and unemployment is published four times per year in the FOMC’s Summary of Economic Projections. For example, in the most recent projections, FOMC participants’ estimates of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment had a central tendency of 5.2 percent to 6.0 percent, roughly unchanged from last January but substantially higher than the corresponding interval several years earlier. In setting monetary policy, the Committee seeks The inﬂation rate over the longer run is primarily determined by monetary policy, and hence the Committee has the ability to specify a longer-run goal for inﬂation. The Committee judges that inﬂa- tion at the rate of 2 percent, as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal con- sumption expenditures, is most consistent over the longer run with the Federal Reserve’s statutory mandate. Communicating this inﬂation goal clearly to the public helps keep longer-term inﬂation expectations ﬁrmly anchored, thereby fostering to mitigate deviations of inﬂation from its longer- run goal and deviations of employment from the Committee’s assessments of its maximum level. These objectives are generally complementary. However, under circumstances in which the Com- mittee judges that the objectives are not comple- mentary, it follows a balanced approach in promot- ing them, taking into account the magnitude of the deviations and the potentially different time hori- zons over which employment and inﬂation are pro- jected to return to levels judged consistent with its mandate. The following material appeared as an addendum to the minutes of the January 24–25, 2012, meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee. In conjunction with the January 24–25, 2012, Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting, the mem- bers of the Board of Governors and the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks, all of whom participate in the deliberations of the FOMC, submitted projections for growth of real output, the unemployment rate, and inflation for the years 2012 to 2014 and over the longer run. The economic projections were based on informa- tion available at the time of the meeting and partici- pants’ individual assumptions about factors likely to affect economic outcomes, including their assessments of appropriate monetary policy. Starting with the January meeting, participants also submitted their assessments of the path for the target federal funds rate that they viewed as appropriate and compatible with their individual economic projections. Longer-run pro- jections represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to con- verge over time under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks. “Appropriate monetary policy” is defined as the future path of policy that participants deem most likely to foster out- comes for economic activity and inflation that best satisfy their individual interpretation of the Federal Reserve’s objectives of maximum employment and stable prices. sures on inflation in 2011 from factors such as supply chain disruptions and rising commodity prices as hav- ing waned, and they anticipated that inflation would fall back in 2012. Over the projection period, most par- ticipants expected inflation, as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), to be at or below the FOMC’s objective of 2 percent that was expressed in the Com- mittee’s statement of longer-run goals and policy strat- egy. Core inflation was projected to run at about the same rate as overall inflation. As indicated in table 1, relative to their previous pro- jections in November 2011, participants made small downward revisions to their expectations for the rate of increase in real GDP in 2012 and 2013, but they did not materially alter their projections for a noticeably stronger pace of expansion by 2014. With the unem- ployment rate having declined in recent months by more than participants had anticipated in the previous Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), they gener- ally lowered their forecasts for the level of the unem- ployment rate over the next two years. Participants’ expectations for both the longer-run rate of increase in real GDP and the longer-run unemployment rate were little changed from November. They did not signifi- cantly alter their forecasts for the rate of inflation over the next three years. However, in light of the 2 percent inflation that is the objective included in the statement of longer-run goals and policy strategy adopted at the January meeting, the range and central tendency of their projections of longer-run inflation were all equal to 2 percent. As depicted in figure 1, FOMC participants pro- jected continued economic expansion over the 2012–14 period, with real gross domestic product (GDP) rising at a modest rate this year and then strengthening fur- ther through 2014. Participants generally anticipated only a small decline in the unemployment rate this year. In 2013 and 2014, the pace of the expansion was projected to exceed participants’ estimates of the longer-run sustainable rate of increase in real GDP by enough to result in a gradual further decline in the unemployment rate. However, at the end of 2014, par- ticipants generally expected that the unemployment rate would still be well above their estimates of the longer-run normal unemployment rate that they cur- rently view as consistent with the FOMC’s statutory mandate for promoting maximum employment and price stability. Participants viewed the upward pres- As shown in figure 2, most participants judged that highly accommodative monetary policy was likely to be warranted over coming years to promote a stronger economic expansion in the context of price stability. In particular, with the unemployment rate projected to remain elevated over the projection period and infla- tion expected to be subdued, six participants antici- pated that, under appropriate monetary policy, the first increase in the target federal funds rate would occur after 2014, and five expected policy firming to com- mence during 2014 (the upper panel). The remaining six participants judged that raising the federal funds rate sooner would be required to forestall inflationary pressures or avoid distortions in the financial system. As indicated in the lower panel, all of the individual Figure 1. Central tendencies and ranges of economic projections, 2012–14 and over the longer run Longer run Longer run Longer run NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the notes to table 1. The data for the actual values of the variables are annual. The data for the change in real GDP, PCE inflation, and core PCE inflation shown for 2011 incorporate the advance estimate of GDP for the fourth quarter of 2011, which the Bureau of Economic Analysis released on January 27, 2012. This information was not available to FOMC meeting participants at the time of their meeting. Longer run Longer run                                                           NOTE: Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP) and projections for both measures of inflation are from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. PCE inflation and core PCE inflation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) and the price index for PCE excluding food and energy. Projections for the unemployment rate are for the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. Each participant’s projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy. Longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. The November projections were made in conjunction with the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on November 1–2, 2011. 1. The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each year. 2. The range for a variable in a given year includes all participants’ projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year. 3. Longer-run projections for core PCE inflation are not collected. assessments of the appropriate target federal funds rate over the next several years were below the longer-run level of the federal funds rate, and 11 participants placed the target federal funds rate at 1 percent or lower at the end of 2014. Most participants indicated that they expected that the normalization of the Fed- eral Reserve’s balance sheet should occur in a way con- sistent with the principles agreed on at the June 2011 meeting of the FOMC, with the timing of adjustments dependent on the expected date of the first policy tightening. A few participants judged that, given their current assessments of the economic outlook, appro- priate policy would include additional asset purchases in 2012, and one assumed an early ending of the matur- ity extension program. A sizable majority of participants continued to judge the level of uncertainty associated with their pro- jections for real activity and the unemployment rate as unusually high relative to historical norms. Many also attached a greater-than-normal level of uncertainty to their forecasts for inflation, but, compared with the November SEP, two additional participants viewed uncertainty as broadly similar to longer-run norms. As in November, many participants saw downside risks attending their forecasts of real GDP growth and upside risks to their forecasts of the unemployment rate; most participants viewed the risks to their infla- tion projections as broadly balanced. The central tendency of participants’ forecasts for the change in real GDP in 2012 was 2.2 to 2.7 percent. This forecast for 2012, while slightly lower than the projection prepared in November, would represent a pickup in output growth from 2011 to a rate close to its longer-run trend. Participants stated that the eco- nomic information received since November showed continued gradual improvement in the pace of eco- nomic activity during the second half of 2011, as the influence of the temporary factors that damped activ- ity in the first half of the year subsided. Consumer spending increased at a moderate rate, exports expanded solidly, and business investment rose further. Recently, consumers and businesses appeared to become somewhat more optimistic about the outlook. Financial conditions for domestic nonfinancial busi- nesses were generally favorable, and conditions in con- sumer credit markets showed signs of improvement. However, a number of factors suggested that the pace of the expansion would continue to be restrained. Although some indicators of activity in the housing sector improved slightly at the end of 2011, new home- building and sales remained at depressed levels, house prices were still falling, and mortgage credit remained tight. Households’ real disposable income rose only modestly through late 2011. In addition, federal spend- ing contracted toward year-end, and the restraining effects of fiscal consolidation appeared likely to be greater this year than anticipated at the time of the November projections. Participants also read the infor- mation on economic activity abroad, particularly in Europe, as pointing to weaker demand for U.S. exports in coming quarters than had seemed likely when they prepared their forecasts in November. Participants anticipated that the pace of the eco- nomic expansion would strengthen over the 2013–14 period, reaching rates of increase in real GDP above their estimates of the longer-run rates of output growth. The central tendencies of participants’ fore- casts for the change in real GDP were 2.8 to 3.2 per- cent in 2013 and 3.3 to 4.0 percent in 2014. Among the considerations supporting their forecasts, participants cited their expectation that the expansion would be supported by monetary policy accommodation, ongo- ing improvements in credit conditions, rising house- hold and business confidence, and strengthening household balance sheets. Many participants judged that U.S. fiscal policy would still be a drag on eco- nomic activity in 2013, but many anticipated that prog- ress would be made in resolving the fiscal situation in Europe and that the foreign economic outlook would be more positive. Over time and in the absence of shocks, participants expected that the rate of increase of real GDP would converge to their estimates of its longer-run rate, with a central tendency of 2.3 to 2.6 percent, little changed from their estimates in November. The unemployment rate improved more in late 2011 than most participants had anticipated when they pre- pared their November projections, falling from 9.1 to 8.7 percent between the third and fourth quarters. As a result, most participants adjusted down their projec- tions for the unemployment rate this year. Nonetheless, with real GDP expected to increase at a modest rate in 2012, the unemployment rate was projected to decline only a little this year, with the central tendency of par- ticipants’ forecasts at 8.2 to 8.5 percent at year-end. Thereafter, participants expected that the pickup in the pace of the expansion in 2013 and 2014 would be accompanied by a further gradual improvement in labor market conditions. The central tendency of par- ticipants’ forecasts for the unemployment rate at the end of 2013 was 7.4 to 8.1 percent, and it was 6.7 to 7.6 percent at the end of 2014. The central tendency of participants’ estimates of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment that would prevail in the absence of further shocks was 5.2 to 6.0 percent. Most partici- pants indicated that they anticipated that five or six years would be required to close the gap between the current unemployment rate and their estimates of the longer-run rate, although some noted that more time would likely be needed. Figures 3.A and 3.B provide details on the diversity of participants’ views regarding the likely outcomes for real GDP growth and the unemployment rate over the next three years and over the longer run. The disper- sion in these projections reflected differences in partici- pants’ assessments of many factors, including appro- priate monetary policy and its effects on economic activity, the underlying momentum in economic activ- ity, the effects of the European situation, the prospec- tive path for U.S. fiscal policy, the likely evolution of credit and financial market conditions, and the extent of structural dislocations in the labor market. Com- pared with their November projections, the range of participants’ forecasts for the change in real GDP in 2012 narrowed somewhat and shifted slightly lower, as some participants reassessed the outlook for global economic growth and for U.S. fiscal policy. Many, how- ever, made no material change to their forecasts for growth of real GDP this year. The dispersion of par- ticipants’ forecasts for output growth in 2013 and 2014 remained relatively wide. Having incorporated the data showing a lower rate of unemployment at the end of 2011 than previously expected, the distribution of par- ticipants’ projections for the end of 2012 shifted noticeably down relative to the November forecasts. The ranges for the unemployment rate in 2013 and 2014 showed less pronounced shifts toward lower rates and, as was the case with the ranges for output growth, remained wide. Participants made only modest adjust- ments to their projections of the rates of output growth and unemployment over the longer run, and, on net, the dispersions of their projections for both were little changed from those reported in November. The dispersion of estimates for the longer-run rate of output growth is narrow, with only one participant’s estimate outside of a range of 2.2 to 2.7 percent. By comparison, participants’ views about the level to which the unemployment rate would converge in the long run are more diverse, reflecting, among other things, different views on the outlook for labor supply and on the extent of structural impediments in the labor market. Participants generally viewed the outlook for inflation as very similar to that in November. Most indicated that, as they expected, the effects of the run-up in prices of energy and other commodities and the supply Figure 3.A. Distribution of participants’ projections for the change in real GDP, 2012–14 and over the longer run Longer run NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. Figure 3.B. Distribution of participants’ projections for the unemployment rate, 2012–14 and over the longer run Longer run NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. disruptions that occurred in the first half of 2011 had largely waned, and that inflation had been subdued in recent months. Participants also noted that inflation expectations had remained stable over the past year despite the fluctuations in headline inflation. Assuming no further supply shocks, most participants anticipated that both headline and core inflation would remain subdued over the 2012–14 period at rates at or below the FOMC’s longer-run objective of 2 percent. Specifi- cally, the central tendency of participants’ projections for the increase in inflation, as measured by the PCE price index, in 2012 was 1.4 to 1.8 percent, and it edged up to a central tendency of 1.6 to 2.0 percent in 2014; the central tendencies of the forecasts for core PCE inflation were largely the same as those for the total measure. Figures 3.C and 3.D provide information about the diversity of participants’ views about the outlook for inflation. Compared with their November projections, expectations for inflation in 2012 shifted down a bit, with some participants noting that the slowing in infla- tion at the end of 2011 had been greater than they anticipated. Nonetheless, the range of participants’ forecasts for inflation in 2012 remained wide, and the dispersion was only slightly narrower in 2013. By 2014, the range of inflation forecasts narrowed more notice- ably, as participants expected that, under appropriate monetary policy, inflation would begin to converge to the Committee’s longer-run objective. In general, the dispersion of views on the outlook for inflation over the projection period represented differences in judg- ments regarding the degree of slack in resource utiliza- tion and the extent to which slack influences inflation and inflation expectations. In addition, participants differed in their estimates of how the stance of mon- etary policy would influence inflation expectations. Most participants judged that the current outlook— for a moderate pace of economic recovery with the unemployment rate declining only gradually and infla- tion subdued—warranted exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate at least until late 2014. In par- ticular, five participants viewed appropriate policy firming as commencing during 2014, while six others judged that the first increase in the federal funds rate would not be warranted until 2015 or 2016. As a result, those 11 participants anticipated that the appropriate federal funds rate at the end of 2014 would be 1 per- cent or lower. Those who saw the first increase occur- ring in 2015 reported that they anticipated that the federal funds rate would be ½ percent at the end of that year. For the two participants who put the first increase in 2016, the appropriate target federal funds rate at the end of that year was 1½ and 1¾ percent. In contrast, six participants expected that an increase in the target federal funds rate would be appropriate within the next two years, and those participants anticipated that the target rate would need to be increased to around 1½ to 2¾ percent at the end of 2014. the federal funds rate reflected their judgments of the policy that would best support progress in achieving the Federal Reserve’s mandate for promoting maxi- mum employment and stable prices. Among the key factors informing participants’ expectations about the appropriate setting for monetary policy were their assessments of the maximum level of employment, the Committee’s longer-run inflation goal, the extent to which current conditions deviate from these mandate- consistent levels, and their projections of the likely time horizons required to return employment and inflation to such levels. Several participants com- mented that their assessments took into account the risks to the outlook for economic activity and infla- tion, and a few pointed specifically to the relevance of financial stability in their policy judgments. Partici- pants also noted that because the appropriate stance of monetary policy depends importantly on the evolution of real activity and inflation over time, their assess- ments of the appropriate future path of the federal funds rate could change if economic conditions were to evolve in an unexpected manner. All participants reported levels for the appropriate target federal funds rate at the end of 2014 that were well below their estimates of the level expected to pre- vail in the longer run. The longer-run nominal levels were in a range from 3¾ to 4½ percent, reflecting par- ticipants’ judgments about the longer-run equilibrium level of the real federal funds rate and the Committee’s inflation objective of 2 percent. Participants also provided qualitative information on their views regarding the appropriate path of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. A few participants’ assessments of appropriate monetary policy incorpo- rated additional purchases of longer-term securities in 2012, and a number of participants indicated that they remained open to a consideration of additional asset purchases if the economic outlook deteriorated. All but one of the participants continued to expect that the Committee would carry out the normalization of the balance sheet according to the principles approved at the June 2011 FOMC meeting. That is, prior to the Figure 3.C. Distribution of participants’ projections for PCE inflation, 2012–14 and over the longer run Longer run NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. first increase in the federal funds rate, the Committee would likely cease reinvesting some or all payments on the securities holdings in the System Open Market Account (SOMA), and it would likely begin sales of agency securities from the SOMA sometime after the first rate increase, aiming to eliminate the SOMA’s holdings of agency securities over a period of three to five years. Indeed, most participants saw sales of agency securities starting no earlier than 2015. How- ever, those participants anticipating an earlier increase in the federal funds rate also called for earlier adjust- ments to the balance sheet, and one participant assumed an early end of the maturity extension program. Figure 3.E details the distribution of participants’ judgments regarding the appropriate level of the target federal funds rate at the end of each calendar year from 2012 to 2014 and over the longer run. Most par- ticipants anticipated that economic conditions would warrant maintaining the current low level of the fed- eral funds rate over the next two years. However, views on the appropriate level of the federal funds rate at the end of 2014 were more widely dispersed, with two- thirds of participants seeing the appropriate level of Figure 3.E. Distribution of participants’ projections for the target federal funds rate, 2012–14 and over the longer run Longer run NOTE: The target funds rate is measured as the level of the target rate at the end of the calendar year or in the longer run. the federal funds rate as 1 percent or below and five seeing the appropriate rate as 2 percent or higher. Those participants who judged that a longer period of exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate would be appropriate generally also anticipated that the pace of the economic expansion would be moderate and that the unemployment rate would decline only gradu- ally, remaining well above its longer-run rate at the end of 2014. Almost all of these participants expected that inflation would be relatively stable at or below the FOMC’s longer-run objective of 2 percent until the time of the first increase in the federal funds rate. A number of them also mentioned their assessment that a longer period of low federal funds rates is appropri- ate when the federal funds rate is constrained by its effective lower bound. In contrast, the six participants who judged that policy firming should begin in 2012 or 2013 indicated that the Committee would need to act decisively to keep inflation at mandate-consistent levels and to limit the risk of undermining Federal Reserve credibility and causing a rise in inflation expectations. Several were projecting a faster pickup in economic activity, and a few stressed the risk of distortions in the financial system from an extended period of exception- ally low interest rates. Figure 4 shows that most participants continued to share the view that their projections for real GDP growth and the unemployment rate were subject to a higher level of uncertainty than was the norm during the previous 20 years.23 Many also judged the level of uncertainty associated with their inflation forecasts to be higher than the longer-run norm, but that assess- ment was somewhat less prevalent among participants than was the case for uncertainty about real activity. Participants identified a number of factors that con- tributed to the elevated level of uncertainty about the outlook. In particular, many participants continued to cite risks related to ongoing developments in Europe. More broadly, they again noted difficulties in forecast- ing the path of economic recovery from a deep reces- sion that was the result of a severe financial crisis and thus differed importantly from the experience with 23. Table 2 provides estimates of the forecast uncertainty for the change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, and total consumer price inflation over the period from 1991 to 2010. At the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty” discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty in the economic forecasts and explains the approach used to assess the uncertainty and risks attending the participants’ projections. Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges NOTE: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root mean squared error of projections for 1991 through 2010 that were released in the win- ter by various private and government forecasters. As described in the box “Fore- cast Uncertainty,” under certain assumptions, there is about a 70 percent probabil- ity that actual outcomes for real GDP, unemployment, and consumer prices will be in ranges implied by the average size of projection errors made in the past. Fur- ther information is in David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip (2007), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook from Historical Forecasting Errors,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2007-60 (Washington: Board of Gover- nors of the Federal Reserve System, November). 1. For definitions, refer to general note in table 1. 2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure that has been most widely used in government and private economic forecasts. Projection is per- cent change, fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. recoveries over the past 60 years. In that regard, par- ticipants continued to be uncertain about the pace at which credit conditions would ease and about pros- pects for a recovery in the housing sector. In addition, participants generally saw the outlook for fiscal and regulatory policies as still highly uncertain. Regarding the unemployment rate, several expressed uncertainty about how labor demand and supply would evolve over the forecast period. Among the sources of uncer- tainty about the outlook for inflation were the difficul- ties in assessing the current and prospective margins of slack in resource markets and the effect of such slack on prices. A majority of participants continued to report that they saw the risks to their forecasts of real GDP growth as weighted to the downside and, accordingly, the risks to their projections for the unemployment rate as skewed to the upside. All but one of the remain- ing participants viewed the risks to both projections as broadly balanced, while one noted a risk that the unemployment rate might continue to decline more rapidly than expected. The most frequently cited downside risks to the projected pace of the economic expansion were the possibility of financial market and economic spillovers from the fiscal and financial issues in the euro area and the chance that some of the fac- tors that have restrained the recovery in recent years could persist and weigh on economic activity to a greater extent than assumed in participants’ baseline forecasts. In particular, some participants mentioned the downside risks to consumer spending from still- weak household balance sheets and only modest gains in real income, along with the possible effects of still- high levels of uncertainty regarding fiscal and regula- tory policies that might damp businesses’ willingness Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Risks to core PCE inflation Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside NOTE: For definitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. The economic projections provided by the mem- bers of the Board of Governors and the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks inform discussions of monetary policy among policymakers and can aid public understanding of the basis for policy actions. Considerable uncertainty attends these projections, however. The economic and statistical models and relationships used to help produce economic forecasts are necessarily imperfect descriptions of the real world, and the future path of the economy can be affected by myriad unfore- seen developments and events. Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, participants consider not only what appears to be the most likely eco- nomic outcome as embodied in their projections, but also the range of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of their occurring, and the potential costs to the economy should they occur. Table 2 summarizes the average historical accu- racy of a range of forecasts, including those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports and those prepared by the Federal Reserve Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee. The projection error ranges shown in the table illustrate the considerable uncertainty associated with economic forecasts. For example, suppose a participant projects that real gross domestic product (GDP) and total consumer prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty attend- ing those projections is similar to that experienced in the past and the risks around the projections are broadly balanced, the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a probability of about 70 percent that actual GDP would expand within a range of 1.7 to 4.3 percent in the current year, 1.3 to 4.7 percent in to invest and hire. A number of participants noted the risk of another disruption in global oil markets that could not only boost inflation but also reduce real income and spending. The participants who judged the risks to be broadly balanced also recognized a number of these downside risks to the outlook but saw them as counterbalanced by the possibility that the resilience of economic activity in late 2011 and the recent drop in the unemployment rate might signal greater underlying momentum in economic activity. In contrast to their outlook for economic activity, most participants judged the risks to their projections of inflation as broadly balanced. Participants generally viewed the recent decline in inflation as having been in line with their earlier forecasts, and they noted that inflation expectations remain stable. While many of the second year, and 1.2 to 4.8 in the third year. The corresponding 70 percent conﬁdence intervals for overall inﬂation would be 1.1 to 2.9 percent in the current year and 1.0 to 3.0 percent in the second and third years. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over history, par- ticipants provide judgments as to whether the uncertainty attached to their projections of each variable is greater than, smaller than, or broadly similar to typical levels of forecast uncertainty in the past, as shown in table 2. Participants also pro- vide judgments as to whether the risks to their pro- jections are weighted to the upside, are weighted to the downside, or are broadly balanced. That is, participants judge whether each variable is more likely to be above or below their projections of the most likely outcome. These judgments about the uncertainty and the risks attending each partici- pant’s projections are distinct from the diversity of participants’ views about the most likely outcomes. Forecast uncertainty is concerned with the risks associated with a particular projection rather than with divergences across a number of different projections. the future path of the federal funds rate is subject to considerable uncertainty. This uncertainty arises primarily because each participant’s assessment of the appropriate stance of monetary policy depends importantly on the evolution of real activ- ity and inﬂation over time. If economic conditions evolve in an unexpected manner, then assessments of the appropriate setting of the federal funds rate would change from that point forward. these participants saw the persistence of substantial slack in resource utilization as likely to keep inflation subdued over the projection period, a few others noted the risk that elevated resource slack might put more downward pressure on inflation than expected. In con- trast, some participants noted the upside risks to infla- tion from developments in global oil and commodity markets, and several indicated that the current highly accommodative stance of monetary policy and the substantial liquidity currently in the financial system risked a pickup in inflation to a level above the Com- mittee’s objective. A few also pointed to the risk that uncertainty about the Committee’s ability to effectively remove policy accommodation when appropriate could lead to a rise in inflation expectations. emerging market economy London interbank offered rate On August 12, 2015, the ending dates of the data were clarified for figure B in the box “Slack in the Labor Market” (2015:Q2) and for figures D and E in the box “Liquidity Conditions in the Bond Market” (March 2015). The Board of Governors is pleased to submit its Monetary Policy Report pursuant to section 2B of the Federal Reserve Act. Statement on Longer-run goaLS and monetary PoLicy Strategy Adopted effective January 24, 2012; as amended effective January 27, 2015 The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) is firmly committed to fulfilling its statutory mandate from the Congress of promoting maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates. The Committee seeks to explain its monetary policy decisions to the public as clearly as possible. Such clarity facilitates well-informed decisionmaking by households and businesses, reduces economic and financial uncertainty, increases the effectiveness of monetary policy, and enhances transparency and accountability, which are essential in a democratic society. Inflation, employment, and long-term interest rates fluctuate over time in response to economic and financial disturbances. Moreover, monetary policy actions tend to influence economic activity and prices with a lag. Therefore, the Committee’s policy decisions reflect its longer-run goals, its medium- term outlook, and its assessments of the balance of risks, including risks to the financial system that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. The inflation rate over the longer run is primarily determined by monetary policy, and hence the Committee has the ability to specify a longer-run goal for inflation. The Committee reaffirms its judgment that inflation at the rate of 2 percent, as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, is most consistent over the longer run with the Federal Reserve’s statutory mandate. Communicating this inflation goal clearly to the public helps keep longer-term inflation expectations firmly anchored, thereby fostering price stability and moderate long-term interest rates and enhancing the Committee’s ability to promote maximum employment in the face of significant economic disturbances. The maximum level of employment is largely determined by nonmonetary factors that affect the structure and dynamics of the labor market. These factors may change over time and may not be directly measurable. Consequently, it would not be appropriate to specify a fixed goal for employment; rather, the Committee’s policy decisions must be informed by assessments of the maximum level of employment, recognizing that such assessments are necessarily uncertain and subject to revision. The Committee considers a wide range of indicators in making these assessments. Information about Committee participants’ estimates of the longer-run normal rates of output growth and unemployment is published four times per year in the FOMC’s Summary of Economic Projections. For example, in the most recent projections, FOMC participants’ estimates of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment had a central tendency of 5.2 percent to 5.5 percent. In setting monetary policy, the Committee seeks to mitigate deviations of inflation from its longer-run goal and deviations of employment from the Committee’s assessments of its maximum level. These objectives are generally complementary. However, under circumstances in which the Committee judges that the objectives are not complementary, it follows a balanced approach in promoting them, taking into account the magnitude of the deviations and the potentially different time horizons over which employment and inflation are projected to return to levels judged consistent with its mandate. The Committee intends to reaffirm these principles and to make adjustments as appropriate at its annual organizational meeting each January. Note: Unless otherwise stated, the time series in the figures extend through, for daily data, July 9, 2015; for monthly data, June 2015; and, for quarterly data, 2015:Q1. In bar charts, except as noted, the change for a given period is measured to its final quarter from the final quarter of the preceding period. summary The overall condition of the labor market continued to strengthen over the first half of 2015, albeit at a more moderate pace than in 2014. So far this year, payroll employment has increased by about 210,000 on average per month compared with the robust 260,000 average in 2014, and the unemployment rate has declined about ¼ percentage point to 5.3 percent in June, close to most Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants’ estimates of its longer-run normal level. Other measures of labor market activity also point to ongoing improvement in labor market conditions even as they continue to suggest that further improvement is needed to achieve the Committee’s maximum employment mandate. In particular, the labor force participation rate has generally been holding steady but nevertheless remains below most assessments of its trend, and the number of people working part time when they would prefer full-time employment has declined further but remains elevated. And, while some measures of labor compensation are starting to rise more rapidly, they nevertheless remain consistent with the view that labor resources likely are still not being fully utilized. Consumer price inflation remains below the FOMC’s longer-run goal of 2 percent. The price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) edged up only ¼ percent over the 12 months ending in May, held down by the pass-through of a sizable decline in crude oil prices over the second half of last year. However, consumer energy prices appear to have stabilized in recent months. Changes in the PCE price index excluding food and energy items, which are often a better indicator of where overall inflation will be in the future, also remained relatively low; this index rose 1¼ percent over the 12 months ending in May, partly restrained by declines in the prices of non-energy imported goods. Meanwhile, survey-based measures of longer-run inflation expectations have remained relatively stable; market-based measures of inflation compensation have moved up somewhat from their lows earlier this year but remain below levels that prevailed until last summer. Real gross domestic product is reported to have been little changed in the first quarter of this year. Some of this weakness likely reflected temporary factors that will reverse over the coming quarters. Indeed, a number of recent spending indicators suggest that economic activity increased at a moderate pace in the second quarter. The economic expansion continues to be supported by rising incomes resulting from ongoing job gains, accommodative monetary policy, and generally favorable financial conditions. Furthermore, the sizable drop in oil prices since last summer has been a substantial benefit to households, although the negative side of that decline has been quite evident in cutbacks in the energy sector of our economy. In addition, the sluggish pace of economic activity abroad, together with the appreciation of the dollar, has weighed on net exports. The Committee expects that, with appropriate policy accommodation, economic activity will expand at a moderate pace and labor market conditions will continue to move toward levels the Committee judges to be consistent with its dual mandate of maximum employment and price stability. In addition, the Committee anticipates that, with stable inflation expectations and strengthening economic activity, inflation will rise gradually over the medium term toward the Committee’s 2 percent objective. Those expectations are reflected in the June Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), which provides projections of the individual FOMC participants and is included as Part 3 of this report. Domestic financial conditions have generally remained supportive of economic growth. After having declined notably in 2014, longer- term interest rates have increased somewhat, on net, over the first half of the year, but they remain at historically low levels. Broad measures of U.S. equity prices have been little changed, on balance, this year after having risen considerably in recent years. Credit flows to large nonfinancial businesses have remained solid, and financing generally appears to have become available to small businesses as well. Credit conditions for households have been mixed: While the availability of mortgage loans continues to expand gradually, mortgages remain relatively difficult to obtain for some individuals, and credit card lending standards and terms are tight for borrowers with below-prime scores. Meanwhile, auto and student loans continued to be widely available, and outstanding balances of such loans have continued to rise significantly. Financial vulnerabilities in the United States overall have remained moderate since the previous Monetary Policy Report. Capital and liquidity positions at the largest banking firms have remained strong, maturity transformation outside the banking system has continued to trend lower, and debt growth by the household sector has been modest. Valuation pressures in many fixed-income markets, while having eased, have remained notable; prices and valuation measures for commercial real estate have increased further; and borrowing by lower-rated businesses has continued at a rapid rate. Although market participants have expressed concerns about the resilience of liquidity during stress events, a variety of metrics do not suggest a significant deterioration in market liquidity; the Federal Reserve is watching developments closely. Foreign developments, such as the situation in Greece and financial conditions in China, could pose some risks to the United States if they lead to broader strains in those regions. The FOMC has continued to judge that a high degree of policy accommodation remains appropriate to support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability. As a result, it has maintained the exceptionally low target range of 0 to ¼ percent for the federal funds rate and has kept the Federal Reserve’s holdings of longer- term securities at their current elevated levels to help maintain accommodative financial conditions. The Committee has reiterated that in deciding how long to maintain the current target range for the federal funds rate, it will consider a broad set of indicators to assess realized and expected progress toward its objectives. Since its April meeting, the Committee has stated it anticipates that raising the target range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate when it has seen further improvement in the labor market and is reasonably confident that inflation will move back to its 2 percent objective over the medium term. In the June SEP, most policymakers anticipated that these conditions would be met sometime this year. The Committee continues to expect that, even after employment and inflation are near mandate-consistent levels, economic conditions may, for some time, warrant keeping the target federal funds rate below levels the Committee views as normal in the longer run. The Federal Reserve has continued to plan for the eventual normalization of the stance and conduct of monetary policy, including by testing the operational readiness of the policy tools to be used. The FOMC remains confident that it has the tools it needs to raise short-term interest rates when doing so becomes appropriate. Labor market conditions continued to improve over the first half of 2015, although at a more moderate pace than last year. Gains in payroll employment since the start of the year have averaged close to 210,000 per month, somewhat below last year’s average pace, while the unemployment rate edged down slightly to 5.3 percent in June, close to most Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants’ estimates of its longer-run normal level. Since last summer, a steep drop in crude oil prices has exerted downward pressure on overall inflation, and price increases for other goods and services have been subdued, partly reflecting declines in prices for imported non-energy goods. The price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) increased only ¼ percent during the 12 months ending in May, a rate that is well below the FOMC’s longer-run objective of 2 percent; the index excluding food and energy prices was up 1¼ percent over this period. Survey-based measures of longer-run inflation expectations have been fairly stable, whereas measures of inflation compensation derived from financial market quotes, while up from their lows earlier this year, remain below the levels that prevailed prior to last summer. Meanwhile, real gross domestic product (GDP) was reported to have been little changed in the first quarter of this year. Some of this weakness likely was the result of temporary factors, and recent indicators suggest that economic activity picked up in the second quarter; even so, the pace of output growth appears to have slowed so far this year, on average, relative to its pace last year. The economic expansion continues to be supported by rising real incomes driven by gains in employment and, recently, lower oil prices; by improving consumer and business confidence; and by accommodative monetary policy and generally favorable financial conditions. However, the low level of oil prices also pushed down investment spending in the energy sector early this year, and sluggish growth abroad and the higher foreign exchange value of the dollar have weighed on U.S. exports. The labor market has continued to improve but at a more gradual pace . . . Labor market conditions strengthened further over the first half of 2015 but at a more moderate pace than last year. Payroll employment gains have averaged about 210,000 per month so far this year, a solid pace but down from an average of 260,000 jobs per month in 2014 (figure 1). The unemployment rate has continued to edge lower and reached 5.3 percent in June, ¼ percentage point lower than in December; in 2014, the unemployment rate declined more rapidly. In addition, the share of unemployed who have been out of work for more than six months has declined noticeably this year. After falling steeply during the recession and the early part of the recovery, the labor force participation rate has remained roughly flat since late 2013, 1. Net change in payroll employment 2. Labor force participation rate and employment-to-population ratio NOTE: Both series are a percent of the population aged 16 and over. SOURCE: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. although it ticked lower in June (figure 2). The continued stability of the participation rate likely represents cyclical improvement relative to its declining trend, which reflects ongoing demographic trends such as the aging of members of the baby-boom generation into their retirement years. With employment rising and the participation rate holding steady, the employment-to-population ratio edged up further over the first half of this year. Furthermore, the job openings rate has continued to move up this year and now stands above its pre-recession level, and the quits rate, which is often considered a measure of workers’ confidence in labor market opportunities, has remained at relatively high levels. Unemployment insurance claims are now very low. . . . and some labor market slack remains . . . With these improvements, the labor market has shown further progress toward the Committee’s maximum employment mandate. Nevertheless, as described in the box “Slack in the Labor Market,” other labor market indicators are consistent with more slack in resource utilization than is indicated by the unemployment rate alone. In particular, although these measures have improved, the participation rate remains below most assessments of its trend, and the share of workers who are employed part time but would like to work full time is still high; in large part for this reason, the more comprehensive U-6 measure of labor underutilization remains elevated relative to the unemployment rate (figure 3). . . . while compensation has shown some signs of accelerating . . . As the labor market has continued to improve, increases in some measures of hourly labor compensation have begun to pick up but, nonetheless, remain relatively subdued. The employment cost index (ECI) for private- industry workers, which measures both wages 3. Measures of labor underutilization NOTE: U-4 measures total unemployed plus discouraged workers, as a percent of the labor force plus discouraged workers. Discouraged workers are a subset of marginally attached workers who are not currently looking for work because they believe no jobs are available for them. U-5 measures total unemployed plus all marginally attached to the labor force, as a percent of the labor force plus persons marginally attached to the labor force. Marginally attached workers are not in the labor force, want and are available for work, and have looked for a job in the past 12 months. U-6 measures total unemployed plus all marginally attached workers plus total employed part time for economic reasons, as a percent of the labor force plus all marginally attached workers. The shaded bar indicates a period of business recession as defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research. and the cost of employer-provided benefits, rose 2¾ percent over the 12 months ending in March, up from gains of about 2 percent that had prevailed over the past few years (figure 4). Two other prominent measures of compensation—average hourly earnings and business-sector compensation per hour—have increased a bit more slowly than the ECI over the past year and have shown little sign of acceleration. Since the recession began, the gains in all three of these measures of nominal compensation have fallen well short of their pre-recession averages, and growth of real compensation has fallen short of productivity growth over much of this period. That said, the drop in energy prices boosted real wage growth over the past year. 4. Measures of change in hourly compensation NOTE: The average hourly earnings data series begins in March 2007 and extends through June 2015. The compensation per hour and employment cost index data extend through 2015:Q1. For business-sector compensation, change is over four quarters; for the employment cost index, change is over the 12 months ending in the last month of each quarter; for average hourly earnings, change is from 12 months earlier. . . . and productivity growth has been especially weak Labor productivity in the business sector is reported to have declined in both the fourth Gauging how far the economy is from the Federal Reserve’s congressionally mandated objective of maximum employment—that is, estimating the amount of slack (or underutilized resources) in the labor market—is of central importance for monetary policy decisions. The most common and straightforward measure of labor market slack is the unemployment rate gap—the deviation of the unemployment rate from its longer-run sustainable level, or natural rate. By this measure, labor slack has narrowed significantly, and, according to many estimates of the natural rate, the economy may be near maximum employment. However, other measures of labor utilization— including the labor force participation rate and the share of workers employed part time who would like to work full time—have shown less improvement and may represent additional margins of labor market slack that should be considered when assessing progress toward maximum employment. The natural rate of unemployment is unobserved and necessarily uncertain. At present, most Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants estimate the longer-run normal level of the unemployment rate to be between 5.0 and 5.2 percent, while the Congressional Budget Office’s (CBO) current estimate of the natural rate is 5.4 percent.1 The natural rate is thought to be influenced by frictions in the labor market that prevent firms and workers from quickly forming employment relationships, and some analysts have suggested that these frictions have increased since the Great Recession because of a greater mismatch between the skills demanded by firms and those provided by job seekers or because long spells of unemployment have made some job seekers less employable.2 Others have argued that these factors do not necessarily imply a higher natural rate of unemployment.3 Moreover, the natural 1. The FOMC participants’ estimate is the central tendency of the longer-run unemployment rate as presented in the Summary of Economic Projections that is included as Part 3 of this report. The full range of participants’ estimates is from 5.0 to 5.8 percent. Estimates from the CBO are provided in Congressional Budget Office (2015), The Budget and Economic Outlook: 2015 to 2025 (Washington: CBO, January), www.cbo.gov/publication/49892. 2. One study estimates that the efficiency of job matching deteriorated during the recession and, by 2012, had recovered only incompletely; see Regis Barnichon and Andrew Figura (forthcoming), “Labor Market Heterogeneity and the Aggregate Matching Function,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics. Another study argues that the long-term unemployed will continue to have a low likelihood of finding employment; see Alan B. Krueger, Judd Cramer, and David Cho (2014), “Are the Long-Term Unemployed on the Margins of the Labor Market?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol. 48 (Spring), pp. 229–99, www.brookings.edu/~/media/ Projects/BPEA/Spring-2014/2014a_Krueger.pdf?la=en. 3. As evidence of less efficient matching, some analysts point to the elevated level of job vacancies relative to unemployed persons. However, vacancies may also be rate may have fallen in recent years because of a shift in the composition of the labor force toward individuals with lower average unemployment rates.4 Even if we could accurately measure the natural rate, the unemployment rate gap may at times be an insufficient measure of slack. The measured unemployment rate includes only persons who do not have a job, are available to work, and are actively looking for a job. It excludes persons who may want a job but are not actively searching; these individuals are counted as being out of the labor force instead. The labor force participation rate (the fraction of the population either employed or counted as unemployed) has fallen steeply since the start of the recession. Much of this decline—at least half, by many estimates—likely reflects demographic changes, and another portion of the decline may be related to developments that have contributed to longer-run secular declines in labor force participation among younger adults and working-age men; the portion of the decline due to these factors likely would have occurred even in the absence of a recession. However, the severity of the Great Recession and, especially, the sluggishness of the recovery may nonetheless have discouraged many more persons from looking for work and thus contributed to the steep decline in the participation rate in recent years.5 Figure A plots the actual participation rate against estimates of its trend level from the CBO and from a model developed by Federal Reserve System staff and featured in the fall 2014 edition of the Brookings elevated because it has become more profitable for firms to post vacancies as labor’s share of income has declined, as shown in Andrew Figura and David Ratner (2015), “The Labor Share of Income and Equilibrium Unemployment,” FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June 8), www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/ notes/feds-notes/2015/labor-share-of-income-and-equilibrium- unemployment-20150608.html. For evidence supporting the view that the long-term unemployed may be no less employable than the short-term unemployed because both the long- and short-term unemployed tend to have the same influence on wages, see Christopher Smith (2014), “The Effect of Labor Slack on Wages: Evidence from State-Level Relationships,” FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June 2), www.federalreserve. gov/econresdata/notes/feds-notes/2014/effect-of-labor-slack-on- wages-evidence-from-state-level-relationships-20140602.html. 4. Demographic changes, all else being equal, would push down the natural rate relative to its pre-recession level, as shown in Daniel Aaronson, Luojia Hu, Arian Seifoddini, and Daniel G. Sullivan (2014), “Declining Labor Force Participation and Its Implications for Unemployment and Employment Growth,” Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Economic Perspectives, vol. 38 (Fourth Quarter), pp. 100–38, https://www.chicagofed.org/publications/economic- perspectives/2014/4q-aaronson-etal. 5. For a discussion of secular trends in labor force participation that predated the recession, see Stephanie Aaronson, Tomaz Cajner, Bruce Fallick, Felix Galbis-Reig, Christopher L. Smith, and William Wascher (2014), “Labor NOTE: All series are annual averages. For the annual participation rate in 2015, the average through June is plotted. The shaded bar indicates a period of business recession as defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research. SOURCE: Labor force participation rate from published data, Bureau of Labor Statistics; Congressional Budget Office estimate of trend derived from “Key Inputs in CBO's Projection of Potential GDP” and population projections from the January 2015 Budget, as well as Census estimates of population for 2013 and earlier years; model-based estimate from Aaronson and others (2014), “Labor Force Participation: Recent Developments and Future Prospects,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (Fall), pp. 197-275. Papers on Economic Activity.6 Both estimates of the trend capture the influences of demographics and long-running secular changes on the participation rate. Using either estimate, the actual participation rate is at present further below its trend than would be expected given the unemployment rate gap. As a result, at present the unemployment rate gap may understate how much slack remains in the labor market. As job prospects improve further, the participation rate should continue to converge toward its trend, and this excess slack should also diminish. Additionally, the fraction of workers who report working part time but who want a full-time job (the share of people working part time for economic reasons, or the PTER rate) remains higher than would be expected given other measures of labor market utilization. For example, figure B plots the PTER rate with a prediction of what the PTER rate would be if it moved with the unemployment rate in its historically Force Participation: Recent Developments and Future Prospects,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (Fall), pp. 197–275, www.brookings.edu/~/media/Projects/BPEA/Fall- 2014/Fall2014BPEA_Aaronson_et_al.pdf?la=en. For evidence suggesting that the decline predominantly reflects weak labor demand, see Christopher J. Erceg and Andrew T. Levin (2014), “Labor Force Participation and Monetary Policy in the Wake of the Great Recession,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 46 (October), pp. 3–49. 6. Model estimates refer to published estimates from Aaronson and others, “Labor Force Participation: Recent Developments,” in note 5; estimates from the CBO are derived from supplementary economic data and projections in typical fashion. Although the PTER rate has declined somewhat as the unemployment rate has fallen, it remains higher than would be expected given the current level of the unemployment rate. As with the participation rate, some of the movement in the PTER rate may reflect a longer-term trend—such as a shift in employment toward service-producing industries, which tend to employ more part-time workers as a share of their workforce.7 However, the share of involuntary part-time workers remains elevated in most industries and for most demographic groups, suggesting that at least some of the still-elevated PTER rate is due to weak labor demand. If so, then involuntary part-time workers represent another margin of labor market slack not captured by the unemployment rate. To be sure, there is considerable uncertainty about the magnitude of any additional labor market slack represented by each of these elements. However, it seems likely that they do reflect additional slack not measured by the unemployment rate, which should also be considered when judging how far employment is from its maximum sustainable level. 7. See Rob Valletta and Catherine van der List (2015), NOTE: The data extend through 2015:Q2. The dashed line depicts fitted and simulated values from regression of the part-time for economic reasons rate on the unemployment rate and three lags of the unemployment rate over the period from 1994 to 2007. The shaded bar indicates a period of business recession as defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research. 5. Change in business sector output per hour NOTE: Changes are measured from Q4 of the year immediately preceding the period through Q4 of the final year of the period. The final period is measured from 2007:Q4 through 2015:Q1. 6. Change in the chain-type price index for personal consumption expenditures Excluding food and energy NOTE: The data extend through May 2015; changes are from one year quarter of 2014 and the first quarter of 2015, as the recovery in hours worked progressed even as output growth slowed. Over such short periods, however, productivity growth is often quite volatile, both because of difficulties in measuring output and hours and because other transitory factors may affect productivity growth from quarter to quarter. Taking a longer view, output per hour in the business sector has risen at an average annual rate of 1¼ percent since the recession began in late 2007, a gain that is modest by historical standards (figure 5). The relatively slow pace of productivity growth since 2007 reflects, in part, the sustained weakness in capital investment over the recession and recovery period; consequently, productivity gains may improve in the future as investment in productivity-enhancing capital equipment and research and development strengthens. A plunge in crude oil prices has held down consumer prices . . . Overall consumer price inflation has slowed to near zero over the past year, well below the FOMC’s longer-run objective of 2 percent. In May, the 12-month change in the overall PCE price index was only ¼ percent, down from 1¾ percent in May 2014 (figure 6). This deceleration importantly reflects the sharp drop in oil and farm commodity prices over this period as well as declines in non-energy import prices. However, energy prices have stabilized in recent months, with the result that one-month changes in overall PCE prices have firmed somewhat. After plunging in the second half of 2014, the spot price of crude oil moved up somewhat in the first half of 2015, reflecting in part a sharp decline in investment in the U.S. energy sector. Over the past few weeks, prices have moved lower as both U.S. and foreign oil production have been stronger than expected and as concerns about global growth persist. As of early July, at below $60 per barrel, the spot price of Brent crude oil remains at about half of its mid-2014 peak (figure 7). Moreover, oil futures prices suggest that market participants expect only a moderate increase in oil prices over the next couple of years as global demand firms and North American supply growth slows. The large cumulative drop in crude oil prices was fully passed through to lower retail prices for gasoline and other energy products early this year. More recently, gasoline prices have increased somewhat, although prices at the pump remain at levels substantially below those of last summer. Food commodity prices have fallen considerably from their levels of a year ago, and the gradual pass-through of these costs to the retail level has led to declines in consumer food prices over the first five months of this year. Meanwhile, non-oil import prices have been declining sharply so far this year, reflecting lower commodity prices as well as the rise since last summer in the exchange value of the dollar (figure 8). . . . and outside of the energy and food categories, inflation has remained subdued Inflation for items other than food and energy (so-called core inflation) has remained relatively low. Core PCE prices rose about 1¼ percent over the 12 months ending in May, down slightly from its year-earlier pace. Falling import prices likely held down core inflation over the past year, and lower oil prices and easing prices for commodities more generally may have played a role in holding down firms’ costs and prices. In addition, ongoing slack in labor and product markets has likely placed downward pressure on inflation, although with the improving labor market, the effect of this factor likely is waning. Survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable . . . 7. Brent spot and futures prices 8. Non-oil import prices and U.S. dollar exchange rate 9. Median inflation expectations NOTE: The Michigan survey data are monthly. The SPF data for inflation expectations for personal consumption expenditures are quarterly and extend from 2007:Q1 through 2015:Q2. 10. 5-to-10-year-forward inflation compensation NOTE: The data are weekly averages of daily data and extend through July Federal Reserve tracks a variety of indicators of these expectations. Survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations have been quite stable over the past 15 years. Readings on inflation expectations over the next 5 to 10 years, as reported in the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers, have continued to move within a narrow range, and, in the Survey of Professional Forecasters, conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, the median expectation for the annual rate of increase in the PCE price index over the next 10 years has been unchanged at 2 percent (figure 9). Furthermore, in the Survey of Primary Dealers, conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, distributions of inflation expectations 5 to 10 years ahead have also remained stable. . . . while market-based measures of inflation compensation have declined since last summer In contrast, market-based measures of longer- term inflation compensation—derived from inflation swaps or from differences between yields on nominal Treasury securities and Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS)—declined noticeably between the middle of 2014 and early this year, and, while they have retraced part of that decline in recent months, they remain below the levels that prevailed prior to last summer (figure 10). Deducing the sources of changes in inflation compensation is difficult because such movements reflect not only expected inflation, but also an inflation risk premium— the compensation that holders of nominal securities demand for bearing inflation risk—as well as other factors. Nevertheless, one cannot rule out a decline in inflation expectations among market participants since last summer. Economic activity slowed earlier this year Real GDP is reported to have been little changed in the first quarter of this year after increasing 2½ percent in 2014 (figure 11). Some of this weakness likely reflected temporary disruptions due to unusually severe winter weather and a labor dispute at West Coast ports; in addition, residual seasonality in some components of GDP may have held down measured first-quarter growth.1 Both of these factors would tend to boost measured GDP growth over the remainder of the year. Indeed, a number of recent spending indicators suggest that economic activity rose moderately in the second quarter. However, some of the slowdown in GDP growth relative to its pace last year likely reflects somewhat more persistent factors. In particular, expectations that the relative strength of the U.S. economy will lead to an earlier normalization of monetary policy than in our trading partners have contributed to a substantial appreciation of the dollar over the past year. The appreciation, combined with sluggish foreign growth, is weighing on the demand for U.S. exports. And the sizable drop in oil prices since last summer has led to marked cutbacks in investment in the energy sector of our economy even though those 1. Residual seasonality is the presence of a predictable seasonal pattern in data that have already been seasonally adjusted. For recent discussions of this issue, see Jason Furman (2015), “Second Estimate of GDP for the First Quarter of 2015,” Council of Economic Advisers Blog, May 29, https://www.whitehouse.gov/blog/2015/05/29/ second-estimate-gdp-first-quarter-2015; and Charles E. Gilbert, Norman J. Morin, Andrew D. Paciorek, and Claudia R. Sahm (2015), “Residual Seasonality in GDP,” FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May 14), www.federalreserve. gov/econresdata/notes/feds-notes/2015/residual-seasonality- in-gdp-20150514.html. The Bureau of Economic Analysis discusses its plans to revise seasonal adjustment procedures for GDP in its upcoming annual revision in Stephanie H. McCulla and Shelly Smith (2015), “Preview of the 2015 Annual Revision of the National Income and Product Accounts,” Bureau of Economic Analysis, Survey of Current Business (June), www.bea.gov/scb/ pdf/2015/06%20June/0615_preview_of_2015_annual_ revision_of_national_income_and_product_accounts.pdf. 11. Change in real gross domestic product, gross domestic income, and private domestic final purchases 12. Change in real imports and exports of goods and services 13. U.S. trade and current account balances NOTE: GDP is gross domestic product. SOURCE: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis. 14. Change in real personal consumption expenditures and disposable personal income Personal consumption expenditures Disposable personal income NOTE: The reading for 2015:H1 is the annualized May/Q4 change. SOURCE: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis. price declines have been a substantial benefit to households. These factors also contributed to the 2¾ percent annual rate of decline in industrial production in the first five months of this year. Despite the drag on production from these headwinds, the economic expansion continues to be supported by accommodative financial conditions—including the low cost of borrowing for many households and businesses—and by increases in households’ real incomes spurred by continuing job gains and the earlier decline in oil prices. Net exports were a substantial drag on real GDP growth in the first quarter Exports fell markedly in the first quarter, held back by lackluster growth abroad, the appreciation of the dollar, and transitory factors, including the West Coast port labor dispute (figure 12). In contrast, imports grew briskly in the first quarter, supported in part by the stronger dollar. As a result, net exports were an unusually large drag on real GDP growth. Trade data through May suggest that exports recovered from their first-quarter drop and import growth slowed, pointing to a small negative contribution from net exports in the second quarter. The current account deficit widened a bit to 2.6 percent of nominal GDP in the first quarter of this year but remains near its narrowest readings since the late 1990s (figure 13). Gains in income and wealth are supporting consumer spending . . . The rate of growth in consumer spending slowed during this year’s harsh winter but has picked up in recent months. Smoothing through these monthly fluctuations, real consumer spending increased at an average annual rate of 2¾ percent over the first five months of this year, about the same as its average pace over 2014 (figure 14). The ongoing improvement in the labor market has supported income growth, and low gasoline prices have boosted households’ purchasing power. As a result, real disposable personal income—that is, income after taxes and adjusted for price changes—increased at an Coupled with low interest rates, the rise in incomes has reduced debt payment burdens for many households. The household debt service ratio—that is, the ratio of required principal and interest payments on outstanding household debt to disposable personal income—has remained at a very low level by historical standards. Consumer spending growth also continues to be supported by increases in household net worth. Over the first half of this year, broad measures of U.S. equity prices were little changed, on balance, after having risen considerably in recent years, and house prices moved up further (figure 15). Buoyed by cumulative increases in home and equity prices, aggregate household net worth has risen appreciably from its levels during the recession and its aftermath to more than six times the value of disposable personal income (figure 16). . . . as is credit availability for consumers that remains generally favorable Consumer credit has continued to expand this year (figure 17). Auto and student loans remain widely available even to borrowers with lower credit scores, and outstanding balances of such loans expanded significantly through May. Credit card borrowing slowed early this year, likely reflecting weak retail activity, but has rebounded in recent months. However, credit card availability remains unusually tight for borrowers with below-prime credit scores. Consumer confidence remains high Indicators of consumer sentiment suggest that confidence among households remains high. The Michigan survey’s index of consumer sentiment—which incorporates households’ views about their own financial situations as well as broader economic conditions—moved up noticeably over the second half of 2014 as 15. Prices of existing single-family houses NOTE: The data for the S&P/Case-Shiller index extend through April 2015. The data for the Zillow and CoreLogic indexes extend through May 2015. SOURCE: CoreLogic Price Index; Zillow; and the S&P/Case-Shiller U.S. National Home Price Index (“Index”). Note that the S&P/Case-Shiller Index is a product of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates and has been licensed for use by the Board. Copyright © 2015 S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC, a subsidiary of the McGraw Hill Financial Inc., and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Redistribution, reproduction and/or photocopying in whole or in part are prohibited without written permission of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC. For more information on any of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC's indices please visit www.spdji.com. S&P® is a registered trademark of Standard & Poor's Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones® is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. Neither S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC, Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC, their affiliates nor their third party licensors make any representation or warranty, express or implied, as to the ability of any index to accurately represent the asset class or market sector that it purports to represent and neither S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC, Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC, their affiliates nor their third party licensors shall have any liability for any errors, omissions, or interruptions of any index or the data included therein. 16. Wealth-to-income ratio NOTE: The series is the ratio of household net worth to disposable personal 17. Changes in household debt NOTE: Changes are calculated from year-end to year-end, except 2015 changes, which are calculated from Q1 to Q1. NOTE: The data are three-month moving averages and extend through June 2015. Consumer sentiment is indexed to 100 in 1966. Real income expectations are calculated as the net percent of survey respondents expecting family income to go up more than prices during the next year or two. 19. Private housing starts and permits NOTE: The data extend through May 2015. SOURCE: Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. oil prices plunged and labor market conditions improved and has remained upbeat so far this year (figure 18). Responses to the Michigan survey’s question about households’ expectations of real income changes over the next year or two have also moved up over the past year to their highest levels since before the recession. The pace of homebuilding has improved only slowly The recovery in residential investment continued at a gradual pace over the first half of this year. Smoothing through the effects of harsh winter weather, single-family housing starts have edged up since last summer, while sales of new and existing homes have been trending up, on balance, over the past year (figures 19 and 20). In addition, multifamily construction activity has recovered to its pre- recession level, reflecting a shift in demand toward rental units. All told, real residential investment looks set to post a moderate gain over the first half of the year. Nevertheless, overall construction activity remains well below its pre-recession levels, likely due to a rate of household formation that, notwithstanding tentative signs of a recent pickup, has generally run quite low relative to demographic norms since the recession. The slow advances in single-family construction and home sales have likely been supported, at least to some degree, by low interest rates and a gradual easing in mortgage credit. In the April Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS), banks reported having eased lending standards for a number of categories of residential mortgage loans in the first quarter.2 Even so, loans remain difficult to obtain for potential borrowers with low credit scores as well as for any potential borrowers that cannot meet a number of other requirements, such as fully documenting their income and meeting debt-to-income ratios. Meanwhile, for 2. The SLOOS is available on the Board’s website at qualified borrowers, interest rates for 30-year fixed mortgages remain near their historical lows despite having moved up somewhat, on net, over the first half of the year (figure 21). Increases in house prices and mortgage rates have been balanced out by rising household incomes, with the result that standard measures of housing affordability have stayed flat at relatively high levels over the first half of this year. With the number of mortgage originations for home purchase still well below pre-crisis levels, aggregate net mortgage debt growth has continued to be quite sluggish. Overall business investment has turned down as investment in the energy sector has plunged Business investment (that is, private nonresidential fixed investment) fell at an annual rate of 2 percent in the first quarter, reflecting a sizable decline in investment in the equipment and structures used in the drilling and mining sector (figure 22). The number of drilling rigs in operation has fallen precipitously this year in response to the earlier steep drop in crude oil prices, and a number of oil and gas companies have announced plans to cut capital expenditures this year. As a result, activity has also slowed markedly in sectors that supply oil production companies, including steel and certain types of machinery. The drop in drilling and mining investment subtracted more than ½ percentage point from first-quarter real GDP growth, and, with the contraction in that sector continuing, it likely took a similar amount off of GDP growth in the second quarter. Business outlays for structures outside of the energy sector also declined in the first quarter, while spending on equipment and intellectual property products (E&I) increased at a modest 3½ percent annual rate. Forward-looking indicators, such as orders and shipments of capital goods and surveys of business conditions, point to continued modest gains in E&I investment in the second quarter. Overall business investment has been supported by low interest rates and generally accommodative 20. New and existing home sales Existing home sales NOTE: The data extend through May 2015. “Existing home sales” includes SOURCE: For new single-family home sales, Census Bureau; for existing 21. Mortgage rates and housing affordability NOTE: The housing affordability index data are monthly through April 2015 and the mortgage rate data are weekly through July 8, 2015. At an index value of 100, a median-income family has exactly enough income to qualify for a median-priced home mortgage. Housing affordability is seasonally adjusted by Board staff. 22. Change in real private nonresidential fixed investment 23. Selected components of net financing for nonfinancial businesses NOTE: The data for the components except bonds are seasonally adjusted. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Board, Statistical Release Z.1, “Financial 24. Corporate bond yields, by securities rating NOTE: The yields shown are yields on 10-year bonds. SOURCE: BofA Merrill Lynch Global Research, used with permission. financial conditions but has been held back by slowing business output growth, which reflects, in part, weakening exports by domestic businesses due to the stronger dollar. Corporate financing conditions were generally favorable Financing conditions for nonfinancial firms remained solid in the first half of the year. Although corporate profits as reported by the Bureau of Economic Analysis declined in the first quarter, profitability stayed high, and default rates on nonfinancial corporate bonds were generally low. Nonfinancial businesses have raised substantial amounts of funds in bond, equity, and loan markets so far this year, in part to finance a recent pickup in mergers and acquisitions activity (figure 23). Bond issuance by both investment- and speculative- grade firms has remained quite strong, as firms continued to take advantage of historically low interest rates (figure 24). Commercial and industrial loans on banks’ books have expanded at a solid pace this year, in part reflecting narrower loan spreads. Meanwhile, financing conditions for small businesses continued to improve, although the growth of small business loans remained subdued, evidently reflecting still-tepid demand for credit from small business owners. In the first quarter, some banks with loans to firms in the oil and gas drilling or extraction sectors indicated they were reducing existing lines of credit to these firms and tightening standards on new loans or lines of credit. In the commercial real estate (CRE) sector, financing remained broadly available. CRE loans on banks’ books increased appreciably this year through May, consistent with stronger loan demand and a further easing of lending standards reported in the April SLOOS. Banks also reported that, over the past 12 months, they had eased spreads, increased maximum loan sizes, and extended the maximum maturity on such loans. Issuance of commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) continued to be robust, and the spreads of CMBS rates over Treasury rates remained narrow. The drag from federal fiscal policy has waned . . . Fiscal policy at the federal level had been a factor restraining GDP growth for several years. However, the contractionary effects of fiscal policy changes eased appreciably last year as the restraining effects of the 2013 tax increases abated, transfers increased from the Affordable Care Act, and federal purchases flattened out after falling sharply from 2011 through 2013 (figure 25). The federal unified deficit narrowed further this year, reflecting both previous years’ spending cuts and an increase in tax receipts resulting from the ongoing economic expansion. Federal receipts have edged up to around 18 percent of GDP, their highest level in more than a decade (figure 26). Meanwhile, nominal federal outlays as a share of GDP have flattened out at about 20 percent, still a little above the levels that prevailed before the start of the recession. As a result, the budget deficit currently stands at about 2½ percent of GDP, down considerably from its peak at nearly 10 percent during the recession. Overall federal debt held by the public stabilized as a share of GDP in 2014 and early 2015, albeit at a relatively high level (figure 27). . . . and state and local government expenditures are rising anemically The expansion of economic activity and further gains in house prices—which should help boost property tax revenues over time— continue to support a gradual improvement in the fiscal positions of most state and local governments. Consistent with slowly improving finances, states and localities expanded employment slightly, on average, over 2014 and the first half of this year 25. Change in real government expenditures on consumption and investment 26. Federal receipts and expenditures NOTE: Through 2014, receipts and expenditures are for fiscal years (October to September); gross domestic product (GDP) is for the four quarters ending in Q3. For 2015, receipts and expenditures are for the 12 months ending in May, and GDP is the average of 2014:Q4 and 2015:Q1. Receipts and expenditures are on a unified-budget basis. 27. Federal government debt held by the public NOTE: The data for gross domestic product (GDP) are at an annual rate. Debt held by the public is debt held at the end of the period. 28. State and local government employment change following several years of declines (figure 28). In addition, these governments have increased outlays for construction projects somewhat over this period. Market expectations for the path of the federal funds rate over the next several years declined . . . Despite the continued improvement in labor market conditions, market participants’ expectations for the path of policy rates over the next several years shifted downward in the first half of 2015. Contributing to this shift were weak data on real economic activity in the first quarter of this year and Federal Reserve communications that were seen as more accommodative than expected—including the downward revisions to FOMC participants’ projections for the federal funds rate, real GDP growth, inflation, and the longer-run unemployment rate, particularly in March. On balance, market-based measures of the expected path of the federal funds rate through late 2016 have flattened. The expected timing of the initial increase in the federal funds rate has been pushed out from mid-2015 toward the end of the year, although the expected pace of increases in the federal funds rate after 2016 is now somewhat faster. In the Survey of Primary Dealers and the Survey of Market Participants conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York just prior to the June FOMC meeting, respondents judged that the initial increase in the target federal funds rate was most likely to occur at the FOMC’s September 2015 meeting, about one quarter later than they had expected last December.3 Meanwhile, as the anticipated date of the beginning of normalization has become closer, measures of policy rate uncertainty based on interest rate derivatives have continued to edge higher. 3. The results of the Survey of Primary Dealers and of the Survey of Market Participants are available on the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s website at www.newyorkfed. org/markets/primarydealer_survey_questions.html and www.newyorkfed.org/markets/survey_market_ participants.html, respectively. . . . and longer-term Treasury yields have remained low Yields on longer-term Treasury securities have risen notably since early February, reversing the downward trend over the previous 13 months. However, they remain at historically low levels (figure 29). On net, yields on 10- and 30-year nominal Treasury securities are 16 basis points and 43 basis points, respectively, above their levels at the end of 2014. The increases were most pronounced in longer-horizon forward rates. For example, the five-year forward rate five years ahead rose 42 basis points over the first half of 2015 and in early July after falling nearly 2 percentage points in 2014. U.S. Treasury yields continued to be especially sensitive to foreign monetary policy and political developments and movements in core European sovereign yields (for more details, see the section “International Developments”). Uncertainty about long-term interest rates has also risen somewhat amid higher realized volatility of long-term yields, fluctuations in oil prices, and uncertainties surrounding the global outlook. Consistent with moves in the yields on longer- term Treasury securities, yields on 30-year agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS)—an important determinant of mortgage interest rates—have increased about 20 basis points, on balance, so far in 2015 (figure 30). Liquidity conditions in the Treasury and agency MBS markets were generally stable . . . Indicators of Treasury market functioning remained broadly stable over the first half of 2015. While market commentary increasingly pointed to a possible deterioration in liquidity in these markets, a variety of liquidity metrics—including bid-asked spreads and bid sizes—have displayed no notable signs of liquidity pressures over the past half- year. Moreover, Treasury auctions generally continued to be well received by investors. (See the box “Liquidity Conditions in the Bond Market.”) 29. Yields on nominal Treasury securities NOTE: The Treasury ceased publication of the 30-year constant maturity series on February 18, 2002, and resumed that series on February 9, 2006. 30. Yield and spread on agency mortgage-backed securities NOTE: The data are daily. Yield shown is for the Fannie Mae 30-year current coupon, the coupon rate at which new mortgage-backed securities would be priced at par, or face, value. Spread shown is to the average of the 5- and 10-year nominal Treasury yields. A growing number of market commentaries have recently noted that liquidity conditions in fixed- income markets have deteriorated somewhat in recent years. They point to events like the “flash rally” on October 15, 2014, in which the Treasury market experienced elevated intraday volatility, as a worrisome sign of liquidity deterioration in even the most liquid fixed-income market. In response to a set of special questions in the June Senior Credit Officer Opinion Survey on Dealer Financing Terms (SCOOS), over four- fifths and about two-fifths of the dealer respondents characterized current liquidity and market functioning in the secondary markets for nominal Treasury securities and corporate bonds, respectively, as having deteriorated over the past five years.1 Respondents attributed the deterioration primarily to securities dealers’ decreased willingness to provide balance sheet resources for market-making purposes as a result of both regulatory changes and changes in internal risk- management practices. Furthermore, many investors have also noted potential risks to Treasury market functioning posed by high-frequency trading (HFT), which is now employed by most market participants.2 Coincident with the changes in trading technologies, the composition of market participants has changed over the past decade, with proprietary HFT firms now accounting for the majority of trading volumes in the electronically brokered interdealer Treasury market. As discussed in the recently released interagency staff report on the events of October 15, such changes to market making, automated trading, and participation— many of which predate recent regulatory initiatives— have likely altered the nature of Treasury market liquidity in recent years.3 Despite these increased market discussions, a variety of metrics of liquidity in the nominal Treasury market do not indicate notable deteriorations. For example, bid-asked spreads for the on-the-run 10-year Treasury security have remained at levels comparable with or even slightly narrower than those observed SOURCE: Staff calculations using data from EBS BrokerTec. before the recent financial crisis (figure A). A measure of market depth has shown notable variation since the data became available in 2010 and is currently around its average level in 2010 and 2011 (figure B). Both measures may have been affected by the increased presence of HFT strategies in the nominal Treasury market, as firms employing such strategies tend to submit orders close to prevailing market prices but with small order sizes, which might partially explain the narrower bid-asked spreads in recent years. In addition to the two measures discussed earlier, SCOOS respondents also cited market turnover as another metric reflective of the deterioration in liquidity conditions. Indeed, the ratio of primary dealer trading volumes to outstanding Treasury securities has been declining since 2008 (figure C). Nonetheless, part of this decline may reflect institutional changes in the Treasury market, including the Federal Reserve’s asset 1. The SCOOS is available on the Board’s website at www. 2. High-frequency trading refers to computerized trading using proprietary algorithms that often rely on low-latency technology. For a description of the growth of automated trading—HFT in particular—and the associated benefits and risks, see Treasury Market Practices Group (2015), “Automated Trading in Treasury Markets,” white paper (New york: TMPG, June), www.newyorkfed.org/tmpg/TPMG_June%202015_ automated%20trading_white%20paper.pdf. 3. U.S. Department of the Treasury, Board of Governors of NOTE: Market depth is defined as the average top three bid and asked SOURCE: Staff calculations using data from EBS BrokerTec. purchases; the growth of HFT; increased internalization of dealer flows, in which dealers seek to match buyers and sellers across various internal desks before accessing liquidity in interdealer markets; and rising demand from buy-and-hold investors. Although the bid-asked spread and market depth remained generally stable in recent years, one concern is that these metrics could change sharply during times of market stress. Some investors cautioned that, while proprietary HFT firms can contribute to improved liquidity during normal times by placing orders with narrow bid-asked spreads, they have limited capital to absorb price shocks and could choose to withdraw from the market during periods of turbulence, potentially exacerbating the deterioration in liquidity. All told, while the current level of liquidity in the on- the-run interdealer market seems healthy, some aspects of price movements and liquidity metrics in this market warrant careful monitoring. Similar to the Treasury market, a range of conventional liquidity metrics in corporate bond markets also generally do not point to a significant deterioration of market liquidity in recent years. For example, effective bid-asked spreads have remained low, and measures of the price impact, such as Amihud’s illiquidity measure, have been fairly stable (figure D). In contrast, the proportion of large-sized trades has remained low since the financial crisis, particularly for speculative-grade bonds, and turnover has declined somewhat as the growth of total bonds outstanding has outpaced the growth of trading volume (figure E). However, as in the case of Treasury securities, it is unclear whether declines in corporate bond trade size and market turnover necessarily indicate a deterioration in liquidity. NOTE: Turnover is calculated as three-month moving averages of daily primary dealer trading volumes divided by nominal Treasury securities outstanding. NOTE: Bid-asked spreads are estimated based on the autocovariance of bond returns. Market impact is the Amihud (2002) measure, which is defined as the monthly average of the ratio of the absolute value of percentage price changes to transaction volume. The data extend through March 2015. NOTE: Monthly turnover is total trading volume in the month divided by the amount outstanding for the bond. The data extend through March 2015. Some analysts raised concerns that the rise of buy- and-hold investors and the decline in dealer inventories relative to the outstanding amount over the past few years may have negatively affected the prospects for liquidity conditions in the corporate bond market, especially during episodes of financial stress. So far, however, corporate bond market liquidity as captured by conventional measures has not experienced substantial deterioration during recent episodes of stress in fixed-income markets, such as the sharp increase in Treasury rates in the summer of 2013 or the flash rally of October 15, 2014. 31. Dollar-roll-implied financing rates (front month), Fannie Mae 30-year current coupon Fails charge announced Fails charge implemented 32. Equity prices As in the Treasury market, liquidity conditions in the agency MBS market were generally stable. Dollar-roll-implied financing rates for production-coupon MBS—an indicator of the scarcity of agency MBS for settlement— suggested limited settlement pressures in these markets over the first half of 2015 (figure 31). . . . as were short-term funding markets Conditions in short-term dollar funding markets also remained broadly stable during the first half of 2015. Both unsecured and secured money market rates have stayed at modestly higher levels since late 2014 but continued to be close to the average rates observed since the federal funds rate reached its effective lower bound. Secured money markets generally functioned smoothly, but rates in these markets experienced some volatility in the first half of 2015, particularly around quarter-ends, consistent with moderate quarter-end funding pressures. Unsecured offshore dollar funding markets generally did not exhibit signs of stress. Money market participants continued to focus on the ongoing testing of the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy tools. The overnight reverse repurchase agreement (ON RRP) operations have continued to provide a soft floor for money market rates, and the combination of term and ON RRP operations supported these rates around quarter-ends. Broad equity price indexes and stock market volatility were both little changed, on net, and risk spreads on speculative-grade corporate bonds narrowed slightly Despite higher interest rates and notable declines in Wall Street analysts’ projections for corporate earnings, broad measures of U.S. equity prices were little changed, on balance, over the first half of the year (figure 32). Stock prices for firms in the utilities sector, which are more sensitive to interest rates, fell substantially. Implied volatility for the S&P 500 index, as calculated from options prices, was little changed, on net, and remained below its historical median level. Corporate bond spreads for investment-grade firms were little changed and stayed close to their historical average levels. Spreads for speculative-grade bonds narrowed modestly—in part because of improvements for energy firms—and are somewhat below their historical norms. (For further related discussion, see the box “Developments Related to Financial Stability.”) Bank credit expanded and bank profitability improved slightly Aggregate credit provided by commercial banks increased at a solid pace in the first quarter of 2015 (figure 33). The expansion in bank credit reflected moderate loan growth coupled with continued expansion of banks’ holdings of securities. The growth of loans on banks’ books was generally consistent with the SLOOS reports of increased loan demand for most loan categories and further easing of lending standards for real estate loans over the first quarter of 2015. Meanwhile, delinquency and charge-off rates continued to improve across most major loan types. Measures of bank profitability remained below their historical averages but improved slightly in the first quarter of 2015 (figure 34). Several subcomponents of noninterest income increased, although declining net interest margins continued to put downward pressure on the profitability of banks. Equity prices of large domestic bank holding companies (BHCs) have increased modestly, on net, since the end of last year (figure 32). Credit default swap (CDS) spreads for large BHCs were about unchanged on balance. The M2 measure of the money stock has increased at an average annualized rate of about 6 percent since January, somewhat faster than the pace of nominal GDP growth. Demand for liquid deposits and currency has continued to boost M2 growth. 33. Ratio of total commercial bank credit to nominal gross domestic product 34. Profitability of bank holding companies NOTE: The data, which are seasonally adjusted, are quarterly. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Board, FR Y-9C, Consolidated Financial A. Regulatory capital ratios at top 25 bank holding overall have continued to be moderate since the February Monetary Policy Report. Capital and liquidity positions at the largest banking firms have remained at high levels relative to recent historical standards, and debt growth in the household sector has been modest. However, valuation pressures in many fixed-income markets, while having eased, have stayed notable, prices and valuations for commercial real estate have increased further, and underwriting standards for leveraged loans are still a concern. Moreover, borrowing by lower-rated businesses has continued at a rapid rate. Market participants have expressed a concern that liquidity, especially in fixed-income markets, is now more likely to deteriorate significantly even under moderate stress. However, a variety of metrics do not suggest a deterioration in day-to-day liquidity, with some mixed evidence that may point to less resilient liquidity. The Federal Reserve is watching related developments closely. (See the box “Liquidity Conditions in the Bond Market.”) The financial sector now is likely more resilient to possible adverse events largely because of the increased capital held by the largest banking firms, which reduces the potential spillovers to the macroeconomy from losses in the banking sector (figure A). Regulatory capital ratios of the largest banks are high by recent historical standards, and the stress tests mandated by the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 as well as the accompanying Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review, both of which were completed in April 2015, show that the 31 participating firms would maintain capital ratios above required minimums through a severe recession during a nine-quarter projection horizon. Higher forward-looking capital positions reflect, in part, a decrease in the average credit risk of loans, although underwriting standards have weakened in certain segments. Large firms’ liquidity ratios have also improved with the initial phase-in of new liquidity regulations. Estimates of duration gaps for these firms suggest that they have lower sensitivities to higher interest rates than smaller banking firms. All banks, however, face considerable uncertainty regarding the sensitivity of their deposits to rising interest rates, and supervisors have been working with firms to manage this potential risk. At insurance companies and broker-dealers, capital positions are also relatively high. In addition, secured borrowing and financing by dealers continue to decline, suggesting less short-term funding both for NOTE: Prior to 2014:Q1, the numerator of the common equity tier 1 ratio is tier 1 common capital. Beginning in 2014:Q1 for advanced approaches bank holding companies and in 2015:Q1 for all other bank holding companies, the numerator is common equity tier 1 capital. The shaded bar indicates a period of business recession as defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research. financing clients and for financing inventories that can be used to provide liquidity in markets. The stock of private, short-term, money-like instruments, which form funding intermediation chains that may be vulnerable to runs, has generally hovered at relatively high levels in the past couple of years, though well below crisis peaks. A decline in repurchase agreements has coincided with growth in uninsured deposits. Assets in money market funds have held about steady since the Securities and Exchange Commission finalized reforms in July 2014 to mitigate the funds’ susceptibility to investor runs. The reforms are required to be fully implemented by late 2016, and it will be important to monitor their effects. valuation measures in most asset markets remain notable, but they are less pronounced in some sectors given the low level of long-term real Treasury yields. Credit markets have been reflecting some signs of reach-for-yield behavior, as issuance of speculative- grade bonds continues to be strong, yields are low, and credit spreads are somewhat narrow by historical standards. Issuance of leveraged loans, while robust, declined in the first half of 2015 on a year-over- year basis. Market participants continue to point to the leveraged lending guidance as having affected the market. Indicators of the underwriting quality of leveraged loans in recent months show a modest improvement, but, overall, underwriting standards remain weak. The share of loans—mostly those for middle-market companies—originated by nonbank lenders reportedly has increased a bit further. valuation pressures in commercial real estate are rising as commercial property prices continue to increase rapidly, and underwriting standards at banks and in commercial mortgage-backed securities have been loosening. For residential real estate, prices have risen most rapidly in areas where they fell most in the wake of the financial crisis, and aggregate valuation measures remain close to historical norms. In addition, dealers’ responses to the March and June Senior Credit Officer Opinion Survey on Dealer Financing Terms suggest that client demand for secured funding of commercial and residential mortgage-backed securities has been increasing in recent quarters. Stock prices were little changed, on net, even as earnings forecasts fell and interest rates rose. The equity risk premium—the gap between the expected return and the real 10-year Treasury yield—narrowed further and is now close to historical norms. The possibility that term premiums could revert sharply to more normal levels continues to be a potential risk for asset prices, especially if this reversion were to occur in the absence of positive news about economic growth. Moreover, ongoing concerns that liquidity could deteriorate unexpectedly, in combination with the growth in assets of mutual funds that hold less liquid bonds, suggest that a jump in long-term rates that in turn sparked large bond fund redemptions might amplify volatility. That said, the risk of fire sales is mitigated to some extent by the lower leverage in the financial system. The ratio of private nonfinancial sector credit to gross domestic product (GDP) is significantly below its peak in 2009 and likely remains below a trend-adjusted level (figure B). The household debt-to-GDP ratio has receded to early 2000 levels. Recent modest increases in household debt continue to mostly reflect the sluggish increases in mortgages for prime borrowers. However, auto and student lending, even to financially fragile households, continued apace, though these are smaller components of total household debt. Measures of leverage for the aggregate nonfinancial business sector have been rising, and they are near the high end of their multidecade range for speculative-grade and unrated firms, indicating a buildup of vulnerabilities. Large banking firms generally have only limited exposure to areas of the financial system with more notable vulnerabilities, such as segments of the bond and equity markets, and their actions are not contributing materially to higher vulnerabilities in those sectors. Large banking firms’ direct net exposures to Greece are low, although financial vulnerabilities from the situation could become more concerning if large European counterparties were weakened by a significant deterioration in peripheral European countries. As part of its efforts to improve the resilience of the financial system, the Federal Reserve Board and other federal banking agencies finalized a rule last year that introduced a liquidity coverage ratio. The rule requires large and internationally active banking organizations to hold a certain minimum amount of high-quality liquid assets—such as central bank reserves and government and corporate debt—that can be converted easily and quickly into cash. Since the February Monetary Policy Report, the Federal Reserve Board proposed an amendment to that rule that would allow limited amounts of certain general obligation state and municipal bonds to qualify as high-quality liquid assets if they meet the same liquidity criteria that currently apply to corporate debt securities.1 The proposed rule would maintain the strong liquidity standards of the liquidity coverage ratio rule while providing banking organizations with the flexibility to hold a wider range of instruments that would qualify as high-quality liquid assets. 1. For the proposed amendment, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2015), “Liquidity Coverage Ratio: Treatment of U.S. Municipal Securities as High-Quality Liquid Assets,” Federal Register, vol. 80 (May 28), pp. 30383–89, www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2015-05-28/pdf/2015-12850.pdf. 35. 10-year nominal benchmark yields in advanced foreign economies Municipal bond markets functioned smoothly, but some issuers remained strained Credit conditions in municipal bond markets have generally remained stable since the end of last year. Over that period, the MCDX—an index of CDS spreads for a broad portfolio of municipal bonds—increased slightly, while ratios of yields on 20-year general obligation municipal bonds to those on comparable- maturity Treasury securities moved down a bit. Nevertheless, significant financial strains were still evident for some issuers. In particular, Puerto Rico, which continued to face challenges from subdued economic performance, severe indebtedness, and other fiscal pressures, could reportedly seek to restructure at least part of its debt. Sovereign bond yields are higher . . . After declining, on balance, during the first few months of the year, sovereign yields in the advanced foreign economies (AFEs) began to climb rapidly in late April (figure 35). In Germany, long-term yields traded at record lows in mid-April, in part in response to the initiation of the public-sector purchase program of the European Central Bank (ECB). However, the 10-year government bond yield subsequently rose about 60 basis points. Most of this rise appeared to reflect an increase in the term premium, which had likely become very low earlier in the year. However, the timing of this increase has no clear explanation. The rise in German yields also appeared to reflect higher expected short-term rates, which rose, at least in part, in response to euro-area inflation data that came in higher than had been expected. (For more discussion, see the box “Monetary Policy and Interest Rates in Advanced Economies.”) More recently, however, German yields have moved back down some in reaction to developments in Greece. During 2014, economic prospects in the United States improved, while in some major advanced foreign economies (including the euro area and Japan), data on economic activity disappointed and concerns about deflationary pressures increased. As economic outlooks diverged, so did monetary policies. The Federal Reserve wound down and, in October, concluded the asset purchase program that began in September 2012. In contrast, the Bank of Japan (BOJ) and the European Central Bank (ECB) announced further expansions of their asset holdings (figure A). In October, the BOJ increased the pace of its asset purchases (primarily Japanese government bonds, but also some shares of exchange-traded stock funds and real estate investment trusts) and reiterated that its goal was to raise inflation to 2 percent. In September, the ECB reduced its key policy rates, with the deposit rate falling to negative 0.2 percent, and announced plans to purchase two kinds of private-sector securities: covered bonds and asset-backed securities. Then, in January of this year, the ECB announced an expansion of its asset purchases to include public-sector securities, raising its total asset purchases to €60 billion per month. The ECB indicated that it intends to continue that pace of purchases through September 2016 or until its Governing Council believes that euro-area inflation is on track to meet the target of below, but close to, 2 percent. Policy easing abroad contributed to a decline in market expectations for future policy rates, especially in the euro area, relative to those in the United States (figure B). The divergence of policy expectations was accompanied by a significant increase in the foreign exchange value of the dollar from mid-2014 to March of this year. That dollar appreciation has likely contributed to the drag that U.S. net exports have exerted on U.S. economic growth in recent quarters. In addition, the rise in the dollar’s value has lowered U.S. import prices and thus put downward pressure on U.S. consumer price inflation. Long-term interest rates abroad declined during 2014 and early 2015 (figure 35). Those declines reflected not only shifting expectations of the path of policy interest rates, but also reductions in the term premiums required by investors to hold longer-term assets. Central bank asset purchases—both expectations of those purchases and their later commencement— appear to explain some, but not all, of the decline in term premiums. Term premiums on German bonds continued to decline following the start of ECB asset purchases in March, and German 10-year bond yields fell to near zero by early April. Since then, however, term premiums and yields on German 10-year bonds have risen sharply, on net, as market participants reassessed the sustainability of the previous substantial declines. These movements in foreign yields and term premiums appear to have spilled over to U.S. yields and term premiums. Some of the pickup in long-term interest rates abroad since mid-April also likely reflected a modest rebound in market expectations of future policy rates in those countries. Data showed continued economic recovery in the euro area and solid growth in Japan, and the stabilization in oil prices after previous sharp declines reduced concerns over deflation in the advanced foreign economies. Still, market expectations, as implied by quotes from overnight index swaps, suggest that policy rates will remain near zero for quite some time in the euro area and Japan, even as monetary policy begins to normalize in the United States and the United Kingdom (as shown in figure B). A. Central bank assets in selected advanced economies B. December 2017 expected policy rates NOTE: The data are three-day moving averages of one-month forward rates 36. U.S. dollar exchange rate against broad index and selected groups of major currencies Emerging market economies NOTE: The data, which are in foreign currency units per dollar, extend 37. Equity indexes for selected foreign economies NOTE: The data extend through July 9, 2015. SOURCE: For Japan, Tokyo Stock Price Index (TOPIX); for the euro area, Dow Jones Euro STOXX Index; for China, Shanghai Composite Index; all via Bloomberg. Sovereign yields rose even more in other euro-area countries, especially in Greece. Since the previous report, negotiations among the Greek government, other European authorities, and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) over official financial assistance to Greece have been protracted. In late June, Greek authorities decided to hold a referendum on their creditors’ proposals, stalling negotiations and resulting in the cash-strapped Greek government missing a payment of €1½ billion in principal to the IMF. With fears of a potential exit from the euro area and acute problems at Greek banks accelerating withdrawals of Greek bank deposits, Greek authorities declared a bank holiday and imposed capital controls. Negotiations resumed after Greek citizens voted to reject the creditor proposals, but the closure of the banks contributed to a further deterioration of economic conditions in Greece. Over the previous weekend, Greece and its creditors reached a preliminary agreement to begin negotiations on a new financing and adjustment program, subject to Greece completing several prior actions. Greek sovereign spreads spiked at the end of June, and Italian and Spanish sovereign spreads rose modestly. These spreads have since retraced substantially; as a result, Greek spreads remain somewhat wider since mid-February, and Italian and Spanish spreads are little changed. . . . and the dollar remains well above levels of a year ago The foreign exchange value of the dollar rose appreciably in the second half of 2014 and early 2015. It has changed little, on balance, since then (figure 36). The dollar is stronger against emerging market economy (EME) currencies since February, as U.S. yields have risen and concerns about economic prospects for the EMEs mounted. Equities in Europe and Japan have moved higher this year, buoyed by encouraging macroeconomic data (figure 37). The Nikkei increased roughly 15 percent, boosted by stronger-than-expected consumer price releases and strong corporate earnings in addition to continued quantitative easing. EME equity prices are also generally higher. Notably, the Shanghai Composite index has been unusually volatile. It soared 60 percent in the first five months of 2015, reportedly reflecting repeated monetary policy easing measures and increased investor leverage. However, since mid-June, the index has dropped about 20 percent, on net, even while Chinese authorities have introduced a number of measures to stem the decline, including the People’s Bank of China providing direct liquidity support to fund stock purchases. In numerous foreign economies, economic growth stepped down in the first quarter Economic growth slowed in the first quarter in many of our main trading partners (figure 38). In China, weakness in exports and the real estate sector led to a significant step-down in GDP growth in the first quarter. Weak exports also constrained growth in Mexico and the United Kingdom. GDP contracted around ½ percent in Brazil. And, in Canada, real GDP also contracted in the first quarter, in part because lower oil prices weighed on investment in the energy sector and severe winter weather depressed consumption. Recent economic data for the second quarter have been mixed. By contrast, in the euro area and Japan, economic growth picked up during the first quarter of 2015, and data thus far point to solid growth during the second quarter (figure 39). Growth in these economies continues to receive support from highly accommodative monetary policies and lower commodity prices. Nevertheless, the situation in Greece remains a concern for the euro area. After falling significantly at the beginning of the year, foreign inflation began to recover but remained low Largely reflecting the plunge in oil prices last year, headline inflation fell further early in the year in the AFEs and the EMEs. However, as 38. Real gross domestic product growth in selected foreign economies 39. Real gross domestic product growth in selected advanced foreign economies energy prices rebounded during the first half of the year, monthly foreign inflation readings also began to turn up. Nevertheless, 12-month inflation in a number of major trading partners remained substantially below their central banks’ target, including in the euro area, Japan, and the United Kingdom. In response, foreign central banks maintained highly accommodative monetary policies A number of foreign central banks eased monetary policy. Some central banks cut policy rates, including those in Canada, China, India, and Korea. In several cases, including in Denmark, Sweden, and Switzerland, these cuts included moves that left policy rates negative. In addition to cutting benchmark rates, the People’s Bank of China also lowered the reserve requirement ratio. The ECB launched a program to purchase public-sector securities, and the Bank of Japan continued to purchase assets at a rapid pace. Meanwhile, the Bank of England kept its policy rate at the historically low level of 0.5 percent, where it has been since March 2009. To support further progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has kept the target federal funds rate at its effective lower bound and maintained the Federal Reserve’s holdings of longer-term securities at sizable levels. At its two most recent meetings, the Committee indicated that it will be appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate when it has seen further improvement in the labor market and is reasonably confident that inflation will move back to its 2 percent objective over the medium term. The Federal Reserve has continued to plan for the eventual normalization of monetary policy, including by testing the operational readiness of the policy tools to be used. To support further progress toward its statutory objectives, the FOMC has kept the target federal funds rate at its lower bound . . . The FOMC has maintained the target range of 0 to ¼ percent for the federal funds rate to support continued progress toward its statutory objectives of maximum employment and price stability (figure 40). The Committee has further reiterated that, in determining how long to maintain this target range, it will assess realized and expected progress toward its objectives. This assessment will continue to take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. Based on its assessment of those factors, the Committee maintained the judgment at its January meeting that it could be patient in beginning to normalize the stance of monetary policy, and it stated at its March meeting that a start of the normalization process remained unlikely at its April meeting.4 Chair Yellen indicated that, subsequent to the April meeting, the FOMC 4. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2015), “Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement,” press release, January 28, www.federalreserve. gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20150128a.htm; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2015), “Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement,” press release, March 18, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/ press/monetary/20150318a.htm. 40. Selected interest rates NOTE: The 2-year and 10-year Treasury rates are the constant-maturity yields based on the most actively traded securities. The dates on the horizontal axis are those of regularly scheduled Federal Open Market Committee meetings. would determine the timing of the initial increase in the target federal funds rate on a meeting-by-meeting basis, depending on its assessment of incoming economic information and its implications for the economic outlook.5 Specifically, the FOMC anticipates that it will be appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate when it has seen further improvement in the labor market and is reasonably confident that inflation will move back to its 2 percent objective over the medium term. While the Committee has not decided on the timing of the initial increase in the target range for the federal funds rate, according to the June Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), 15 of the 17 policymakers anticipated that conditions may warrant a first increase in the federal funds rate target sometime this year. (The June SEP is included as Part 3 of this report.) The Committee has reiterated that, when it decides to begin to remove policy accommodation, it will take a balanced approach consistent with its longer-run goals of maximum employment and inflation of 2 percent. Even after the initial increase in the target federal funds rate, the Committee’s policy is likely to remain highly accommodative in order to support continued progress toward its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. In addition, the Committee continues to anticipate that, even after employment and inflation are near mandate-consistent levels, economic conditions may, for some time, warrant keeping the target federal funds rate below levels the Committee views as normal 5. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2015), “Transcript of Chair Yellen’s FOMC Press Conference,” March 18, www.federalreserve.gov/ mediacenter/files/FOMCpresconf20150318.pdf; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2015), “Transcript of Chair Yellen’s Press Conference,” June 17, www.federalreserve.gov/mediacenter/files/ FOMCpresconf20150617.pdf. in the longer run. As pointed out by Chair Yellen in her recent press conferences, FOMC participants provide a number of explanations for this view, with many citing the residual effects of the financial crisis.6 These effects are expected to ease gradually, but they are seen as likely to continue to constrain spending and credit availability for some time. . . . and stressed that its policy decisions will be data dependent In her recent speeches and press conferences, Chair Yellen emphasized that, while the return of the federal funds rate to a more normal level is likely to be gradual, forecasts of the appropriate path of the federal funds rate are conditional on individual projections for economic output, inflation, and other factors, and the Committee’s actual policy decisions over time will be data dependent. The FOMC does not intend to embark on any predetermined course of tightening following an initial decision to raise the federal funds rate target range. Accordingly, if the expansion proves to be more vigorous than currently anticipated and inflation moves higher than expected, then the appropriate path would likely follow a higher and steeper trajectory; conversely, if conditions were to prove weaker, then the appropriate trajectory would be lower and less steep. The size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet has remained stable The Committee has maintained its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) in agency MBS and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction. This policy, by keeping the Federal Reserve’s holdings of longer-term securities at sizable levels, is expected to help 6. See Board of Governors, “Transcript of Chair Yellen’s FOMC Press Conference,” March 18, and Board of Governors, “Transcript of Chair Yellen’s Press Conference,” June 17, in note 5. maintain accommodative financial conditions by putting downward pressure on longer- term interest rates and supporting mortgage markets. In turn, those effects are expected to contribute to progress toward both the maximum employment and price-stability objectives of the FOMC. The FOMC continued to plan for the eventual normalization of monetary policy . . . After the conclusion of the large-scale asset purchase program at the end of October 2014 and with the continuation of the Committee’s reinvestment policy, the Federal Reserve’s total assets have held steady at around $4.5 trillion (figure 41). Holdings of U.S. Treasury securities in the System Open Market Account (SOMA) have remained at $2.5 trillion, and holdings of agency debt and agency MBS at $1.8 trillion. Consequently, total liabilities on the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet were largely unchanged. FOMC meeting participants have continued their discussions about the eventual normalization of the stance and conduct of monetary policy.8 The participants 7. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Given the Federal Reserve’s large securities holdings, interest income on the SOMA portfolio has continued to support substantial remittances to the U.S. Treasury Department. The Federal Reserve provided $96.9 billion of such distributions to the Treasury in 2014 and $21.7 billion during the first quarter of 8. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2015), “Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, March 17–18, 2015,” press release, April 8, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/ monetary/20150408a.htm; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2015), “Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, April 28–29, 2015,” press release, May 20, www.federalreserve.gov/ newsevents/press/monetary/20150520a.htm. 41. Federal Reserve assets and liabilities Treasury securities held outright NOTE: “Credit and liquidity facilities” consists of primary, secondary, and seasonal credit; term auction credit; central bank liquidity swaps; support for Maiden Lane, Bear Stearns, and AIG; and other credit facilities, including the Primary Dealer Credit Facility, the Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility, the Commercial Paper Funding Facility, and the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility. “Other assets” includes unamortized premiums and discounts on securities held outright. “Capital and other liabilities” includes reverse repurchase agreements, the U.S. Treasury General Account, and the U.S. Treasury Supplementary Financing Account. The data extend through July 8, 2015. emphasized that, during the early stages of policy normalization, it will be a priority to ensure appropriate control over the federal funds rate and other short-term interest rates. Consequently, the discussions involved various tools that could be used to control the level of short-term interest rates, even while the balance sheet of the Federal Reserve remains very large, as well as approaches to eventually normalizing the size and composition of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. As was the case before the crisis, the Committee intends to adjust the stance of monetary policy during normalization primarily through actions that influence the level of the federal funds rate and other short-term interest rates. The Committee indicated that, when economic conditions warrant the commencement of policy firming, the Federal Reserve intends to continue to target a range for the federal funds rate that is 25 basis points wide, set the interest rate it pays on excess reserves (the IOER rate) equal to the top of the target range for the federal funds rate, and set the offering rate associated with an overnight reverse repurchase agreement (ON RRP) facility equal to the bottom of the target range for the federal funds rate. The Committee will further allow aggregate capacity of the ON RRP facility to be temporarily elevated to support policy implementation and will use other tools, such as term operations, as necessary. The Committee expects that it will be appropriate to reduce the capacity of the facility fairly soon after it commences policy firming. Regarding the balance sheet, the Committee intends to reduce securities holdings in a gradual and predictable manner primarily by ceasing to reinvest repayments of principal on securities held in the SOMA. The Committee noted that economic and financial conditions could change, and that it was prepared to make adjustments to its normalization plans if warranted. (For more information, see the box “Policy Normalization Principles and Plans: Additional Details.”) . . . including by testing the policy tools to be used The Federal Reserve continued to test the operational readiness of its policy tools, conducting daily ON RRP operations and a series of term RRP operations. At its March meeting, the Committee approved further tests of term RRP operations over quarter- ends through January 2016.9 In addition, the Federal Reserve conducted two further series of Term Deposit Facility (TDF) operations. In these TDF operations, the Federal Reserve eliminated the three-day lag between the execution of an operation and settlement that existed in previous tests. These operations showed that bank demand for term deposits continues to be strong even for incremental increases in yield. To date, testing has progressed smoothly, and, in particular, short-term market rates have generally traded above the ON RRP rate, which suggests that the facility will be a useful supplementary tool for the FOMC in addition to the IOER rate to control the federal funds rate during the normalization process. Overall, testing operations reinforced the Federal Reserve’s confidence in its view that it has the tools necessary to tighten policy at the appropriate time. 9. See Board of Governors, “Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, March 17–18, 2015,” in note 8. Over the past four years, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has discussed ways to normalize the stance of monetary policy and the Federal Reserve’s securities holdings. The discussions have been part of prudent planning and have not been meant to imply that the move toward normalization would necessarily begin soon. In June 2011, the Committee made public a first set of normalization principles.1 In light of subsequent changes in the System Open Market Account (SOMA) portfolio and enhancements in the tools the Committee will have available to implement policy during normalization, the Com- mittee concluded that some aspects of the eventual normalization process would likely differ from those specified earlier. Accordingly, in September 2014, the FOMC announced that all participants but one had agreed on the following principles and plans for policy normalization:2 The Committee will determine the timing and pace of policy normalization—meaning steps to raise the federal funds rate and other short-term interest rates to more normal levels and to reduce the Federal Reserve’s securities holdings—so as to promote its statutory mandate of maximum employment and price stability. {{ When economic conditions and the economic outlook warrant a less accommodative monetary policy, the Committee will raise its target range for the federal funds rate. {{ During normalization, the Federal Reserve intends to move the federal funds rate into the target range set by the FOMC primarily by adjusting the interest rate it pays on excess reserve (IOER) balances. intends to use an overnight reverse repurchase agreement (ON RRP) facility and other supplementary tools as needed to help control the federal funds rate. The Committee will use an ON RRP facility only to the extent necessary and will phase it out when it is no longer needed to help control the federal funds rate. The Committee intends to reduce the Federal Reserve’s securities holdings in a gradual and 1. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System predictable manner primarily by ceasing to reinvest repayments of principal on securities held in the SOMA. {{ The Committee expects to cease or commence phasing out reinvestments after it begins increasing the target range for the federal funds rate; the timing will depend on how economic and financial conditions and the economic outlook evolve. {{ The Committee currently does not anticipate selling agency mortgage-backed securities as part of the normalization process, although limited sales might be warranted in the longer run to reduce or eliminate residual holdings. The timing and pace of any sales would be communicated to the public in advance. The Committee intends that the Federal Reserve will, in the longer run, hold no more securities than necessary to implement monetary policy efficiently and effectively, and that it will hold primarily Treasury securities, thereby minimizing the effect of Federal Reserve holdings on the allocation of credit across sectors of the economy. The Committee is prepared to adjust the details of its approach to policy normalization in light of economic and financial developments. agreed to provide the following additional details on the principles and plans for policy normalization.3 When economic conditions warrant the commencement of policy firming, the Federal Reserve intends to: Continue to target a range for the federal funds rate that is 25 basis points wide. Set the IOER rate equal to the top of the target range for the federal funds rate and set the offering rate associated with an ON RRP facility equal to the bottom of the target range for the federal funds rate. Allow aggregate capacity of the ON RRP facility to be temporarily elevated to support policy implementation; adjust the IOER rate and the parameters of the ON RRP facility, and use other tools such as term operations, as necessary for appropriate monetary control, based on policymakers’ assessments of the efficacy and costs of their tools. The Committee expects that it will be appropriate to reduce the capacity of the facility fairly soon after it commences policy firming. 2. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 3. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System The following material appeared as an addendum to the minutes of the June 16–17, 2015, meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee. In conjunction with the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting held on June 16–17, 2015, meeting participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real output growth, the unemployment rate, inflation, and the federal funds rate for each year from 2015 to 2017 and over the longer run.10 Each participant’s projection was based on information available at the time of the meeting together with his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy and assumptions about the factors likely to affect economic outcomes. The longer- run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the value to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, 10. The incoming president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia assumed office after the June FOMC meeting, on July 1, and a new president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas has yet to be selected. Blake Prichard and Helen E. Holcomb, first vice presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and Dallas, respectively, submitted economic projections. under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. “Appropriate monetary policy” is defined as the future path of policy that each participant deems most likely to foster outcomes for economic activity and inflation that best satisfy his or her individual interpretation of the Federal Reserve’s objectives of maximum employment and stable prices. FOMC participants generally expected that, under appropriate monetary policy, growth of real gross domestic product (GDP) in 2015 would be somewhat below their individual estimates of the U.S. economy’s longer-run normal growth rate but would increase in 2016 before slowing to or toward its longer-run rate in 2017 (table 1 and figure 1). Participants generally expected that the unemployment rate would continue to decline in 2015 and 2016, and that the unemployment rate would be at or below their individual judgments of its longer-run normal level by the end of Longer run Longer run Note: Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP) and projections for both measures of inflation are from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. PCE inflation and core PCE inflation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) and the price index for PCE excluding food and energy. Projections for the unemployment rate are for the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. Each participant’s projections are based on his or her assessment of appropri- ate monetary policy. Longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. The March projections were made in conjunction with the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on March 17–18, 2015. 1. The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each year. 2. The range for a variable in a given year includes all participants’ projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year. 3. Longer-run projections for core PCE inflation are not collected. Figure 1. Central tendencies and ranges of economic projections, 2015–17 and over the longer run NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. The data for the actual values of the variables are annual. Longer run Longer run Longer run Longer run 2017. Participants anticipated that inflation, as measured by the four-quarter percent change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), would be appreciably below 2 percent this year but expected it to step up next year, and a substantial majority of participants projected that inflation would be at or close to the Committee’s goal of 2 percent in 2017. As shown in figure 2, all but two participants anticipated that further improvement in economic conditions and the economic outlook would make it appropriate to begin raising the target range for the federal funds rate in 2015. The economic outlooks of individual participants implied that it likely would be appropriate to raise the target federal funds rate fairly gradually over the projection period in order to promote labor market conditions and inflation the Committee judges most consistent with attaining its mandated objectives of maximum employment and stable prices. Most participants continued to expect that it would be appropriate for the federal funds rate to stay appreciably below its longer- run level for some time after inflation and unemployment are near mandate-consistent levels, reflecting the effects of remaining headwinds holding back the economic expansion, and other factors. Most participants viewed the uncertainty associated with their outlooks for economic growth and the unemployment rate as broadly similar to the average level of the past 20 years. Most participants also judged the level of uncertainty about inflation to be broadly similar to the average level of the past 20 years, although some participants viewed it as higher. In addition, most participants continued to see the risks to the outlook for economic growth and for the unemployment rate as broadly balanced, though some viewed the risks to economic growth as weighted to the downside. A majority of participants saw the risks to inflation as balanced; of the five who did not see inflation risks as balanced, four saw risks as tilted to the downside. Participants generally projected that, conditional on their individual assumptions about appropriate monetary policy, real GDP would grow slowly in the first half of 2015, but that this near-term weakness would give way to growth in 2016 that exceeds their estimates of its longer-run normal rate; most participants expected real GDP growth to slow in 2017 to rates at or near their individual estimates of the longer-run rate. Participants generally regarded the weakness in economic activity in the first half of this year to be temporary and pointed to a number of factors that they expected would contribute to solid output growth through 2016, including improving labor market conditions, strengthened household and business balance sheets, waning effects of the earlier increases in the exchange value of the dollar, a boost to consumer spending from low energy prices, diminishing restraint from fiscal policy, and still-accommodative monetary policy. Compared with their Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) contributions in March, all participants revised down their projections of real GDP growth for 2015, but many expected the economy to make up at least some of the shortfall over the remainder of the forecast period. Beyond the near term, changes in participants’ forecasts were small. The central tendencies of participants’ current projections for real GDP growth were 1.8 to 2.0 percent in 2015, 2.4 to 2.7 percent in 2016, and 2.1 to 2.5 percent in 2017. The central tendency of the projections of GDP growth in the longer run was unchanged from March at 2.0 to 2.3 percent. Most participants projected that the unemployment rate would continue to decline through 2016, and nearly all projected that by the fourth quarter of 2017, the unemployment rate would be at or below their individual judgments of its longer-run normal level. The central tendencies of participants’ forecasts for the unemployment rate in the fourth NOTE: In the upper panel, the height of each bar denotes the number of FOMC participants who judge that, under appropriate monetary policy, the first increase in the target range for the federal funds rate from its current range of 0 to ¼ percent will occur in the specified calendar year. In March 2015, the numbers of FOMC participants who judged that the first increase in the target federal funds rate would occur in 2015 and 2016 were, respectively, 15 and 2. In the lower panel, each shaded circle indicates the value (rounded to the nearest ⅛ percentage point) of an individual participant’s judgment of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the appropriate target level for the federal funds rate at the end of the specified calendar year or over the longer run. quarter of each year were 5.2 to 5.3 percent in 2015, and 4.9 to 5.1 percent in both 2016 and 2017. Compared with the March SEP, participants’ projections for the unemployment rate edged up in 2015 but were little different over the medium term. Several participants indicated that the differences from their March projections for the unemployment rate over the medium term were modest in part because of the monetary policy response that they incorporated into their forecasts to mitigate an otherwise weaker trajectory for expenditures. Figures 3.A and 3.B show the distribution of participants’ views regarding the likely outcomes for real GDP growth and the unemployment rate through 2017 and in the longer run. Some of the diversity of views reflected participants’ individual assessments of a number of factors, including the effects of lower oil prices on consumer spending and business investment, the extent to which dollar appreciation would affect real activity, the rate at which the forces that have been restraining the pace of the economic recovery would continue to abate, the trajectory for growth in consumption as labor market slack diminishes, and the appropriate path of monetary policy. Relative to the March SEP, the dispersion of participants’ projections for real GDP growth in 2015 narrowed considerably, reflecting in part the release of the national income and product accounts data for the first quarter of this year, which were not available when the FOMC met in March. All participants projected headline PCE inflation to come in at or below 1 percent this year—mostly due to the temporary effects of earlier declines in energy prices and decreases in non-energy import prices—but to climb to 1½ percent or more in 2016. A sizable majority of participants expected that headline inflation would be at or close to the Committee’s goal in 2017. Most participants projected only a slight decline in core PCE inflation this year and anticipated a gradual rise over the remainder of the forecast period. Relative to the March SEP, participants’ projections for PCE inflation changed very little. The central tendencies for PCE inflation were 0.6 to 0.8 percent in 2015, 1.6 to 1.9 percent in 2016, and 1.9 to 2.0 percent in 2017; for core PCE inflation, the central tendencies were 1.3 to 1.4 percent in 2015, 1.6 to 1.9 percent in 2016, and 1.9 to 2.0 percent in 2017. Factors cited by participants as likely to contribute to inflation rising toward 2 percent included stable longer-term inflation expectations, steadily diminishing resource slack, a pickup in wage growth, the waning effects of declines in energy prices, and still-accommodative monetary policy. Figures 3.C and 3.D provide information on the distribution of participants’ views about the outlook for inflation. The range of projections for PCE inflation in 2015 narrowed, albeit mostly on the basis of the lowering of just one projection; otherwise, the ranges of participants’ projections for both headline and core PCE inflation were nearly identical to what was reported in March. Participants judged that it would be appropriate to begin normalization of monetary policy as labor market indicators and inflation moved to or toward values the Committee regards as consistent with the attainment of its mandated objectives of maximum employment and price stability. As shown in figure 2, all but two participants anticipated that it would be appropriate to begin raising the target range for the federal funds rate during 2015. However, a sizable majority projected that the appropriate level of the federal funds rate would remain below their individual estimates of its longer-run normal level through 2017. All but a few participants projected that the unemployment rate would be at or somewhat above their estimates of its longer-run normal level at the end of the year in which Figure 3.A. Distribution of participants’ projections for the change in real GDP, 2015–17 and over the longer run 1.6 1.7        1.6 1.7        1.6 1.7        Longer run 1.6 1.7        NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. Figure 3.B. Distribution of participants’ projections for the unemployment rate, 2015–17 and over the longer run 4.4 4.5        4.4 4.5        4.4 4.5        Longer run 4.4 4.5        NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. Figure 3.C. Distribution of participants’ projections for PCE inflation, 2015–17 and over the longer run 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.2 - 1.5 1.3 1.4 1.6 Percent range 1.7 1.8 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.2 - 1.5 1.3 1.4 1.6 Percent range 1.7 1.8 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.2 - 1.3 1.5 1.6 1.4 Percent range 1.7 1.8 Longer run 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.2 - 1.3 1.5 1.6 1.4 Percent range 1.7 1.8 NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 1.9 2.0 1.9 2.0 1.9 2.0 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 Percent range 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 Percent range 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 Percent range NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 1.9 2.0 1.9 2.0 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 they judged the initial increase in the target range for the federal funds rate would be warranted, and all participants projected that unemployment would decline further after the commencement of normalization. All participants projected that inflation would be below the Committee’s 2 percent objective that year, but they also saw inflation rising notably closer to 2 percent in the following year. Figure 3.E provides the distribution of participants’ judgments regarding the appropriate level of the target federal funds rate at the end of each calendar year from 2015 to 2017 and over the longer run. Relative to their March projections, most participants considered a lower level of the federal funds rate to be appropriate over some part of the projection period. The median projection for the federal funds rate at the end of 2015 was unchanged from March at 0.63 percent; however, the mean federal funds rate projection of 0.58 percent for that date was 19 basis points lower than in March. The median projections for the ends of 2016 and 2017 were 1.63 percent and 2.88 percent, respectively—both 25 basis points lower than in March. Compared with the March SEP, the dispersion of the projections for the appropriate level of the federal funds rate was a bit narrower over 2015 and 2016, and about the same as in March for 2017. A sizable majority of participants judged that it would be appropriate for the federal funds rate at the end of 2017 to remain below its longer-run normal level, with about half of all participants projecting the federal funds rate at that time to be more than ½ percentage point lower than their estimates of its longer-run value. Participants provided a number of reasons why they thought it would be appropriate for the federal funds rate to remain below its longer-run normal level for some time after inflation and the unemployment rate were near mandate- consistent levels. These reasons included the expectation that headwinds that have been holding back the recovery would continue to exert some restraint on economic activity, that weak real activity abroad and the recent appreciation of the dollar were likely to persist and temper spending and production in the United States, that residual slack in the labor market would still be evident in some measures of labor utilization other than the unemployment rate, and that the risks to the economic outlook were asymmetric in part because of the constraints on monetary policy associated with the effective lower bound on the federal funds rate. Relative to the March SEP, participants made at most modest adjustments to their estimates of the longer-run level of the federal funds rate. These changes left the median estimate of the longer-run normal federal funds rate unchanged from March at 3.75 percent; the central tendency for the federal funds rate in the longer run was 3.5 to 3.75 percent, also the same as in March. Participants’ views of the appropriate path for monetary policy were informed by their judgments about the state of the economy, including their estimates of the values of the unemployment rate and other labor market indicators that would be consistent with maximum employment, the extent to which labor market conditions were currently perceived to be falling short of maximum employment, and the prospects for inflation to return to the Committee’s longer-term objective of 2 percent over the medium term. Also noted by participants were the implications of international developments for the domestic economy, the uncertainty regarding the reaction by economic decisionmakers to the beginning of policy normalization after a lengthy period with the federal funds rate at the effective lower bound, the economic benefits of limiting any associated disruptions in financial markets, and a general desire to practice risk management in setting monetary policy. In addition, some participants mentioned the prescriptions of various monetary policy rules as factors they considered in judging the appropriate path for the federal funds rate. Figure 3.E. Distribution of participants’ judgments of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the appropriate target level for the federal funds rate, 2015–17 and over the longer run Longer run NOTE: The midpoints of the target ranges for the federal funds rate and the target levels for the federal funds rate are measured at the end of the specified calendar year or over the longer run. A large majority of participants continued to judge the levels of uncertainty attending their projections for real GDP growth and the unemployment rate as broadly similar to the norms of the previous 20 years (figure 4).11 As in March, most participants saw the risks to their outlooks for real GDP growth as broadly balanced, although some participants again viewed the risks to real GDP growth as weighted to the downside. Those participants who viewed the risks as weighted to the downside cited, for example, concern about the limited ability of monetary policy to respond to negative shocks to the economy when the federal funds rate is at its effective lower bound, a fragile foreign economic outlook, and weak readings on productivity growth. A large majority of participants judged the risks to the outlook for the unemployment rate to be broadly balanced. Participants generally agreed that the levels of uncertainty associated with their inflation forecasts were broadly similar to historical norms. A few policymakers indicated that their confidence in the likelihood of inflation 11. Table 2 provides estimates of the forecast uncertainty for the change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, and total consumer price inflation over the period from 1995 through 2014. At the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty” discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty in the economic forecasts and explains the approach used to assess the uncertainty and risks attending the participants’ projections. Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges Percentage points note: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root mean squared error of projections for 1995 through 2014 that were released in the summer by various private and government forecasters. As described in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain assump- tions, there is about a 70 percent probability that actual outcomes for real GDP, unemployment, and consumer prices will be in ranges implied by the average size of projection errors made in the past. For more information, see David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip (2007), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook from Historical Forecasting Errors,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2007-60 (Washing- ton: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November), available at www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds/ 2007/200760/200760abs . html; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Division of Research and Statistics (2014), “Updated Historical Forecast Errors,” memorandum, April 9, www.federalreserve.gov/foia/files/20140409- historical-forecast-errors.pdf. 1. Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure that has been most widely used in government and private economic forecasts. Projection is percent change, fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. moving toward the policy objective of 2 percent inflation had increased. In all, 11 participants viewed the risks to their inflation forecast as balanced, up from 8 in the March SEP. The risks were still seen as tilted to the downside by 5 participants who cited the possibility that the effects of the high exchange value of the dollar on domestic inflation could persist for longer than anticipated, that longer-term inflation expectations might coalesce on a lower level of inflation than assumed, or that, in current circumstances, it could be difficult for the Committee to respond effectively to low- inflation outcomes. Conversely, 1 participant saw risks to inflation as weighted to the upside, citing uncertainty about the timing and efficacy of the Committee’s withdrawal of monetary policy accommodation. Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Risks to core PCE inflation Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside NOTE: For definitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. The economic projections provided by the members of the Board of Governors and the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks inform discussions of monetary policy among policymakers and can aid public understanding of the basis for policy actions. Considerable uncertainty attends these projections, however. The economic and statistical models and relationships used to help produce economic forecasts are necessarily imperfect descriptions of the real world, and the future path of the economy can be affected by myriad unforeseen developments and events. Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, participants consider not only what appears to be the most likely economic outcome as embodied in their projections, but also the range of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of their occurring, and the potential costs to the economy should they occur. Table 2 summarizes the average historical accuracy of a range of forecasts, including those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports and those prepared by the Federal Reserve Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee. The projection error ranges shown in the table illustrate the considerable uncertainty associated with economic forecasts. For example, suppose a participant projects that real gross domestic product (GDP) and total consumer prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty attending those projections is similar to that experienced in the past and the risks around the projections are broadly balanced, the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a probability of about 70 percent that actual GDP would expand within a range of 1.6 to 4.4 percent in the current year, 1.0 to 5.0 percent in the second year, and 0.9 to 5.1 percent in the third year. The corresponding 70 percent confidence intervals for overall inflation would be 1.2 to 2.8 percent in the current year and 1.0 to 3.0 percent in the second and third years. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over history, participants provide judgments as to whether the uncertainty attached to their projections of each variable is greater than, smaller than, or broadly similar to typical levels of forecast uncertainty in the past, as shown in table 2. Participants also provide judgments as to whether the risks to their projections are weighted to the upside, are weighted to the downside, or are broadly balanced. That is, participants judge whether each variable is more likely to be above or below their projections of the most likely outcome. These judgments about the uncertainty and the risks attending each participant’s projections are distinct from the diversity of participants’ views about the most likely outcomes. Forecast uncertainty is concerned with the risks associated with a particular projection rather than with divergences across a number of different projections. As with real activity and inflation, the outlook for the future path of the federal funds rate is subject to considerable uncertainty. This uncertainty arises primarily because each participant’s assessment of the appropriate stance of monetary policy depends importantly on the evolution of real activity and inflation over time. If economic conditions evolve in an unexpected manner, then assessments of the appropriate setting of the federal funds rate would change from that point forward. bank holding company emerging market economy The Board of Governors is pleased to submit its Monetary Policy Report pursuant to section 2B of the Federal Reserve Act. Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 Assessing Conditions in the Labor Market . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 The Federal Reserve’s Actions to Foster Financial Stability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30 An Update on the European Fiscal and Banking Crisis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32 Efficacy and Costs of Large-Scale Asset Purchases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39 Forecast Uncertainty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57 The U.S. economy continued to expand at a moderate rate, on average, over the second half of 2012. The housing recovery appeared to gain additional traction, consumer spending rose moderately, and business investment advanced further. Financial conditions eased over the period but credit remained tight for many households and businesses, and concerns about the course of federal fiscal policy and the ongoing European situation likely restrained private-sector demand. In addition, total government purchases continued to move lower in an environment of budget restraint, while export growth was held back by slow foreign economic growth. All told, real gross domestic product (GDP) is estimated to have increased at an average annual rate of 1½ percent in the second half of the year, similar to the pace in the first half. Conditions in the labor market gradually improved. Employment increased at an average monthly pace of 175,000 in the second half of the year, about the same as in the first half. The unemployment rate moved down from 8¼ percent last summer to a little below 8 percent in January. Even so, the unemployment rate was still well above levels observed prior to the recent recession. Moreover, it remained the case that a large share of the unemployed had been out of work for more than six months, and that a significant portion of the employed had part- time jobs because they were unable to find full- time employment. Meanwhile, consumer price inflation remained subdued amid stable long- term inflation expectations and persistent slack in labor markets. Over the second half of the year, the price index for personal consumption expenditures increased at an annual rate of 1½ percent. During the summer and fall, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) judged that the economic recovery would strengthen only gradually over time, as some of the factors restraining activity—including restrictive credit for some borrowers, continuing concerns about the domestic and international economic environments, and the ongoing shift toward tighter federal fiscal policy—were thought likely to recede only slowly. Moreover, the Committee judged that the possibility of an escalation of the financial crisis in Europe and uncertainty about the course of fiscal policy in the United States posed significant downside risks to the outlook for economic activity. However, the Committee expected that, with appropriate monetary accommodation, economic growth would proceed at a moderate pace, with the unemployment rate gradually declining toward levels consistent with the FOMC’s dual mandate of maximum employment and price stability. Against this backdrop, and with long-run inflation expectations well anchored, the FOMC projected that inflation would remain at or below the rate consistent with the Committee’s dual mandate. Accordingly, to promote its objectives, the FOMC provided additional monetary accommodation during the second half of 2012 by both strengthening its forward guidance regarding the federal funds rate and initiating additional asset purchases. In September, the Committee announced that it would continue its program to extend the average maturity of its Treasury holdings and would begin purchasing additional agency- guaranteed mortgage-backed securities (MBS) at a pace of $40 billion per month. The Committee also stated its intention to continue its purchases of agency MBS, undertake additional asset purchases, and employ its other policy tools as appropriate until the outlook for the labor market improves substantially in a context of price stability. The Committee agreed that in determining the size, pace, and composition of its asset purchases, it would, as always, take account of the likely efficacy and costs of such purchases. The Committee also modified its forward guidance regarding the federal funds rate at the September meeting, noting that exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate were likely to be warranted at least through mid- 2015, longer than had been indicated in previous FOMC statements. Moreover, the Committee stated its expectation that a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy would remain appropriate for a considerable time after the economic recovery strengthens. In December, the Committee announced that in addition to continuing its purchases of agency MBS, it would purchase longer- term Treasury securities, initially at a pace of $45 billion per month, starting after the completion at the end of the year of its program to extend the maturity of its Treasury holdings. It also further modified its forward rate guidance, replacing the earlier date-based guidance with numerical thresholds for the unemployment rate and projected inflation. In particular, the Committee indicated that it expected the exceptionally low range for the federal funds rate would remain appropriate at least as long as the unemployment rate remains above 6½ percent, inflation between one and two years ahead is projected to be no more than ½ percentage point above the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal, and longer-term inflation expectations continue to be well anchored. Partly in response to this additional monetary accommodation, as well as to improved sentiment regarding the situation in Europe, broad financial conditions eased over the second half of 2012. Although yields on nominal Treasury securities rose, on net, yields on inflation-protected Treasury securities declined, and longer-term interest rates paid by households and firms generally fell. Yields on agency MBS and investment- and speculative-grade corporate bonds touched record lows, and broad equity price indexes rose. Conditions in short-term dollar funding markets eased over the summer and remained stable thereafter, and market sentiment toward the banking industry improved. Nonetheless, credit remained tight for borrowers with lower credit scores, and borrowing conditions for small businesses continued to improve more gradually than for large firms. At the time of the most recent FOMC meeting in January, Committee participants saw the economic outlook as little changed or modestly improved from the time of their December meeting, when the most recent Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) was compiled. (The December SEP is included as Part 3 of this report.) Participants generally judged that strains in global financial markets had eased somewhat, and that the downside risks to the economic outlook had lessened. Under the assumption of appropriate monetary policy—that is, policy consistent with the Committee’s Statement on Longer- Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy (see box)—FOMC participants expected the economy to expand at a moderate pace, with the unemployment rate gradually declining and inflation remaining at or below the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal. is firmly committed to fulfilling its statutory mandate from the Congress of promoting maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates . The Committee seeks to explain its monetary policy decisions to the public as clearly as possible . Such clarity facilitates well-informed decisionmaking by households and businesses, reduces economic and financial uncertainty, increases the effectiveness of monetary policy, and enhances transparency and accountability, which are essential in a democratic society . Inflation, employment, and long-term interest rates fluctuate over time in response to economic and financial disturbances . Moreover, monetary policy actions tend to influence economic activity and prices with a lag . Therefore, the Committee’s policy decisions reflect its longer-run goals, its medium-term outlook, and its assessments of the balance of risks, including risks to the financial system that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals . The maximum level of employment is largely determined by nonmonetary factors that affect the structure and dynamics of the labor market . These factors may change over time and may not be directly measurable . Consequently, it would not be appropriate to specify a fixed goal for employment; rather, the Committee’s policy decisions must be informed by assessments of the maximum level of employment, recognizing that such assessments are necessarily uncertain and subject to revision . The Committee considers a wide range of indicators in making these assessments . Information about Committee participants’ estimates of the longer-run normal rates of output growth and unemployment is published four times per year in the FOMC’s Summary of Economic Projections . For example, in the most recent projections, FOMC participants’ estimates of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment had a central tendency of 5 .2 percent to 6 .0 percent, unchanged from one year ago but substantially higher than the corresponding interval several years earlier . The inflation rate over the longer run is primarily In setting monetary policy, the Committee seeks determined by monetary policy, and hence the Committee has the ability to specify a longer-run goal for inflation . The Committee judges that inflation at the rate of 2 percent, as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, is most consistent over the longer run with the Federal Reserve’s statutory mandate . Communicating this inflation goal clearly to the public helps keep longer-term inflation expectations firmly anchored, thereby fostering price stability and moderate long-term interest rates and enhancing the Committee’s ability to promote maximum employment in the face of significant economic disturbances . to mitigate deviations of inflation from its longer- run goal and deviations of employment from the Committee’s assessments of its maximum level . These objectives are generally complementary . However, under circumstances in which the Committee judges that the objectives are not complementary, it follows a balanced approach in promoting them, taking into account the magnitude of the deviations and the potentially different time horizons over which employment and inflation are projected to return to levels judged consistent with its mandate . The Committee intends to reaffirm these principles and to make adjustments as appropriate at its annual organizational meeting each January . Real gross domestic product (GDP) increased at a moderate annual rate of 1½ percent, on average, in the second half of 2012—similar to the rate of increase in the first half—as various headwinds continued to restrain growth. Financial conditions eased over the second half in response to the additional monetary accommodation provided by the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) and to improved sentiment regarding the crisis in Europe. However, credit availability remained tight for many households and businesses. In addition, declines in real government purchases continued to weigh on economic activity, as did household and business concerns about the economic outlook, while weak foreign demand restrained exports. In this environment, conditions in the labor market continued to improve gradually but remained weak. At a little under 8 percent in January, the unemployment rate was still well above levels prevailing prior to the recent recession. Inflation remained subdued at the end of last year, with consumer prices rising at about a 1½ percent annual rate in the second half, and measures of longer-run inflation expectations remained in the narrow ranges seen over the past several years. GDP increased moderately but continued to be restrained by various headwinds Real GDP is estimated to have increased at an annual rate of 3 percent in the third quarter but to have been essentially flat in the fourth, as economic activity was temporarily restrained by weather-related disruptions and declines in some erratic categories of spending, including inventory investment and federal defense spending.1 On average, real GDP expanded at an annual rate of 1½ percent in the second half of 2012, similar to the pace of increase in the first half of the year (figure 1). The housing recovery gained additional traction, consumer spending continued to increase moderately, and business investment rose further. However, a severe drought in much of the country held down farm production, and disruptions from Hurricane Sandy also likely held back economic activity somewhat in the fourth quarter. More fundamentally, some of the same factors that restrained growth in the first half of last year likely continued to weigh on activity. Although financial conditions continued to 1. Change in real gross domestic product, 2006–12 NOTE: Here and in subsequent figures, except as noted, change for a given period is measured to its final quarter from the final quarter of the preceding period. 1. Data for the fourth quarter of 2012 from the national income and product accounts reflect the advance estimate released on January 30, 2013. 2. Net change in payroll employment, 2006–13 NOTE: The data are three-month moving averages and extend through 3. Civilian unemployment rate, 1979–2013 NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through January 2013. SOURCE: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. 4. Long-term unemployed, 1979–2013 NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through January 2013. The series shown is the percentage of total unemployed persons who have been unemployed for 27 weeks or more. improve overall, the financial system has not fully recovered from the financial crisis, and banks remained cautious in their lending to many households and businesses. In particular, restricted financing for home mortgages and new-home construction projects, along with the depressing effects on housing demand of an uncertain outlook for house prices and jobs, kept the level of activity in the housing sector well below longer-run norms. Budgetary pressures at all levels of government also continued to weigh on GDP growth. Moreover, businesses and households remained concerned about many aspects of the economic environment, including the uncertain course of U.S. fiscal policy at the turn of the year as well as the still-worrisome European situation and the slow recovery more generally. The labor market improved somewhat, but the unemployment rate remained high In this economic environment, firms increased their workforces moderately. Over the second half of last year, nonfarm payroll employment rose an average of about 175,000 per month, similar to the average increase in the first half (figure 2). These job gains helped lower the unemployment rate from 8.2 percent in the second quarter of last year to 7.9 percent in January (figure 3). Nevertheless, the unemployment rate remained much higher than it was prior to the recent recession, and long-term unemployment continued to be widespread. In the fourth quarter, about 40 percent of the unemployed had been out of work for more than six months (figure 4). Moreover, the proportion of workers employed part time because they were unable to find full-time work remained elevated. Some of the increase in the unemployment rate since the beginning of the recent recession could reflect structural changes in the labor market— such as a greater mismatch between the types of jobs that are open and the skills of workers available to fill them—that would reduce the maximum sustainable level of employment. However, most of the economic analysis on this subject suggests that the bulk of the increase in unemployment probably reflects a deficiency in labor demand.2 As a result, the unemployment rate likely remains well above levels consistent with maximum sustainable employment. As described in the box “Assessing Conditions in the Labor Market,” the unemployment rate appears to be a very good indicator of labor market conditions. That said, other indicators also provide important perspectives on the health of the labor market, and the most accurate assessment of labor market conditions can be obtained by combining the signals from many such indicators. Aside from the decline in the unemployment rate, probably the most important other pieces of evidence corroborating the gradual improvement in labor market conditions over the second half of last year were the gains in nonfarm payrolls noted earlier and the slight net reduction in initial claims for unemployment insurance. Restrained by the ongoing weak conditions in the labor market, labor compensation has increased slowly. The employment cost index for private industry workers, which encompasses both wages and the cost to employers of providing benefits, increased only 2 percent over the 12 months of 2012, similar to the rate of gain since 2010 (figure 5). Similarly, nominal compensation per hour in the nonfarm business sector—a measure derived from the labor compensation data in the national income and product accounts (NIPA)—increased 2½ percent over the four quarters of 2012, well below average increases 2. See, for example, Mary C. Daly, Bart Hobijn, Ayşegül Şahin, and Robert G. Valletta (2012), “A Search and Matching Approach to Labor Markets: Did the Natural Rate of Unemployment Rise?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 26 (Summer), pp. 3–26; Michael W. L. Elsby, Bart Hobijn, Ayşegül Şahin, and Robert G. Valletta (2011), “The Labor Market in the Great Recession—An Update to September 2011,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, pp. 353–71; and Jesse Rothstein (2012), “The Labor Market Four Years into the Crisis: Assessing Structural Explanations,” ILRReview, vol. 65 (July), pp. 467–500. 5. Measures of change in hourly compensation, 2002–12 NOTE: The data are quarterly and extend through 2012:Q4. For nonfarm business compensation, change is over four quarters; for the employment cost index (ECI), change is over the 12 months ending in the last month of each quarter. The nonfarm business sector excludes farms, government, nonprofit institutions, and households. The sector covered by the ECI used here is the nonfarm business sector plus nonprofit institutions. no single statistic can provide a complete picture of a labor market as large and diverse as that in the United States . The evidence suggests that the unemployment rate is probably the most useful single summary indicator of labor market conditions . However, other indicators, prominently including but not limited to nonfarm payroll employment, provide important additional information . The unemployment rate is intended to measure the extent of the most obvious, and arguably the most important, problem in a slack labor market: the inability of some people who are looking for work to find acceptable jobs . The unemployment rate is also well correlated with, and representative of, a broad set of labor market indicators that portray many aspects of the job market . This relationship is demonstrated in figure A, which plots the detrended unemployment rate along with the first principal component from a factor model of labor market indicators described in a paper by Barnes and others .1 In addition, other research suggests that the unemployment rate is 1 . The first principal component is a summary statistic that captures the common movement among a variety of indicators . See Michelle Barnes, Ryan Chahrour, Giovanni Olivei, and Gaoyan Tang (2007), “A Principal Components Approach to Estimating Labor Market Pressure and Its Implications for Inflation,” Public Policy Briefs 07-2 (Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, December), www .bostonfed . org/economic/ppb/2007/ppb072 .pdf . Of course, the unemployment rate does not, by itself, provide a complete and fully accurate portrait of labor market conditions . As with most indicators, the unemployment rate is subject to sampling and other measurement errors, so month-to-month movements should be interpreted with some caution . Even over longer periods, the unemployment rate may not always characterize the situation in the labor market altogether accurately . For example, if many unemployed individuals cease looking for work (and so are no longer counted as unemployed) because they have become discouraged about their job prospects, the measured unemployment rate could decline even if the demand for labor has not improved . Also, the unemployment rate may not always move in step with other types of underemployment, such as 2 . For two examples, see Charles A . Fleischman and John M . Roberts (2011), “From Many Series, One Cycle: Improved Estimates of the Business Cycle from a Multivariate Unobserved Components Model,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2011-46 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October), www . federalreserve .gov/pubs/feds/2011/201146/201146pap . pdf; and Jeremy J . nalewaik (2011), “Forecasting Recessions Using Stall Speeds,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2011-24 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April), www .federalreserve .gov/pubs/ feds/2011/201124/201124pap .pdf . Detrended unemployment rate NOTE: The shaded bars indicate periods of business recession as defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston staff. persons working part time because they cannot find full-time jobs . For this reason, broader measures of labor underutilization, such as the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ (BLS) U-4, U-5, and U-6 rates, can be useful supplements to the standard unemployment rate . These measures include the number of discouraged workers and part-time workers who are unable to find a full- time job, and they are derived from the same survey of households as is the official unemployment rate (figure B) . Other than the unemployment rate, payroll employment as measured in the BLS survey of establishments may be the most useful labor market indicator . A decline in the unemployment rate that is accompanied by a roughly proportionate increase in payroll employment is more likely to truly reflect improvement in the labor market . Of course, payroll employment is also an imperfect measure, and on some occasions the initial estimates of payrolls have been revised to show a substantially different picture than they originally did . Therefore, it can be useful to also look at a variety of other labor market indicators . These indicators may be less broad-based than either the unemployment rate or payroll employment, but—collectively—they may reduce the uncertainty surrounding the message from the primary measures and provide information about some specific aspects of the labor market . of measures of job losses and hiring . These measures describe the large gross flows of workers in and out of employment that underlie the net changes reflected in the unemployment rate and payroll employment . For example, the improvements in the employment situation thus far during the current recovery have been driven more by reductions in job losses than by increases in hiring . A second set of indicators, the rate of job vacancies and measures of firms’ hiring plans, may be informative about the sustainability of any increase in hiring . Quit rates, a third set, are useful because workers have, historically, been much more likely to quit their jobs when they perceive or anticipate a strong labor market . In addition, surveys of consumers and businesses provide information about the perceptions of a large number of individuals about labor market conditions . As with the unemployment rate and payroll employment, these other indicators have, for the most part, improved considerably during the economic recovery but remain substantially weaker than would normally be associated with a healthy labor market . NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through January 2013. U-4 measures total unemployed plus discouraged workers, as a percent of the labor force plus discouraged workers. Discouraged workers are not currently looking for work because they believe no jobs are available for them. U-5 measures total unemployed plus all marginally attached to the labor force, as a percent of the labor force plus persons marginally attached to the labor force. Marginally attached workers are not in the labor force, want and are available for work, and have looked for a job in the prior 12 months. U-6 measures total unemployed plus all marginally attached workers plus total employed part time for economic reasons, as a percent of labor force plus all marginally attached workers. The shaded bars indicate periods of business recession as defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research. 6. Change in the chain-type price index for personal consumption expenditures, 2006–12 Excluding food and energy NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through December 2012; changes are from one year earlier. 7. Change in output per hour, 1948–2012 NOTE: Nonfarm business sector. Change for each multiyear period is measured to the fourth quarter of the final year of the period from the fourth quarter of the year immediately preceding the period. of close to 4 percent in the years prior to the recent recession. As a result of these modest gains, nominal compensation has increased only about as fast as consumer prices over the recovery. Inflation remained low . . . Consumer price inflation was low over the second half of 2012. With considerable slack in labor markets and limited increases in labor costs, relatively stable prices for commodities and imports, and well-anchored longer-term inflation expectations, prices for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) increased at an annual rate of 1½ percent in the second half of the year, similar to the rate of increase in the first half (figure 6). Excluding food and energy prices, consumer prices increased only 1 percent in the second half of the year, down from 2 percent in the first half. A deceleration in prices of imported goods likely contributed to the low rate of inflation seen in the second half, though price increases for non-energy services were also low. As noted, gains in labor compensation have been subdued given the weak conditions in labor markets, and unit labor costs—which measure the extent to which compensation rises in excess of productivity—have increased very little over the recovery. That said, compensation per hour rose more rapidly last year, and productivity growth, which has averaged 1½ percent per year over the recovery, was relatively low (figure 7). As a result, unit labor costs rose 2 percent in 2012, well above average increases earlier in the recovery. Global oil prices rose in early 2012 but subsequently gave up those gains and remained about flat through the later part of the year (figure 8). Developments related to Iran, including a tightening embargo on Iranian oil exports, likely put upward pressure on prices, but these pressures were apparently offset by continued concerns about weak global demand. However, in recent weeks, global oil prices have increased in response to generally positive demand indicators from China and some reductions in Saudi production. Partly in response to this rise, retail gasoline prices, which changed little, on net, over 2012, have moved up appreciably. Nonfuel commodity prices have remained relatively flat over the past year despite significant movements in the prices of a few specific commodities. Of particular interest, prices for corn and soybeans eased some over the fall after having risen sharply during the summer as the scale of the drought affecting much of the United States became apparent. Given this easing and the small share of grain costs in the retail price of food, the effect of the drought on U.S. consumer food prices is likely to be modest: Consumer food prices rose at an annual rate of 2 percent in the fourth quarter following increases of less than 1 percent in the middle of last year. In line with these flat overall commodity prices, as well as earlier dollar appreciation, prices for imported goods excluding oil were about unchanged on average over the last five months of 2012 and the early part of 2013. . . . and longer-term inflation expectations stayed in their historical range Survey measures of longer-term inflation expectations have changed little, on net, since last summer. Median expected inflation over the next 5 to 10 years, as reported in the Thomson Reuters/University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers, was 3 percent in early February, within the narrow range of the past 10 years (figure 9). In the Survey of Professional Forecasters, conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, the median expectation for the increase in the price index for PCE over the next 10 years was 2 percent in the first quarter of this year, similar to its level in recent years. A measure of 5-year inflation compensation derived from nominal and inflation-protected 8. Prices of oil and nonfuel commodities, 2008–13 NOTE: The data are monthly. The oil price is the spot price of Brent crude oil, and the last observation is the average for February 1–21, 2013. The price of nonfuel commodities is an index of 45 primary-commodity prices and extends through January 2013. 9. Median inflation expectations, 2001–13 NOTE: The Michigan survey data are monthly and extend from January 2001 through a preliminary estimate for February 2013. The SPF data are quarterly and extend from 2007:Q1 through 2013:Q1. 5-year (carry adjusted) NOTE: The data are weekly averages of daily data and extend through February 15, 2013. Inflation compensation is the difference between yields on nominal Treasury securities and Treasury inflation-protected securities (TIPS) of comparable maturities, based on yield curves fitted to off-the-run nominal Treasury securities and on- and off-the-run TIPS. The 5-year measure is adjusted for the effect of indexation lags. 11. Change in real personal consumption expenditures and disposable personal income, 2006–12 NOTE: The data are quarterly and extend through 2012:Q4. SOURCE: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis. Treasury securities has increased 55 basis points since the end of June, while a similar measure of inflation compensation for the period 5 to 10 years ahead has increased about 30 basis points; both measures are within their respective ranges observed in the several years before the recent financial crisis (figure 10). While the increases in these measures could reflect changes in market participants’ expectations of future inflation, they may also have been affected by improved investor risk sentiment and an associated reduction in demand for the relatively greater liquidity of nominal Treasury securities. Consumer spending continued to increase moderately Turning to some important components of final demand, real PCE increased at a moderate annual rate of 2 percent over the second half of 2012, similar to the rate of increase in the first half (figure 11). Household wealth—buoyed by increases in house prices and equity values—moved up over the second half of the year and provided some support for consumer spending (figure 12). In addition, for those households with access to credit, low interest rates spurred spending on motor vehicles and other consumer durables, which increased at an annual rate of 11 percent over the second half of last year. But increases in real wages and salaries were modest over the second half of the year, and overall growth in consumer spending continued to be held back by concerns about the economic outlook and limited access to credit for some households. After rising earlier in the year, consumer sentiment—which reflects household views on their own financial situations as well as broader economic conditions—fell back at the end of the year and stood well below longer- run norms (figure 13). Real disposable personal income (DPI) rose at an annual rate of 3½ percent over the second half of 2012. However, much of this increase was a result of unusually large increases in dividends and employee bonuses, as many firms apparently shifted income disbursements into 2012 in anticipation of an increase in marginal tax rates for high-income households at the beginning of this year. Excluding these special payments, real DPI is estimated to have increased at a modest annual rate of 1¼ percent over the second half of the year, similar to the average pace of increase over the recovery. The surge in dividend and bonus payments also led the personal saving rate to jump from 3.8 percent in the second quarter to 4.7 percent in the fourth quarter (figure 14). In their absence, the saving rate would have likely been little changed over the second half of the year. Households continue to pay down debt and gain access to credit Household debt—the sum of mortgage and consumer debt—edged down further in the third quarter of 2012 as a continued contraction in mortgage debt more than offset a solid expansion in consumer credit. With the reduction in household debt, low levels of most interest rates, and modest income growth, the household debt service ratio— the ratio of required principal and interest payments on outstanding household debt to DPI—decreased further and, at the end of the third quarter, stood at a level last seen in 1983 (figure 15). Consumer credit expanded at an annual rate of about 5¼ percent in the second half of 2012. Nonrevolving credit (mostly auto loans and student loans), which accounts for about two-thirds of total consumer credit outstanding, drove the increase. Revolving consumer credit (primarily credit card lending) was about flat on net. Overall, the increase in nonrevolving consumer credit is consistent with banks’ recent responses to the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS), which indicated that demand had strengthened and standards eased, on net, for auto loans (figure 16).3 3. The SLOOS is available on the Federal Reserve Board’s website at www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/ SnLoanSurvey. 12. Wealth-to-income ratio, 1989–2012 NOTE: The data are quarterly and extend through 2012:Q3. The series is 13. Consumer sentiment indexes, 1999–2013 NOTE: The Conference Board data, indexed to 100 in 1985, are monthly and extend through Jan. 2013. The Mich. survey data, indexed to 100 in 1966, are monthly and extend through a preliminary Feb. 2013 estimate. 14. Personal saving rate, 1989–2012 NOTE: The data are quarterly and extend through 2012:Q4. SOURCE: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis. 15. Household debt service, 1980–2012 NOTE: The data are quarterly and extend through 2012:Q3. Debt service payments consist of estimated required payments on outstanding mortgage and consumer debt. 16. Change in standards and demand for auto loans, 2011–12 NOTE: The data are from a survey generally conducted 4 times per year; the last observation is from the Jan. 2013 survey, which covers 2012:Q4. Each series represents the net percent of surveyed banks that reported a tightening of standards or stronger demand for auto loans over the past 3 months. Changes in interest rates on consumer loans were mixed over the second half of 2012. Interest rates on auto loans declined a bit, as did most measures of the spreads of rates on these loans over yields on Treasury securities of comparable maturity. Interest rates on credit card debt quoted by banks generally declined slightly, while rates observed in credit card offer mailings continued to increase. The housing market recovery gained traction . . . The housing market has continued to recover. Housing starts, sales of new and existing homes, and builder and realtor sentiment all increased over the second half of last year, and residential investment rose at an annual rate of nearly 15 percent. Combined, single- family and multifamily housing starts rose from an average annual rate of 740,000 in the second quarter of last year to 900,000 in the fourth quarter (figure 17). Activity increased most noticeably in the smaller multifamily sector—where starts have nearly reached pre- recession levels—as demand for new housing has apparently shifted toward smaller rental units and away from larger, typically owner- occupied single-family units. . . . as mortgage interest rates reached record lows and house prices rose . . . Mortgage interest rates declined to historically low levels toward the end of 2012—importantly reflecting Federal Reserve policy actions—making housing quite affordable for households with good credit ratings (figure 18). However, the spread between mortgage rates and yields on agency- guaranteed mortgage-backed securities (MBS) remained elevated by historical standards. This unusually wide spread probably reflects still-elevated risk aversion and some capacity constraints among mortgage originators. Overall, refinance activity increased briskly over the second half of 2012—though it was still less than might have been expected, given the level of interest rates—while the pace of mortgage applications for home purchases remained sluggish (figure 19). Recent responses to the SLOOS indicate that banks’ lending standards for residential mortgage loans were little changed over the second half of 2012. House prices, as measured by several national indexes, continued to increase in the second half of 2012. For example, the CoreLogic repeat-sales index rose 3½ percent (not an annual rate) over the last six months of the year to reach its highest level since late 2008 (figure 20). This recent improvement notwithstanding, this measure of house prices remained 27 percent below its peak in early 2006. . . . but the level of new construction remained low, and mortgage delinquencies remained elevated Despite the improvements seen over the second half of 2012, housing starts remained well below the 1960–2000 average of 1.5 million per year, as concerns about the job market and tight mortgage credit for less-credit- worthy households continued to restrain demand for housing. In addition, although the number of vacant homes for sale has declined significantly, the stock of vacant homes held off the market remained quite elevated. Once put on the market, this “shadow” inventory, which likely includes many bank-owned properties, may redirect some demand away from new homes and toward attractively priced existing homes. With home values depressed and unemployment still high, measures of late-stage mortgage delinquency, such as the inventory of properties in foreclosure, remained elevated, keeping high the risk of homes transitioning to vacant bank-owned properties (figure 21). Growth of business investment has slowed since earlier in the recovery After increasing at double-digit rates in 2010 and 2011, business expenditures on equipment and software (E&S) decelerated in 2012 (figure 22). Pent-up demand for capital goods, an important contributor to earlier increases 17. Private housing starts, 1999–2013 NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through January 2013. SOURCE: Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. 18. Mortgage interest rates, 1995–2013 Fixed rate NOTE: The data, which are weekly and extend through February 20, 2013, are contract rates on 30-year mortgages. 19. Mortgage Bankers Association purchase and refinance indexes, 1990–2013 NOTE: The data, which are seasonally adjusted, are a four-week moving average and extend through February 15, 2013. SOURCE: Mortgage Bankers Association. 20. Prices of existing single-family houses, 2002–12 NOTE: The data are monthly and extend into 2012:Q4. Each index has been normalized so that its peak is 100. Both the CoreLogic price index and the FHFA index include purchase transactions only. The S&P/Case-Shiller index reflects all arm's-length sales transactions in selected metropolitan areas. 21. Current prime mortgages becoming delinquent and foreclosure inventory, 2000–12 NOTE: The data for prime mortgages becoming delinquent are monthly and extend through December 2012. The data represent the percentage of mortgages that transition from being current to being at least 30 days delinquent each month. The data for foreclosure inventory are quarterly and extend through 2012:Q3. The shaded bars indicate periods of business recession as defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research. SOURCE: For prime mortgages, LPS Applied Analytics; for foreclosure inventory, Federal Reserve Board staff calculations based on data from Mortgage Bankers Association. in E&S spending, has likely diminished as the recovery has aged. In addition, concerns about possible threats to economic growth and stability from U.S. fiscal policy and the situation in Europe may have contributed to soft investment spending in the middle of last year. As a result, despite a pickup in the pace of gains toward the end of the year, E&S investment increased at an annual rate of 5 percent in the second half of the year, similar to the first-half pace. As for business investment in structures, a sustained recovery has yet to take hold, as high vacancy rates, tight credit for new construction, and low prices for commercial real estate (CRE) are still hampering investment in new buildings. However, in the drilling and mining sector, elevated oil prices and new drilling technologies have kept investment in structures at a relatively high level. Inventory investment remained at a moderate level in the second half of last year, as limited growth in final sales and the uncertain economic environment continued to limit firms’ incentives to accumulate inventories. Census Bureau measures of book-value inventory-to-sales ratios, as well as surveys of private inventory satisfaction and plans, generally suggest that stocks were fairly well aligned with sales at the end of 2012. Corporate earnings growth slowed, but firms’ balance sheets remained strong After having risen 6 percent over the first half of 2012, aggregate operating earnings per share for S&P 500 firms were about flat on a seasonally adjusted basis in the second half of 2012, held down, in part, by weak demand from Europe and some emerging market economies (EMEs). However, the ratio of corporate profits to gross national product in the second half of 2012 hovered around its historical high, and cash flow remained solid. In addition, the ratio of liquid assets to total assets for nonfinancial corporations was close to its highest level in more than 20 years, and the aggregate debt-to-asset ratio remained low by historical standards (figure 23). With corporate credit quality remaining robust and interest rates at historically low levels, nonfinancial firms continued to raise funds at a strong pace in the second half of 2012. Bond issuance by both investment- and speculative- grade nonfinancial firms was extraordinarily strong, although much of the proceeds from bond issuance appeared to be earmarked for the refinancing of existing debt (figure 24). Meanwhile, nonfinancial commercial paper (CP) outstanding was about unchanged. Issuance in the institutional segment of the syndicated leveraged loan market accelerated in the second half of the year, boosted by rapid growth of newly established collateralized loan obligations. Commercial and industrial (C&I) loans outstanding at commercial banking organizations in the United States continued to expand at a brisk pace in the second half of 2012. Moreover, according to the SLOOS, modest net fractions of banks continued to report having eased their lending standards on C&I loans over the second half of the year, and large net fractions of banks indicated having reduced the spread of rates on C&I loans over their cost of funds, largely in response to increased competition from other banks or nonbank lenders (figure 25). Gross public equity issuance by nonfinancial firms slowed a bit in the second half of 2012, held down by a moderate pace of initial public offerings. Meanwhile, data for the third quarter of 2012 indicate that net equity issuance remained deeply negative, as share repurchases and cash-financed mergers by nonfinancial firms remained robust (figure 26). Borrowing conditions for small businesses continued to improve, albeit more gradually than for large firms Borrowing conditions for small businesses continued to improve over the second half of 2012, but as has been the case in recent years, the improvement was more gradual than for larger firms. Moreover, the demand for credit from small firms apparently remained subdued. C&I loans with original amounts 22. Change in real business fixed investment, 2006–12 23. Financial ratios for nonfinancial corporations, 1990–2012 NOTE: The data are annual through 1998, quarterly thereafter, and extend 24. Selected components of net financing for nonfinancial businesses, 2005–12 NOTE: The data for the components except bonds are seasonally adjusted. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Board, flow of funds data. 25. Change in standards and spreads of loan rates over banks' cost of funds for commercial and industrial loans, 1991–2012 NOTE: The data are drawn from a survey generally conducted four times per year; the last observation is from the January 2013 survey, which covers 2012:Q4. Each series represents the net percent of surveyed banks that reported a tightening of standards or increasing spreads of loan rates over the bank's cost of funds for commercial and industrial loans over the past three months. The shaded bars indicate periods of business recession as defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research. 26. Components of net equity issuance, 2006–12 NOTE: Net equity issuance is the difference between equity issued by domestic companies in public or private markets and equity retired through share repurchases, domestic cash-financed mergers, or foreign takeovers of U.S. firms. Equity issuance includes funds invested by private equity partnerships and stock option proceeds. of $1 million or less—a large share of which likely consist of loans to small businesses— rose slightly in the second half of 2012, at about the same rate that prevailed in the first half. Recent readings from the Survey of Terms of Business Lending indicate that the spreads charged by commercial banks on newly originated C&I loans with original amounts less than $1 million, while still quite elevated, continued to decline.4 According to surveys conducted by the National Federation of Independent Business during the second half of 2012, the fraction of small businesses with borrowing needs stayed low. The net percentage of respondents that found credit more difficult to obtain than three months prior edged up, on balance, over this period, as did the net percentage that expected tighter credit conditions over the next three months; both measures remained at relatively high levels in the January survey. Financial conditions in the commercial real estate sector eased but remained relatively tight Financial conditions in the CRE sector continued to ease but remained relatively tight amid weak fundamentals. According to the SLOOS, a modest net fraction of banks reported having eased standards on CRE loans over the second half of last year, and a significant net fraction of banks reported increased demand for such loans. Consistent with these readings, the multiyear contraction in banks’ holdings of CRE loans continued to slow and, indeed, came roughly to a halt as banks’ holdings of CRE loans were about flat over the last quarter of 2012. Issuance of commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) continued to increase over the second half of 2012 from the low levels observed in 2011. Nonetheless, the delinquency rate on loans in CMBS pools remained extremely 4. Data releases for the Survey of Terms of Business Lending are available on the Federal Reserve Board’s website at www.federalreserve.gov/releases/e2/default. htm. high, as some borrowers with five-year loans issued in 2007 were unable to refinance upon the maturity of those loans because of high loan-to-value ratios. While delinquency rates for CRE loans at commercial banks continued to decline, they remained somewhat elevated, especially for construction and land development loans. Budget strains for state and local governments eased, but federal purchases continued to decline Strains on state and local government budgets appear to have lessened some since earlier in the recovery. Although federal grants provided to state governments in the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act have essentially phased out, state and local tax receipts, which have been increasing since 2010, rose moderately further over the second half of last year. Accordingly, after declining at an annual rate of 1½ percent in the first half of last year, real government purchases at the state and local level changed little in the second half (figure 27). Similarly, employment levels at states and municipalities, which had been declining since 2009, changed little, on balance, over the second half of last year. Federal purchases continued to decline over the second half of 2012, reflecting ongoing efforts to reduce the budget deficit and the scaling back of overseas military activities. As measured in the NIPA, real federal expenditures on consumption and gross investment—the part of federal spending included in the calculation of GDP—fell at an annual rate of 3½ percent over the second half of 2012. Real defense spending fell at an annual rate of a little over 6 percent, while nondefense purchases increased at an annual rate of 2 percent. The deficit in the federal unified budget remains high. The budget deficit for fiscal year 2012 was $1.1 trillion, or 7 percent of nominal GDP, down from the deficit recorded in 2011 but still sharply higher than the 27. Change in real government expenditures on consumption and investment, 2006–12 28. Federal receipts and expenditures, 1992–2012 NOTE: The receipts and expenditures data are on a unified-budget basis and are for fiscal years (October through September); gross domestic product (GDP) is for the four quarters ending in Q3. 29. Federal government debt held by the public, 1960–2012 NOTE: The data for debt through 2012 are as of year-end, and the corresponding values for gross domestic product (GDP) are for Q4 at an annual rate. Excludes securities held as investments of federal government accounts. 30. Change in real imports and exports of goods and services, 2007–12 deficits recorded prior to the onset of the last recession. The narrowing of the budget deficit relative to fiscal 2011 reflected an increase in tax revenues that largely stemmed from the gradual increase in economic activity as well as a decline in spending. Despite the rise in tax revenues, the ratio of federal receipts to national income, at 16 percent in fiscal 2012, remained near the low end of the range for this ratio over the past 60 years (figure 28). The ratio of federal outlays to GDP declined but was still high by historical standards, at 23 percent. With deficits still large, federal debt held by the public rose to 73 percent of nominal GDP in the fourth quarter of 2012, 5 percentage points higher than at the end of 2011 (figure 29). Net exports added modestly to real GDP growth Real imports of goods and services contracted at an annual rate of nearly 2 percent over the second half of 2012, held back by the sluggish pace of U.S. demand (figure 30). The decline in imports was fairly broad based across major trading partners and categories of trade. Real exports of goods and services also fell at an annual rate of about 2 percent in the second half despite continued expansion in demand from EMEs. Exports were dragged down by a steep falloff in demand from the euro area and declining export sales to Japan, consistent with weak economic conditions in those areas. In contrast, exports to Canada remained essentially flat. Across the major categories of exports, industrial supplies, automotive products, and agricultural goods contributed to the overall decrease. Overall, real net exports added an estimated 0.1 percentage point to real GDP growth in the second half of 2012, according to the advance estimate of GDP from the Bureau of Economic Analysis, but data received since then suggest a somewhat larger positive contribution. The nominal trade deficit shrank, on net, over the second half of 2012, contributing to the narrowing of the current account deficit to 2¾ percent of GDP in the third quarter (figure 31). The trade deficit as a share of GDP narrowed substantially in late 2008 and early 2009 when U.S. imports dropped sharply, in part reflecting the steep decline in oil prices. Since then, the trade deficit as a share of GDP has remained close to its 2009 level: Although imports recovered from their earlier drop, exports strengthened as well. The current account deficit in the third quarter was financed by strong inflows from foreign official institutions and by foreign private purchases of Treasury securities and equities (figure 32). More-recent data suggest continued strong foreign purchases of Treasury securities and equities in the fourth quarter of 2012. Consistent with improved market sentiment over the third quarter, U.S. investors also increased their holdings of foreign assets, as shown in figure 32. National saving is very low Total U.S. net national saving—that is, the saving of U.S. households, businesses, and governments, net of depreciation charges— remains extremely low by historical standards (figure 33). In the third quarter of last year, net national saving as a percent of nominal GDP was close to zero. The relative flatness of the national saving rate over the past few years reflects the offsetting effects of a narrowing in the federal budget deficit as a share of nominal GDP and a downward movement in the private saving rate. National saving will likely remain low this year, in light of the still-large federal budget deficit. A portion of the decline in federal savings relative to pre-recession levels is cyclical and would be expected to reverse as the economy recovers. If low levels of national saving persist over the longer run, they will likely be associated with both low rates of capital formation and heavy borrowing from abroad, limiting the rise in the standard of living for U.S. residents over time. 31. U.S. trade and current account balances, 2004–12 NOTE: The data are quarterly and extend through 2012:Q3 for the current account and 2012:Q4 for trade. GDP is gross domestic product. 32. U.S. net financial inflows, 2008–12 U.S. private (including banking) Foreign private (including banking) U.S. official Foreign official NOTE: The data are quarterly and extend through 2012:Q3. Negative numbers indicate a balance of payments outflow, generated when U.S. residents, on net, purchase foreign assets or when foreign residents, on net, sell U.S. assets. Therefore, a negative number for “U.S. private” or “U.S. official” indicates an increase in foreign positions. U.S. official flows include the foreign currency acquired when foreign central banks draw on their swap lines with the Federal Reserve. 33. Net saving, 1992–2012 NOTE: The data are quarterly and extend through 2012:Q3. Nonfederal saving is the sum of personal and net business saving and the net saving of state and local governments. GDP is gross domestic product. Interest rates on Treasury securities at selected maturities, 2004–13 NOTE: The data are daily and extend through February 21, 2013. Treasury inflation-protected securities (TIPS) are based on yield curves fitted by Federal Reserve staff to on- and off-the-run TIPS. Expectations regarding the future stance of monetary policy reflected the additional accommodation provided by the Federal Open Market Committee . . . In response to the steps taken by the FOMC to provide additional monetary policy accommodation over the second half of 2012, market participants pushed out the date when they expect the federal funds rate to first rise above its current target range of 0 to ¼ percent. In particular, interest rates on overnight index swaps indicate that investors currently anticipate that the effective federal funds rate will rise above its current target range around the fourth quarter of 2014, roughly four quarters later than they expected at the end of June 2012. Meanwhile, the modal target rate path—the most likely values for future federal funds rates derived from interest rate options—suggests that investors think the rate is most likely to remain in its current range through the first quarter of 2016. In addition, recent readings from the Survey of Primary Dealers conducted by the Open Market Desk at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York suggest that market participants expect the Federal Reserve to hold about $3.75 trillion of Treasury and agency securities at the end of 2014, roughly $1 trillion more than was expected in the middle of 2012.5 . . . and held yields on longer-term Treasury securities and agency mortgage- backed securities near historic lows Yields on nominal and inflation-protected Treasury securities remained near historic lows over the second half of 2012 and into 2013. Yields on longer-term nominal Treasury securities rose, on balance, over this period, while yields on inflation-protected securities fell (figure 34). These changes likely 5. The Survey of Primary Dealers is available on the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s website at www.newyorkfed.org/markets/primarydealer_survey_ questions.html. reflect the effects of additional monetary accommodation, a substantial improvement in sentiment regarding the crisis in Europe that reduced demand for the relative safety and liquidity of nominal Treasury securities, and increases in the prices of key commodities since the end of June 2012. On balance, yields on 5-, 10-, and 30-year nominal Treasury securities increased roughly 15 basis points, 30 basis points, and 40 basis points, respectively, from their levels at the end of June 2012, while yields on 5- and 10-year inflation-protected securities decreased roughly 55 basis points and 15 basis points, respectively. Treasury auctions generally continued to be well received by investors, and the Desk’s outright purchases and sales of Treasury securities did not appear to have a material adverse effect on liquidity or market functioning. Yields on agency MBS were little changed, on net, over the second half of 2012 and into 2013. They fell sharply following the FOMC’s announcement of additional agency MBS purchases in September but retraced over subsequent months. Spreads of yields on agency MBS over yields on nominal Treasury securities narrowed, largely reflecting the effects of the additional monetary accommodation (figure 35). The Desk’s outright purchases of agency MBS did not appear to have a material adverse effect on liquidity or market functioning, although implied financing rates for some securities in the MBS dollar roll market declined in the second half of 2012, and the Desk responded by postponing settlement of some purchases using dollar roll transactions.6 6. Dollar roll transactions consist of a purchase or sale of agency MBS with the simultaneous agreement to sell or purchase substantially similar securities on a specified future date. The Committee directs the Desk to engage in these transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS purchases. 35. Current-coupon yield and spread for agency- guaranteed mortgage-backed securities, 2009–13 NOTE: The data are daily and extend through February 21, 2013. Yield shown is for the Fannie Mae 30-year currrent coupon, the coupon rate at which new mortgage-backed securities would be priced at par, or face, value. Spread shown is to the average of the 5- and 10-year nominal Treasury yields. 36. Spreads of corporate bond yields over comparable off-the-run Treasury yields, by securities rating, 1997–2013 NOTE: The data are daily and extend through February 21, 2013. The spreads shown are the yields on 10-year bonds less the 10-year Treasury yield. SOURCE: Derived from smoothed corporate yield curves using Merrill 37. S&P 500 index, 1995–2013 NOTE: The data are daily and extend through February 21, 2013. SOURCE: Standard & Poor's. Yields on corporate bonds reached record lows, and equity prices increased Yields on investment- and speculative-grade bonds reached record lows in the second half of 2012 and early 2013, respectively, partly reflecting the effects of the FOMC’s additional monetary policy accommodation and increased investor appetite for bearing risk. Spreads to comparable-maturity Treasury securities also narrowed substantially but remained above the narrowest levels that they reached prior to the financial crisis (figure 36). Prices in the secondary market for syndicated leveraged loans have increased, on balance, since the middle of 2012. Broad equity price indexes have increased about 10 percent since the end of June 2012, boosted by the same factors that contributed to the narrowing in bond spreads (figure 37). Nevertheless, the spread between the 12-month forward earnings–price ratio for the S&P 500 and a long-run real Treasury yield—a rough gauge of the equity risk premium—remained at the high end of its historical range (figure 38). Implied volatility for the S&P 500 index, as calculated from option prices, spiked at times but is currently near the bottom end of the range it has occupied since the onset of the financial crisis (figure 39). Conditions in short-term dollar funding markets improved some in the third quarter and remained stable thereafter Measures of stress in unsecured dollar funding markets eased somewhat in the third quarter of 2012 and remained stable at relatively low levels thereafter, reflecting improved sentiment regarding the crisis in Europe. For example, the average maturity of unsecured financial CP issued by institutions with European parents increased, on net, to around the same length as such CP issued by institutions with U.S. parents. Signs of stress were largely absent in secured short-term dollar funding markets. In the market for repurchase agreements (repos), bid-asked spreads and haircuts for most collateral types have changed little since the middle of 2012. However, repo rates continued to edge up over the second half of 2012, likely reflecting in part the financing of the increase in dealers’ inventories of shorter-term Treasury securities that resulted from the maturity extension program (MEP). Following year- end, repo rates fell back as the MEP came to an end and the level of reserve balances began to increase. In asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP) markets, volumes outstanding declined a bit for programs with European and U.S. sponsors, while spreads on ABCP with European bank sponsors remained slightly above those on ABCP with U.S. bank sponsors. Year-end pressures in short-term funding markets were generally modest and roughly in line with the experiences during other years since the financial crisis. Market sentiment toward the banking industry improved as the profitability of banks increased Market sentiment toward the banking industry improved in the second half of 2012, reportedly driven in large part by perceptions of reduced downside risks stemming from the European crisis. Equity prices for bank holding companies (BHCs) increased, outpacing the increases in broad equity price indexes, and BHC credit default swap (CDS) spreads declined (figure 40). The profitability of BHCs increased in the second half of 2012 but continued to run well below the levels that prevailed before the financial crisis (figure 41). Measures of asset quality generally improved further, as delinquency and charge-off rates decreased for almost all major loan categories, although the recent improvement in delinquency rates for consumer credit in part reflects a compositional shift of credit supply toward higher-credit- quality borrowers. Loan loss provisions were flat at around the slightly elevated levels seen prior to the crisis, though they continued to be outpaced by charge-offs. Regulatory 38. Real long-run Treasury yield and 12-month forward earnings–price ratio for the S&P 500, 1995–2013 Expected real yield on 10-year Treasury NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through January 2013. The expected real yield on 10-year Treasury is defined as the off-the-run 10-year Treasury yield less the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia's 10-year expected inflation. NOTE: The data are weekly and extend through the week ending February 15, 2013. The series shown—the VIX—is the implied 30-day volatility of the S&P 500 stock price index as calculated from a weighted average of options prices. 40. Spreads on credit default swaps for selected U.S. banking organizations, 2007–13 Large bank holding companies NOTE: The data are daily and extend through February 21, 2013. Median spreads for six large bank holding companies and nine other banks. 41. Profitability of bank holding companies, 1997–2012 NOTE: The data, which are seasonally adjusted, are quarterly and extend capital ratios remained at high levels based on current standards, but the implementation of generally more stringent Basel III capital requirements will likely lead to some decline in reported regulatory capital ratios at the largest banks. Overall, banks remain well funded with deposits, and their reliance on short-term wholesale funding stayed near its low levels seen in recent quarters. The expiration of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation’s Transaction Account Guarantee program on December 31, 2012, does not appear to have caused any significant change in the availability of deposit funding for banks. Credit provided by commercial banking organizations in the United States increased in the second half of 2012 at about the same moderate pace as in the first half of the year. Core loans—the sum of C&I loans, real estate loans, and consumer loans—expanded modestly, with strong growth in C&I loans offsetting weakness in real estate and credit card loans (figure 42). Banks’ holdings of securities continued to rise moderately overall, as strong growth in holdings of Treasury and municipal securities more than offset modest declines in holdings of agency MBS. Despite continued improvements in market conditions, risks to the stability of financial markets remain While conditions in short-term dollar funding markets have improved, these markets remain vulnerable to potential stresses. Money market funds (MMFs) have sharply reduced their overall exposures to Europe since the middle of 2011, but prime fund exposures to Europe continue to be substantial. MMFs also remain susceptible to the risk of investor runs due to structural vulnerabilities posed by the rounding of net asset values and the absence of loss-absorbing capital.7 7. In November 2012, the Financial Stability Oversight Council proposed recommendations for structural reforms of U.S. MMFs to reduce their vulnerability to runs and mitigate associated risks to the financial system. Dealer firms have reduced their wholesale short-term funding ratios and have increased their liquidity buffers in recent years, but they still heavily rely on wholesale short-term funding. As a result, they remain susceptible to swings in market confidence and a possible resurgence of anxiety regarding counterparty credit risk. Respondents to the Senior Credit Officer Opinion Survey on Dealer Financing Terms indicated that credit terms applicable to important classes of counterparties were little changed over the second half of 2012.8 Dealers reported increased demand for funding of securitized products and indicated that the use of financial leverage among trading real estate investment trusts, or REITs, had increased somewhat. However, respondents continued to note an increase in the amount of resources and attention devoted to the management of concentrated exposures to central counterparties and other financial utilities as well as, to a smaller extent, dealers and other financial intermediaries. With prospective returns on safe assets remaining low, some financial market participants appeared willing to take on more duration and credit risk to boost returns. The pace of speculative-grade corporate bond issuance has been rapid in recent months, and while most of this issuance appears to have been earmarked for the refinancing of existing debt, there has also been an increase in debt to facilitate transactions involving significant risks. In particular, in bonds issued to finance private equity transactions, there has been a reemergence of payment-in-kind options that permit the issuer to increase the face value of debt in lieu of a cash interest payment, and anecdotal reports indicate that bond covenants are becoming less restrictive. Similarly, issuance of bank loans to finance dividend recapitalization deals as well as covenant-lite loans was robust over the second half of the 8. The Senior Credit Officer Opinion Survey on Dealer Financing Terms is available on the Federal Reserve Board’s website at www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/ releases/scoos.htm. 42. Change in commercial and industrial loans and core loans, 1990–2012 NOTE: The data, which are seasonally adjusted, are quarterly and extend through 2012:Q4. Core loans consist of commercial and industrial loans, real estate loans, and consumer loans. Data have been adjusted for banks' implementation of certain accounting rule changes (including the Financial Accounting Standards Board's Statements of Financial Accounting Standards Nos. 166 and 167) and for the effects of large nonbank institutions converting to commercial banks or merging with a commercial bank. Table 1. Selected components of the Federal Reserve balance sheet, 2012–13 Selected assets Selected liabilities Note: LLC is a limited liability company. 1. The Federal Reserve has extended credit to several LLCs in conjunction with efforts to support critical institutions. Maiden Lane LLC was formed to acquire certain assets of The Bear Stearns Companies, Inc. Maiden Lane II LLC was formed to purchase residential mortgage-backed securities from the U.S. securities lending reinvestment portfolio of subsidiaries of American International Group, Inc. (AIG). Maiden Lane III LLC was formed to purchase multisector collateralized debt obligations on which the Financial Products group of AIG had written credit default swap contracts. 2. Includes only MBS purchases that have already settled. Source: Federal Reserve Board, Statistical Release H.4.1, “Factors Affecting Reserve Balances of Depository Institutions and Condition Statement of Federal Reserve Banks.” year. (For a discussion of regulatory steps taken related to financial stability, see the box “The Federal Reserve’s Actions to Foster Financial Stability.”) Federal Reserve assets increased, and the average maturity of its Treasury holdings lengthened . . . Total assets of the Federal Reserve increased to $3,097 billion as of February 20, 2013, $231 billion more than at the end of June 2012 (table 1). The increase primarily reflects growth in Federal Reserve holdings of Treasury securities and agency MBS as a result of the purchase programs initiated at the September 2012 and December 2012 FOMC meetings. As of February 20, 2013, the par value of Treasury securities and agency MBS held by the Federal Reserve had increased $70 billion and $178 billion, respectively, since the end of June 2012. The composition of Treasury securities holdings also changed over the second half of 2012 as a result of the continuation of the MEP, which was announced at the June 2012 FOMC meeting. Under this program, between July and December, the Desk purchased $267 billion in Treasury securities with remaining maturities of 6 to 30 years and sold or redeemed an equal par value of Treasury securities with maturities of 3 years or less. As a result, the average maturity of the Federal Reserve’s Treasury holdings increased 1.7 years over the second half of 2012 and into 2013 and, as of February 2013, stood at 10.5 years. . . . while exposure to facilities established during the crisis continued to wind down In the second half of 2012, the Federal Reserve continued to reduce its exposure to facilities established during the financial crisis to support specific institutions. The portfolio holdings of Maiden Lane LLC and Maiden Lane III LLC—entities that were created during the crisis to acquire certain assets from The Bear Stearns Companies, Inc., and American International Group, Inc., to avoid the disorderly failures of those institutions— declined $14 billion to approximately $1 billion, primarily reflecting the sale of the remaining securities in Maiden Lane III LLC that was announced in August 2012. These sales resulted in a net gain of $6.6 billion for the benefit of the U.S. public. The Federal Reserve’s loans to Maiden Lane LLC and Maiden Lane III LLC had been fully repaid, with interest, as of June 2012. Loans outstanding under the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) decreased $4 billion to under $1 billion because of prepayments and maturities of TALF loans. With accumulated fees collected through TALF exceeding the amount of TALF loans outstanding, the Federal Reserve and the Treasury agreed in January to end the backstop for TALF provided by the Troubled Asset Relief Program. The improvement in offshore U.S. dollar funding markets over the second half of 2012 led to a decline in the outstanding amount of dollars provided through the temporary U.S. dollar liquidity swap arrangements with other central banks. As of February 20, 2013, draws on the liquidity swap lines were $5 billion, down from $27 billion at the end of June 2012. On December 13, 2012, the Federal Reserve announced the extension of these arrangements through February 1, 2014. On the liability side of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet, deposits held by depository institutions increased $176 billion since June 2012, while Federal Reserve notes in circulation rose $60 billion, reflecting solid demand both at home and abroad. M2 has increased at an annual rate of about 8 percent since June 2012. Holdings of M2 assets, including its largest component, liquid deposits, remain elevated relative to what would have been expected based on historical relationships with nominal income and interest rates, likely due to investors’ continued preference to hold safe and liquid assets. As part of its ongoing program to ensure the readiness of tools to manage reserves, the Federal Reserve conducted a series of small- value reverse repurchase transactions using all eligible collateral types with its expanded list of counterparties, as well as a few small- value repurchase agreements with primary dealers. In the same vein, the Federal Reserve continued to offer small-value term deposits through the Term Deposit Facility to provide eligible institutions with an opportunity to become familiar with term deposit operations. Foreign financial market stresses abated . . . Since mid-July, global financial market conditions have improved, on balance, in part reflecting reduced fears of a significant worsening of the European fiscal and financial crisis. Market sentiment was bolstered by a new European Central Bank (ECB) framework for purchases of sovereign debt known as Outright Monetary Transactions (OMT), agreements on continued official- sector support for Greece, progress by Spain in recapitalizing its troubled banks, and some steps toward fiscal and financial integration in Europe. Nevertheless, financial market stresses in Europe remained elevated, and policymakers still face significant challenges (see the box “An Update on the European Fiscal and Banking Crisis”). The Federal Reserve continued to take actions in the second half of 2012 and early 2013 to meet its financial stability responsibilities . Although much remains to be done, the Federal Reserve has implemented regulatory reforms to strengthen the U .S . financial system, and it has taken further steps to gather information from the supervision of large banks, market reports, and other economic and financial sources to assess threats to financial stability . The Federal Reserve also has continued to work closely with its domestic regulatory counterparts and has taken actions to increase the resilience of the international financial regulatory architecture . For example, as mandated by the Dodd–Frank Act, the new supervisory framework for systemically important financial market utilities (FMUs)—that is, those entities that provide the infrastructure to make payments and clear and settle financial transactions—has continued to take shape . In July 2012, the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) designated eight FMUs as systemically important and thus subject to enhanced risk- management standards . On July 30, the Federal Reserve Board approved a final rule establishing enhanced risk-management standards for designated FMUs supervised by the Federal Reserve . The rule also establishes processes to review and consult with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) on any proposed changes to the rules, procedures, or operations of certain designated FMUs that could materially affect the nature or level of their risk . community’s efforts to improve banking regulation has been the development of the Basel III capital reforms . In June 2012, the Federal Reserve Board and the other U .S . banking agencies issued a proposal to amend the U .S . bank capital rules to implement these reforms . The Basel III reforms will raise the quantity of capital that must be held by U .S . banking firms, improve the quality of regulatory capital of those firms, and strengthen the risk-weight framework of U .S . bank capital rules . Consistent with the requirements of the Dodd– Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 (Dodd–Frank Act), the Board has also proposed rules to strengthen the oversight of the U .S . operations of foreign banks . Under the Board’s December 2012 proposal, foreign banking organizations (FBOs) with a large U .S . presence would be required to create an intermediate holding company (IHC) over their U .S . subsidiaries, which would help facilitate consistent and enhanced supervision and regulation of the U .S . operations of these foreign banks . An IHC of a foreign bank would be required to meet the same U .S . risk-based capital and leverage rules as a U .S . bank holding company (BHC) . In addition, IHCs and the U .S . branches and agencies of foreign banks with a large U .S . presence would need to meet liquidity requirements similar to those imposed on U .S . BHCs . Progress in regulatory reform outside of the traditional banking sector has been notable as well . The FSOC has also continued to make progress in its work to designate systemically important nonbank financial companies for consolidated supervision by the Federal Reserve . Relying primarily on data from publicly available reports, the FSOC is evaluating the potential systemic importance of a number of nonbank firms that meet the quantitative criteria for a first-stage review; to date, it has concluded that some firms warranted further consideration and has advanced them to the third and final stage of the determination process . Meanwhile, the International Association of Insurance Supervisors, under the oversight of the Financial Stability Board, has continued to move forward on crafting a methodology to identify global systemically important insurers and developing policy measures that would be applicable to those institutions . In addition, efforts to increase the resilience of “shadow banking,” which refers to credit intermediation that occurs at least partly outside of the traditional banking system, are continuing . In november 2012, the FSOC proposed recommendations for structural reforms of U .S . money market funds to reduce their vulnerability to runs and mitigate associated risks to the financial system . Another set of reforms has been aimed at the triparty repurchase agreement markets, including efforts by the Federal Reserve to reduce the vulnerabilities created by the large amounts of intraday credit provided by clearing banks in these markets . International regulatory groups have also been addressing the financial stability risks of shadow banking . The Federal Reserve has continued to work to embed its supervisory practices within a broader macroprudential framework . Annual stress tests, which assess the internal capital planning processes and capital adequacy of the largest BHCs, continue to be an important element in its strengthened, cross-firm supervisory approach . The latest Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR 2013), which covers the 18 largest BHCs (and is being conducted in a modified form for 11 other large BHCs), is now under way . In October 2012, the Board published final stress-testing rules under the Dodd–Frank Act, and it released the economic and financial market stress scenarios for CCAR 2013 in november .1 CCAR 2013 results will be released in March of this year . The Federal Reserve has also been working to improve the resolvability of the largest, most complex banking firms . The Dodd–Frank Act created the Orderly Liquidation Authority (OLA) to improve the prospects for an orderly liquidation of a systemic financial firm and requires that all large BHCs submit resolution plans to their supervisors . The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) has been developing a single-point-of-entry strategy for resolving systemic financial firms under OLA, and the Federal Reserve, working closely with the FDIC, has been carefully reviewing the resolution plans (the so-called living wills) submitted in the summer and fall of 2012 by the largest and most complex BHCs and FBOs . in July 2011, the Federal Reserve has continued 1 . Information on the Dodd–Frank Act stress tests and CCAR are available on the Federal Reserve Board’s website at www .federalreserve .gov/bankinforeg/stress- tests-capital-planning .htm . to work with the SEC and the CFTC to develop and implement effective supervisory practices and techniques for designated FMUs, including appropriate information-sharing arrangements and Federal Reserve participation in SEC and CFTC examinations of designated FMUs . The Federal Reserve has continued to pursue an active program of research and data collection, often in conjunction with other U .S . and foreign regulators and supervisors, and to work on developing a framework and infrastructure for monitoring risks to financial stability . It continues to regularly monitor a variety of items that measure key financial vulnerabilities, such as leverage, maturity mismatch, interconnectedness, and complexity of financial institutions, markets, and products . In a context of adverse shocks, such vulnerabilities could lead to fire sales and an adverse feedback loop with credit availability, which could, in turn, inflict harm on the real economy . The Federal Reserve pays special attention to developments at the largest, most complex financial firms, using both information gathered through supervision and indicators of financial conditions and systemic risk from financial markets . It has been analyzing the consequences for firms and markets resulting from the ongoing strains in European financial markets as well as those associated with the fiscal situation in the United States . Another issue that the Federal Reserve is monitoring closely is the potential incentive for some investors and institutions to take on excessive risk—for example, by increasing leverage, credit risk, and duration risk—in an attempt to reach for yield in a sustained low interest rate environment . Moreover, efforts are ongoing, both at the Federal Reserve and elsewhere, to evaluate and develop new macroprudential tools that could help limit buildups of systemic risk or increase the resilience of financial institutions and markets to potential adverse shocks . In the second half of 2012, European policymakers stepped up efforts to support vulnerable euro-area economies, strengthen domestic public finances and banking systems, and reinforce the monetary union . As a result, European financial stresses have moderated over the past several months . nevertheless, they remain elevated, and European policymakers still face significant challenges as they seek to improve fiscal positions, implement growth-augmenting structural reforms, and bolster regional integration in a difficult economic environment . A key turning point in the euro-area crisis occurred in late July, when Mario Draghi, the European Central Bank (ECB) president, stated, “Within our mandate, the ECB is ready to do whatever it takes to preserve the euro .”1 The ECB subsequently unveiled a framework for Outright Monetary Transactions (OMT) to address distortions in euro-area government bond markets that undermine the transmission of monetary policy . Under certain conditions, the ECB can purchase potentially unlimited amounts of government bonds .2 To date, the ECB has not purchased any bonds under the OMT framework . nevertheless, the announcement of the framework has mitigated investors’ concerns about the adequacy of financial backstops for the Italian and Spanish governments and, more generally, about the integrity of the euro area . vulnerable euro-area countries have made progress in strengthening their banking systems and public finances in recent months . The governments of Ireland and Portugal have been generally fulfilling their policy commitments under their official financial assistance programs . In Spain, the government secured euro-area official approval and financing for its bank restructuring and recapitalization plans . In Greece, the government reinvigorated its long-stalled austerity and reform initiatives . In response, European authorities resumed financial assistance to the Greek government and took steps to address Greece’s public debt burden, including easing the terms of euro-area official financing and funding a discounted buyback of roughly €30 billion in privately held Greek government debt . More generally, official financial assistance is continuing to provide vulnerable countries with breathing room to make the difficult adjustments needed to resolve their crises . European governments have also made some progress toward a European banking union . After protracted negotiations, European leaders agreed in December on key details of a single supervisory mechanism (SSM) for European banks with the ECB at its center . The SSM is expected to be established sometime this spring and should enter into force in early 2014 . The ECB will directly supervise large euro-area banks and will be able to assume (from national authorities) supervision of any euro-area bank when necessary to ensure consistent application of high supervisory standards . Establishment of the SSM is viewed as a necessary precondition for euro-area governments to share more directly the fiscal burden of resolving national banking crises . In addition, European governments recently set objectives to accelerate the harmonization of national policy frameworks for bank resolution and deposit insurance and, further down the road, to create a single mechanism for bank resolution and recovery . 2 . The ECB’s purchases will focus on government bonds with maturities of one to three years . The ECB will have full discretion over these purchases . A necessary condition for ECB purchases is that a government request a full or precautionary financial assistance program from the European Financial Stability Facility or the European Stability Mechanism . A government that already has such a program must regain market access . In addition, governments must fulfill their policy commitments under their programs and the euro-area governance framework . In part because of the positive developments highlighted previously, financial stresses facing vulnerable European governments and banks— though still elevated—moderated substantially in the second half of 2012 and early 2013 . Sovereign yields declined significantly even as the Italian and Spanish governments issued substantial amounts of debt . In addition, the Irish and Portuguese governments began returning to bond markets; each conducted a limited, yet successful, sale of bonds in January . Reduced concerns about the European crisis contributed to an easing of funding conditions for European banks. Euro-area banks have relied somewhat less on ECB funding in recent months, and use of central bank dollar liquidity swap lines declined significantly. Reflecting market views of the decreased risk of default, CDS premiums on the debt of many large banks in Europe dropped significantly, on net, especially for Italy and Spain, and euro-area bank stocks increased about 30 percent since mid-2012 (figure 43). As risk sentiment improved, foreign equity indexes rose significantly: Over the second half of 2012 and into early 2013, equity indexes increased about 10 percent for the United Kingdom and Canada, about 15 percent in the euro area, and about 25 percent in Japan; equity indexes in EMEs also moved up across the board, as shown in figure 43. Likewise, yields on 10-year government bonds in many countries increased moderately, though Japanese yields remained below 1 percent. Spreads of peripheral European sovereign yields over German bond yields of comparable maturity declined significantly as overall euro-area financial strains abated (figure 44). Corporate credit spreads also declined, and bond issuance picked up. The U.S. dollar depreciated nearly 1 percent against a broad set of currencies over the second half of 2012 and into early 2013 (figure 45). Some of this depreciation reflected a reversal of flight-to-safety flows, in part stemming from the reduction in European financial stress. Indeed, the dollar depreciated 4 percent against the euro. In contrast, the dollar appreciated 17 percent against the Japanese yen. Most of this rise came in recent months, as Shinzo Abe, the newly elected prime minister of Japan, called for the Bank of Japan to employ “unlimited easing” of monetary policy to overcome deflation. 43. Equity indexes for selected foreign economies, 2009–13 Emerging markets NOTE: The data are daily. The last observation for each series is February 20, 2013. Emerging markets are Brazil, Chile, China, Colombia, Czech Republic, Egypt, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, Peru, the Philippines, Poland, Russia, South Africa, South Korea, Taiwan, Thailand, and Turkey. 44. Government debt spreads for peripheral European economies, 2009–13 NOTE: The data are weekly. The last observation for each series is February 15, 2013. The spreads shown are the yields on 10-year bonds less the 10-year German bond yield. 45. U.S. dollar exchange rate against broad index and selected major currencies, 2010–13 NOTE: The data, which are in foreign currency units per dollar, are daily. The last observation for each series is February 21, 2013. 46. Real gross domestic product growth in selected advanced foreign economies, 2010–12 NOTE: The data are quarterly and extend through 2012:Q3 for Canada and . . . but economic activity in the advanced foreign economies continued to weaken . . . Despite the easing of financial stresses in the euro area and some improvement in global financial markets, activity in the advanced foreign economies (AFEs) continued to lose steam in the second half of 2012 (figure 46). The euro area fell further into recession, as fiscal austerity, rising unemployment, and depressed confidence restrained spending, especially in the countries at the center of the crisis. Real GDP also contracted in Japan, reflecting plummeting exports. In the United Kingdom, real GDP growth resumed in the third quarter, partly thanks to a temporary boost to demand from the London Olympics, but contracted again in the fourth quarter. Canadian real GDP growth remained positive but also weakened, largely owing to lower external demand. Survey indicators suggest that conditions in the AFEs improved only marginally around the turn of the year. Amid this weakness in economic activity and limited pressures from commodity prices, inflation readings for most AFEs remained contained. Several foreign central banks expanded their balance sheets further and took other actions to support their economies (figure 47). In addition to its introduction of the OMT, the ECB lowered its main policy rate. The Bank of England completed its latest round of asset purchases, bringing its holdings to £375 billion, and began the implementation of its Funding for Lending Scheme, designed to boost lending to households and firms. The Bank of Japan took a number of steps. It introduced a new Stimulating Bank Lending Facility in October and raised its inflation target from 1 percent to 2 percent in January. In addition, it increased the size of its Asset Purchase Program by ¥30 trillion, to ¥101 trillion, by the end of 2013 and announced that purchases would be open ended beginning in 2014. . . . even as economic growth stabilized in emerging market economies After slowing earlier in the year, in part because of headwinds associated with Europe’s troubles, economic growth in EMEs stabilized in the third quarter and appeared to pick up in the fourth. This modest pickup in economic activity in the face of continued weakness in exports to advanced economies was supported by monetary and fiscal policy stimulus. In China, following slower growth in the first half of 2012, stimulus measures helped boost the pace of real GDP growth in the second half of the year. Improved economic conditions in China also provided a lift to other emerging Asian economies. GDP accelerated in Hong Kong and Taiwan in the third quarter; in the fourth quarter, exports and purchasing managers indexes moved higher in most of the region, and GDP growth rebounded in a number of economies. After stagnating for about a year, economic activity in Brazil picked up in the third quarter to a still-lackluster pace of 2½ percent. Indicators for the fourth quarter suggest a further modest pickup, supported by accommodative policies. In contrast, GDP growth in Mexico continued to fall in the third quarter as the growth of U.S. manufacturing production slowed; however, Mexican growth picked up to 3 percent in the fourth quarter, boosted by services and the volatile agricultural sector. Despite occasional spikes in food prices, inflation in most emerging Asian economies remained well contained as moderate output growth limited broader price pressures. India was a notable exception, with 12-month inflation around 10 percent in recent months. In some Latin American economies, increases in food prices had a greater effect on inflation than in Asia, leading to 12-month price increases of around 5½ percent in Brazil and around 4¼ percent in Mexico over the second half of last year. 47. Central bank assets in selected advanced economies, 2008–12 NOTE: The data are quarterly and extend through 2012:Q3 for the euro area To promote the objectives given to it by the Congress, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) provided additional monetary accommodation at its September 2012 and December 2012 meetings, by both strengthening its forward guidance regarding the federal funds rate and initiating additional asset purchases. As discussed in Part 1, incoming economic data throughout the second half of 2012 and into 2013 indicated that economic activity was expanding at a moderate pace. Employment gains were modest, and although the unemployment rate declined somewhat over the period, it remained elevated relative to levels that almost all members of the FOMC viewed as consistent with the Committee’s dual mandate. Inflation remained subdued, apart from some temporary variations that largely reflected fluctuations in commodities prices. Members generally attached an unusually high level of uncertainty to their assessments of the economic outlook. Moreover, they continued to judge that the risks to economic growth were tilted to the downside because of strains in financial markets stemming from the sovereign debt and banking situation in Europe, as well as the potential for a significant slowdown in global economic growth and for a sharper-than-anticipated fiscal contraction in the United States. With longer-term inflation expectations stable and still-considerable slack in resource markets, most members anticipated that inflation over the medium term would run at or below the Committee’s longer-run goal of 2 percent. Accordingly, to promote the FOMC’s objectives of maximum employment and price stability, the Committee maintained a target range for the federal funds rate of 0 to ¼ percent throughout the second half of 2012 and provided additional monetary accommodation at its September and December meetings, by both strengthening its forward guidance regarding the federal funds rate and initiating additional purchases of longer-term securities (figure 48). The Committee also completed at year-end the continuation of the program to extend the average maturity of its holdings 48. Selected interest rates, 2008–13 NOTE: The data are daily and extend through February 21, 2013. The 2-year and 10-year Treasury rates are the constant-maturity yields based on the most actively traded securities. The dates on the horizontal axis are those of regularly scheduled Federal Open Market Committee meetings. of Treasury securities that was announced in June 2012 and continued its policy of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency-guaranteed mortgage-backed securities (MBS) into agency MBS. At the September 12–13 meeting, the Committee agreed that the outlook called for additional monetary accommodation, and that such accommodation should be provided by both strengthening its forward guidance regarding the federal funds rate and initiating additional purchases of agency MBS at a pace of $40 billion per month. Along with the ongoing purchases of $45 billion per month of longer-term Treasury securities under the maturity extension program announced in June, these purchases increased the Committee’s holdings of longer-term securities by about $85 billion each month through the end of the year. These actions were taken to put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, support mortgage markets, and help make broader financial conditions more accommodative (see the box “Efficacy and Costs of Large-Scale Asset Purchases”). The Committee agreed that it would closely monitor incoming information on economic and financial developments in coming months, and that if the outlook for the labor market did not improve substantially, it would continue its purchases of agency MBS, undertake additional asset purchases, and employ its other policy tools as appropriate until such improvement is achieved in a context of price stability. The Committee also agreed that in determining the size, pace, and composition of its asset purchases, it would, as always, take appropriate account of the likely efficacy and costs of such purchases. This flexible approach was seen as allowing the Committee to tailor its policy over time in response to incoming information while clarifying its intention to improve labor market conditions, thereby enhancing the effectiveness of the action by helping to bolster business and consumer confidence. The Committee also modified its forward guidance regarding the federal funds rate at the September meeting, noting that exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate were likely to be warranted at least through mid- 2015, longer than had been indicated in previous FOMC statements. Moreover, the Committee stated its expectation that a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy would remain appropriate for a considerable time after the economic recovery strengthens. The new language was meant to clarify that the Committee’s anticipation that exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate were likely to be warranted at least through mid-2015 did not reflect an expectation that the economy would remain weak, but rather reflected the Committee’s determination to support a stronger economic recovery. At the December 11–12 meeting, members judged that continued provision of monetary accommodation was warranted in order to support further progress toward the Committee’s goals of maximum employment and price stability. The Committee judged that, following the completion of the maturity extension program at the end of the year, such accommodation should be provided in part by continuing to purchase agency MBS at a pace of $40 billion per month and by purchasing longer-term Treasury securities at a pace initially set at $45 billion per month. The Committee also decided that, starting in January, it would resume rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction. With regard to its forward rate guidance, the Committee decided to indicate in the statement that it expects the highly accommodative stance of monetary policy to remain appropriate for a considerable time after the asset purchase program ends and the economic recovery strengthens. In addition, it replaced the date-based guidance for the federal funds rate with numerical thresholds linked to the unemployment rate and projected inflation. In order to provide additional monetary stimulus when short-term interest rates are near zero, the Federal Reserve has undertaken a series of large- scale asset purchase (LSAP) programs . Between late 2008 and early 2010, the Federal Reserve purchased approximately $1 .7 trillion in longer-term Treasury securities, agency debt, and agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) . From late 2010 to mid-2011, a second round of LSAPs was implemented, consisting of purchases of $600 billion in longer-term Treasury securities . Between September 2011 and the end of 2012, the Federal Reserve implemented the maturity extension program and its continuation, under which it purchased approximately $700 billion in longer- term Treasury securities and sold or allowed to run off an equal amount of shorter-term Treasury securities . And in September and December 2012, the Federal Reserve announced flow-based purchases of agency MBS and longer-term Treasury securities at initial paces of $40 billion and $45 billion per month, respectively . These purchases were undertaken in order to put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, support mortgage markets, and help to make broader financial conditions more accommodative, thereby supporting the economic recovery . One mechanism through which asset purchases can affect financial conditions is the “portfolio balance channel,” which is based on the premise that different financial assets may be reasonably close but imperfect substitutes in investors’ portfolios . This assumption implies that changes in the supplies of various assets available to private investors may affect the prices or yields of those assets and the prices of assets that may be reasonably close substitutes . As a result, the Federal Reserve’s asset purchases can push up the prices and lower the yields on the securities purchased and influence other asset prices as well . As investors further rebalance their portfolios, overall financial conditions should ease more generally, stimulating economic activity through channels similar to those for conventional monetary policy . In addition, asset purchases could also signal that the central bank intends to pursue a more accommodative policy stance than previously thought, thereby lowering investor expectations about the future path of the federal funds rate and putting additional downward pressure on longer-term yields . significantly lowered longer-term Treasury yields .1 More important, the effects of LSAPs do not seem to be restricted to Treasury yields . In particular, LSAPs have been found to be associated with significant declines in MBS yields and corporate bond yields as well as with increases in equity prices . Continued on next page 1 . For a selective list of references regarding the effect of the first LSAP, see the box “The Effects of Federal Reserve Asset Purchases” in Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2011), Monetary Policy Report to the Congress (Washington: Board of Governors, March), www . federalreserve .gov/monetarypolicy/mpr_20110301_part2 .htm . For additional references, including those that analyze the effect of the second LSAP as well as the maturity extension program, see, for example, Stefania D’Amico, William English, David López-Salido, and Edward nelson (2012), “The Federal Reserve’s Large-Scale Asset Purchase Programmes: Rationale and Effects,” Economic Journal, vol . 122 (november), pp . F415–45; Arvind Krishnamurthy and Annette vissing-Jorgensen (2011), “The Effects of Quantitative Easing on Interest Rates: Channels and Implications for Policy,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, pp . 215–65; Canlin Li and Min Wei (2012), “Term Structure Modelling with Supply Factors and the Federal Reserve’s Large Scale Asset Purchase Programs,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2012-37 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May), www .federalreserve . gov/pubs/feds/2012/201237/201237pap .pdf; and references in those studies . For work that specifically emphasizes the signaling channel of LSAPs, see, for example, Michael D . Bauer and Glenn D . Rudebusch (2012), “The Signaling Channel for Federal Reserve Bond Purchases,” Working Paper Series 2011-21 (San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, August), www .frbsf .org/publications/economics/ papers/2011/wp11-21bk .pdf . For work that focuses on the effects on credit default risk, see, for example, Simon Gilchrist and Egon Zakrajšek (2012), “The Impact of the Federal Reserve’s Large-Scale Asset Purchase Programs on Default Risk,” paper presented at “Macroeconomics and Financial Intermediation: Directions since the Crisis,” a conference held at the national Bank of Belgium, Brussels, December 9–10, 2011 . Although the majority of research on the effects of LSAPs appears to support a significant influence on asset prices, the overall result of such programs is generally difficult to estimate precisely: Event studies can make only sharp predictions on the effects within a relatively short time horizon, whereas approaches based on time- series models tend to face challenges in isolating the effects of the programs from other economic developments . For a more skeptical view on the effect of LSAPs, see, for example, Daniel L . Thornton (2012), “Evidence on the Portfolio Balance Channel of Quantitative Easing,” Working Paper Series 2012- 015A (St . Louis: Federal Reserve Bank of St . Louis, October), http://research .stlouisfed .org/wp/2012/2012-015 .pdf . A substantial body of empirical research finds that the Federal Reserve’s asset purchase programs have While there seems to be substantial evidence that LSAPs have lowered longer-term yields and eased broader financial conditions, obtaining accurate estimates of the effects of LSAPs on the macroeconomy is inherently difficult, as the counterfactual case—how the economy would have performed without LSAPs— cannot be directly observed . However, econometric models can be used to estimate the effects of LSAPs on the economy under the assumption that the economic effects of the easier financial conditions that are induced by LSAPs are similar to those that are induced by conventional monetary policy easing . Model simulations conducted at the Federal Reserve have generally found that asset purchases provide a significant boost to the economy . For example, a study based on the Federal Reserve Board’s FRB/US model estimated that, as of 2012, the first two rounds of LSAPs had raised real gross domestic product almost 3 percent and increased private payroll employment by about 3 million jobs, while lowering the unemployment rate about 1 .5 percentage points, relative to what would have been expected otherwise . These simulations also suggest that the program materially reduced the risk of deflation .2 a balanced reading of the evidence supports the conclusion that LSAPs have provided meaningful support to the economic recovery while mitigating deflationary risks . The potential benefits of LSAPs must be considered alongside their possible costs . One potential cost of conducting additional LSAPs is that the operations could lead to a deterioration in market functioning or liquidity in markets where the Federal Reserve is engaged in purchasing . More specifically, if the Federal Reserve becomes too dominant a buyer in a certain market, trading among private participants could decrease enough that market liquidity and price discovery become impaired . As the global financial system relies on deep and liquid markets for U .S . Treasury securities, significant impairment of this market would be especially costly; impairment of this market could also impede the transmission of monetary policy . Although the large volume of the Federal Reserve’s purchases relative to the size of the markets for Treasury or agency securities could ultimately become an issue, few if any problems have been observed in those markets thus far . Of course, all model-based estimates of the macroeconomic effects of LSAPs are subject to considerable statistical and modeling uncertainty and thus should be treated with caution . Indeed, while some other studies also report significant macroeconomic effects from asset purchases, other research finds smaller effects .3 nonetheless, 2 . These results are discussed further in Hess Chung, Jean-Philippe Laforte, David Reifschneider, and John C . Williams (2012), “Have We Underestimated the Likelihood and Severity of Zero Lower Bound Events?” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol . 44 (February supplement), pp . 47–82 . 3 . For studies reporting significant macroeconomic effects from asset purchases, see, for example, Jeffrey C . Fuhrer and Giovanni P . Olivei (2011), “The Estimated Macroeconomic Effects of the Federal Reserve’s Large-Scale Treasury Purchase Program,” Public Policy Briefs 11-02 (Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, April), www .bos .frb .org/economic/ppb/2011/ ppb112 .pdf; and Christiane Baumeister and Luca Benati (2012), “Unconventional Monetary Policy and the Great Recession: Estimating the Macroeconomic Effects of a Spread Compression at the Zero Lower Bound,” Working Papers 2012-21 (Ottawa: Bank of Canada, July), www .bankofcanada . ca/wp-content/uploads/2012/07/wp2012-21 .pdf . Also, the Bank of England has implemented LSAPs similar to those undertaken by the Federal Reserve, and its staff research finds that the effects appear to be quantitatively similar to those in the United States . For studies reporting smaller effects from asset purchases, see, for example, Michael T . Kiley (2012), A second potential cost of LSAPs is that they may undermine public confidence in the Federal Reserve’s ability to exit smoothly from its accommodative policies at the appropriate time . Such a reduction in confidence might increase the risk that long-term inflation expectations become unanchored . The Federal Reserve is certainly aware of these concerns and accordingly has placed great emphasis on developing the necessary tools to ensure that policy accommodation can be removed when appropriate . For example, the Federal Reserve will be able to put upward pressure on short-term interest rates at the appropriate time by raising the interest rate it pays on reserves, using draining tools like reverse repurchase agreements or term deposits with depository institutions, or selling securities from the Federal Reserve’s portfolio . To date, the expansion of the balance sheet does not appear to have materially affected long-term inflation expectations . A third cost to be weighed is that of risks to financial stability . For example, some observers have “The Aggregate Demand Effects of Short- and Long-Term Interest Rates,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2012-54 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August), www .federalreserve .gov/pubs/ feds/2012/201254/201254pap .pdf; and Han Chen, vasco Curdia, and Andrea Ferrero (2012), “The Macroeconomic Effects of Large-Scale Asset Purchase Programmes,” Economic Journal, vol . 122 (november), pp . F289–315 . raised concerns that, by driving longer-term yields lower, nontraditional policies could induce imprudent risk-taking by some investors . Of course, some risk- taking is a necessary element of a healthy economic recovery, and accommodative monetary policies could even serve to reduce the risk in the system by strengthening the overall economy . nonetheless, the Federal Reserve has substantially expanded its monitoring of the financial system and modified its supervisory approach to take a more systemic perspective . There has been limited evidence so far of excessive buildups of duration, credit risk, or leverage, but the Federal Reserve will continue both its careful oversight and its implementation of financial regulatory reforms designed to reduce systemic risk .4 The Federal Reserve has remitted substantial income to the Treasury from its earnings on securities, totaling some $290 billion since 2009 . However, if the economy continues to strengthen and policy accommodation is withdrawn, remittances will likely 4 . For additional details, see the box “The Federal Reserve’s decline in coming years . Indeed, in some scenarios, particularly if interest rates were to rise quickly, remittances to the Treasury could be quite low for a time .5 Even in such scenarios, however, average annual remittances over the period affected by the Federal Reserve’s purchases are highly likely to be greater than the pre-crisis norm, perhaps substantially so . Moreover, if monetary policy promotes a stronger recovery, the associated reduction in the federal deficit would far exceed any variation in the Federal Reserve’s remittances to the Treasury . That said, the Federal Reserve conducts monetary policy to meet its congressionally mandated objectives of maximum employment and price stability and not primarily for the purpose of turning a profit for the U .S . Department of the Treasury . 5 . For additional details, see Seth B . Carpenter, Jane E . Ihrig, Elizabeth C . Klee, Daniel W . Quinn, and Alexander H . Boote (2013), “The Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet and Earnings: A Primer and Projections,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2013-01 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January), www .federalreserve . gov/pubs/feds/2013/201301/201301abs .html . In particular, the Committee indicated that it expected that the exceptionally low range for the federal funds rate would be appropriate at least as long as the unemployment rate remains above 6½ percent, inflation between one and two years ahead is projected to be no more than ½ percentage point above the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal, and longer-term inflation expectations continue to be well anchored. These thresholds were seen as helping the public to more readily understand how the likely timing of an eventual increase in the federal funds rate would shift in response to unanticipated changes in economic conditions and the outlook. Accordingly, thresholds could increase the probability that market reactions to economic developments would move longer- term interest rates in a manner consistent with the Committee’s assessment of the likely future path of short-term interest rates. The Committee indicated in its December statement that it viewed the economic thresholds, at least initially, as consistent with its earlier, date-based guidance. The new language noted that the Committee would also consider other information when determining how long to maintain the highly accommodative stance of monetary policy, including additional measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial developments. At the conclusion of its January 29–30 meeting, the Committee made no changes to its target range for the federal funds rate, its asset purchase program, or its forward guidance for the federal funds rate. The Committee stated that, with appropriate policy accommodation, it expected that economic growth would proceed at a moderate pace and the unemployment rate would gradually decline toward levels the Committee judges consistent with its dual mandate. It noted that strains in global financial markets had eased somewhat, but that it continued to see downside risks to the economic outlook. The Committee continued to anticipate that inflation over the medium term likely would run at or below its 2 percent objective. The following material appeared as an addendum to the minutes of the December 11–12, 2012, meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee. In conjunction with the December 11–12, 2012, Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting, meeting participants—the 7 members of the Board of Governors and the 12 presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks, all of whom participate in the deliberations of the FOMC—submitted their assessments of real output growth, the unemployment rate, inflation, and the target federal funds rate for each year from 2012 through 2015 and over the longer run. Each participant’s assessment was based on information available at the time of the meeting plus his or her judgment of appropriate monetary policy and assumptions about the factors likely to affect economic outcomes. The longer-run projections represent each participant’s judgment of the value to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. “Appropriate monetary policy” is defined as the future path of policy that each participant deems most likely to foster outcomes for economic activity and inflation that best satisfy his or her individual interpretation of the Federal Reserve’s objectives of maximum employment and stable prices. Overall, the assessments submitted in December indicated that FOMC participants projected that, under appropriate monetary policy, the pace of economic recovery would gradually pick up over the 2012–15 period and inflation would remain subdued (table 1 and figure 1). Participants anticipated that the growth rate of real gross domestic product (GDP) would increase somewhat in 2013 and again in 2014, and that economic growth in 2014 and 2015 would exceed their estimates of the longer-run sustainable rate of growth, while the unemployment rate would decline gradually through 2015. Participants projected that each year’s inflation, as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), would run Longer run Longer run Note: Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP) and projections for both measures of inflation are from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quar- ter of the year indicated. PCE inflation and core PCE inflation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) and the price index for PCE excluding food and energy. Projections for the unemployment rate are for the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. Each participant’s projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy. Longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. The September projections were made in conjunction with the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on September 12–13, 2012. 1. The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each year. 2. The range for a variable in a given year includes all participants’ projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year. 3. Longer-run projections for core PCE inflation are not collected. Figure 1. Central tendencies and ranges of economic projections, 2012–15 and over the longer run Longer run Longer run Longer run Longer run Note: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. The data for the actual values of the variables are annual. close to or below the FOMC’s longer-run inflation objective of 2 percent. As shown in figure 2, most participants judged that highly accommodative monetary policy was likely to be warranted over the next few years. In particular, 14 participants thought that it would be appropriate for the first increase in the target federal funds rate to occur during 2015 or later. Most participants judged that appropriate monetary policy would include purchasing agency mortgage- backed securities (MBS) and longer-term Treasury securities after the completion of the maturity extension program at the end of 2012. As in September, participants judged the uncertainty associated with the outlook for real activity and the unemployment rate to be unusually high compared with historical norms, with the risks weighted mainly toward slower economic growth and a higher unemployment rate. While a number of participants viewed the uncertainty surrounding their projections for inflation to be unusually high, more saw the level of uncertainty to be broadly similar to historical norms; most considered the risks to inflation to be roughly balanced. Participants judged that the economy grew at a moderate pace over the second half of 2012 and projected that, conditional on their individual assumptions about appropriate monetary policy, the economy would grow at a somewhat faster pace in 2013 before expanding in 2014 and 2015 at a rate above what participants saw as the longer-run rate of output growth. The central tendency of their projections for the change in real GDP in 2012 was 1.7 to 1.8 percent, slightly lower than in September. A number of participants mentioned that last summer’s drought and the effects of Hurricane Sandy likely had held down economic activity in the second half of this year. Many participants also noted that, while conditions in the housing and labor markets appeared to have improved recently, uncertainty about fiscal policy appeared to be holding back business and household spending. Participants’ projections for 2013 through 2015 were generally little changed relative to their September projections. The central tendency of participants’ projections for real GDP growth in 2013 was 2.3 to 3.0 percent, followed by a central tendency of 3.0 to 3.5 percent for 2014 and one of 3.0 to 3.7 percent for 2015. The central tendency for the longer-run rate of increase of real GDP remained 2.3 to 2.5 percent, unchanged from September. Most participants noted that the high degree of monetary policy accommodation assumed in their projections would help promote the economic recovery over the forecast period; however, they also judged that several factors would likely hold back the pace of economic expansion, including slower growth abroad, a still- weak housing market, the difficult fiscal and financial situation in Europe, and fiscal restraint in the United States. Participants projected the unemployment rate for the final quarter of 2012 to be close to its average level in October and November, implying a rate somewhat below that projected in September. Participants anticipated a gradual decline in the unemployment rate over the forecast period; even so, they generally thought that the unemployment rate at the end of 2015 would still be well above their individual estimates of its longer-run normal level. The central tendencies of participants’ forecasts for the unemployment rate were 7.4 to 7.7 percent at the end of 2013, 6.8 to 7.3 percent at the end of 2014, and 6.0 to 6.6 percent at the end of 2015. The central tendency of participants’ estimates of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment that would prevail under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy was 5.2 to 6.0 percent, unchanged from September. Most participants projected that the unemployment rate would converge Longer run Note: In the upper panel, the height of each bar denotes the number of FOMC participants who judge that, under appropriate monetary policy, the first increase in the target federal funds rate from its current range of 0 to ¼ percent will occur in the specified calendar year. In September 2012, the numbers of FOMC participants who judged that the first increase in the target federal funds rate would occur in 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015, and 2016 were, respectively, 1, 3, 2, 12, and 1. In the lower panel, each shaded circle indicates the value (rounded to the nearest ¼ percentage point) of an individual participant’s judgment of the appropriate level of the target federal funds rate at the end of the specified calendar year or over the longer run. to their estimates of its longer-run normal rate in five or six years, while a few judged that less time would be needed. Figures 3.A and 3.B provide details on the diversity of participants’ views regarding the likely outcomes for real GDP growth and the unemployment rate over the next three years and over the longer run. The dispersion in these projections reflects differences in participants’ assessments of many factors, including appropriate monetary policy and its effects on the economy, the rate of improvement in the housing sector, the spillover effects of the fiscal and financial situation in Europe, the prospective path for U.S. fiscal policy, the extent of structural dislocations in the labor market, the likely evolution of credit and financial market conditions, and longer-term trends in productivity and the labor force. With the data for much of 2012 now in hand, the dispersion of participants’ projections of real GDP growth and the unemployment rate this year narrowed compared with their September submissions. Meanwhile, the distribution of participants’ forecasts for the change in real GDP in 2013 shifted down a bit, and that for 2014 narrowed slightly. However, the range of projections for real GDP growth in 2015 was little changed from September. The distributions of the unemployment rate projections at the end of 2012, 2013, and 2014 all shifted lower, while the range of projections for the unemployment rate for 2015, at 5.7 to 6.8 percent, remained close to its September level. The dispersion of estimates for the longer-run rate of output growth stayed fairly narrow, with all but one between 2.2 and 2.5 percent. The range of participants’ estimates of the longer-run rate of unemployment, at 5.0 to 6.0 percent, narrowed relative to September. This range reflected different judgments among participants about several factors, including the outlook for labor force participation and the structure of the labor market. Participants’ views on the broad outlook for inflation under appropriate monetary policy were little changed from September. Most anticipated that inflation for 2012 as a whole would be close to 1.6 percent, somewhat lower than projected in September. A number of participants remarked that recent inflation readings had come in below their expectations. Almost all of the participants judged that both headline and core inflation would remain subdued over the 2013–15 period, running at rates equal to or below the FOMC’s longer- run objective of 2 percent. Specifically, the central tendency of participants’ projections for inflation, as measured by the PCE price index, moved down to 1.3 to 2.0 percent for 2013 and was little changed for 2014 and 2015 at 1.5 to 2.0 percent and 1.7 to 2.0 percent, respectively. The central tendencies of the forecasts for core inflation were broadly similar to those for the headline measure for 2013 through 2015. In discussing factors likely to sustain low inflation, several participants cited stable inflation expectations and expectations for continued sizable resource slack. Figures 3.C and 3.D provide information about the diversity of participants’ views about the outlook for inflation. The range of participants’ projections for headline inflation for 2012 narrowed from 1.5 to 1.9 percent in September to 1.6 to 1.8 percent in December; nearly all participants’ projections in December were at 1.6 percent or 1.7 percent, broadly in line with recent inflation readings. The distributions of participants’ projections for headline inflation in 2013 and 2014 shifted lower compared with the corresponding distributions for September, while the range of projections for core inflation narrowed slightly for both years. The distributions for core and overall inflation in 2015 were concentrated near the Committee’s longer-run inflation objective of 2 percent, although somewhat less so than in September. Figure 3.A. Distribution of participants’ projections for the change in real GDP, 2012–15 and over the longer run 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 2.6 2.7 2.8 2.9 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.5 3.6 3.7 3.8 3.9 4.0 4.1 4.2 4.3 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 2.6 2.7 2.8 2.9 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.5 3.6 3.7 3.8 3.9 4.0 4.1 4.2 4.3 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 2.6 2.7 2.8 2.9 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.5 3.6 3.7 3.8 3.9 4.0 4.1 4.2 4.3 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 2.6 2.7 2.8 2.9 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.5 3.6 3.7 3.8 3.9 4.0 4.1 4.2 4.3 Longer run 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 2.6 2.7 2.8 2.9 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.5 3.6 3.7 3.8 3.9 4.0 4.1 4.2 4.3 Note: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. Figure 3.B. Distribution of participants’ projections for the unemployment rate, 2012–15 and over the longer run 5.0 5.1 5.2 5.3 5.4 5.5 5.6 5.7 5.8 5.9 6.0 6.1 6.2 6.3 - 6.4 6.6 6.5 6.7 Percent range 6.8 6.9 7.0 7.1 7.2 7.3 7.4 7.5 7.6 7.7 7.8 7.9 8.0 8.1 8.2 8.3 5.0 5.1 5.2 5.3 5.4 5.5 5.6 5.7 5.8 5.9 6.0 6.1 6.2 6.3 - 6.6 6.4 6.7 6.5 Percent range 6.8 6.9 7.0 7.1 7.2 7.3 7.4 7.5 7.6 7.7 7.8 7.9 8.0 8.1 8.2 8.3 5.0 5.1 5.2 5.3 5.4 5.5 5.6 5.7 5.8 5.9 6.0 6.1 6.2 6.3 - 6.4 6.6 6.5 6.7 Percent range 6.8 6.9 7.0 7.1 7.2 7.3 7.4 7.5 7.6 7.7 7.8 7.9 8.0 8.1 8.2 8.3 5.0 5.1 5.2 5.3 5.4 5.5 5.6 5.7 5.8 5.9 6.0 6.1 6.2 6.3 - 6.4 6.6 6.5 6.7 Percent range 6.8 6.9 7.0 7.1 7.2 7.3 7.4 7.5 7.6 7.7 7.8 7.9 8.0 8.1 8.2 8.3 Longer run 5.0 5.1 5.2 5.3 5.4 5.5 5.6 5.7 5.8 5.9 6.0 6.1 6.2 6.3 - 6.6 6.4 6.7 6.5 Percent range 6.8 6.9 7.0 7.1 7.2 7.3 7.4 7.5 7.6 7.7 7.8 7.9 8.0 8.1 8.2 8.3 Note: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. Figure 3.C. Distribution of participants’ projections for PCE inflation, 2012–15 and over the longer run 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 Longer run 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 Note: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 2.3 2.4 2.3 2.4 2.3 2.4 2.3 2.4 2.3 2.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 Percent range 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 Percent range 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 Percent range 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 Percent range 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 Note: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. As indicated in figure 2, most participants judged that exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate would remain appropriate for several more years. In particular, 13 participants thought that the first increase in the target federal funds rate would not be warranted until 2015, and 1 judged that policy firming would likely not be appropriate until 2016 (upper panel). The 13 participants who expected that the target federal funds rate would not move above its effective lower bound until 2015 thought the federal funds rate would be 1¼ percent or lower at the end of that year, while the 1 participant who expected that policy firming would commence in 2016 saw the federal funds rate target at 50 basis points at the end of that year. Five participants judged that an earlier increase in the federal funds rate, in 2013 or 2014, would be most consistent with the Committee’s statutory mandate. Those participants judged that the appropriate value for the federal funds rate would range from ½ to 2¾ percent at the end of 2014 and from 2 to 4½ percent at the end of 2015. Among the participants who saw a later tightening of policy, a majority indicated that they believed it was appropriate to maintain the current level of the federal funds rate until the unemployment rate is less than or equal to 6½ percent. In contrast, a majority of those who favored an earlier tightening of policy pointed to concerns about inflation as a primary reason for expecting that it would be appropriate to tighten policy sooner. Participants were about evenly split between those who judged the appropriate path for the federal funds rate to be unchanged relative to September and those who saw the appropriate path as lower. Nearly all participants saw the appropriate target for the federal funds rate at the end of 2015 as still well below its expected longer- run value. Estimates of the longer-run target federal funds rate ranged from 3 to 4½ percent, reflecting the Committee’s inflation objective of 2 percent and participants’ judgments about the longer-run equilibrium level of the real federal funds rate. Participants also provided information on their views regarding the appropriate path of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. Most participants thought it was appropriate for the Committee to continue purchasing MBS and longer-term Treasury securities after completing the maturity extension program at the end of this year. In their projections, taking into account the likely benefits and costs of purchases as well as the expected evolution of the outlook, these participants were approximately evenly divided between those who judged that it would likely be appropriate for the Committee to complete its asset purchases sometime around the middle of 2013 and those who judged that it would likely be appropriate for the asset purchases to continue beyond that date. In contrast, several participants believed the Committee would best foster its dual objectives by ending its purchases of Treasury securities or all of its asset purchases at the end of this year when the maturity extension program was completed. Key factors informing participants’ views of the economic outlook and the appropriate setting for monetary policy include their judgments regarding labor market conditions that would be consistent with maximum employment, the extent to which employment currently deviated from maximum employment, the extent to which projected inflation over the medium term deviated from the Committee’s longer-term objective of 2 percent, and participants’ projections of the likely time horizon necessary to return employment and inflation to mandate-consistent levels. Many participants mentioned economic thresholds based on the unemployment rate and the inflation outlook that were consistent with their judgments of when it would be appropriate to consider beginning to raise the federal funds rate. A couple of participants noted that their assessments of the appropriate path for the federal funds rate took into account the likelihood that the neutral level of the federal funds rate was somewhat below its historical norm. There was some concern expressed that a protracted period of very accommodative monetary policy could lead to imbalances in the financial system. It was also noted that because the appropriate stance of monetary policy is conditional on the evolution of real activity and inflation over time, assessments of the appropriate future path of the federal funds rate and the balance sheet could change if economic conditions were to evolve in an unexpected manner. Figure 3.E details the distribution of participants’ judgments regarding the appropriate level of the target federal funds rate at the end of each calendar year from 2012 to 2015 and over the longer run. As previously noted, most participants judged that economic conditions would warrant maintaining the current low level of the federal funds rate until 2015. Views on the appropriate level of the federal funds rate by the end of 2015 varied, with 12 participants seeing the appropriate level of the federal funds rate as 1 percent or lower and 4 of them seeing the appropriate level as 2½ percent or higher. Generally, the participants who judged that a longer period of very accommodative monetary policy would be appropriate were those who projected that a sizable gap between the unemployment rate and the longer-run normal level of the unemployment rate would persist until 2015 or later. In contrast, the majority of the 5 participants who judged that policy firming should begin in 2013 or 2014 indicated that the Committee would need to act relatively soon in order to keep inflation near the FOMC’s longer-run objective of 2 percent and to prevent a rise in inflation expectations. Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges Percentage points note: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root mean squared error of projections for 1992 through 2011 that were released in the fall by various private and government forecasters. As described in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain assumptions, there is about a 70 percent probability that actual outcomes for real GDP, unemployment, and consumer prices will be in ranges implied by the average size of projection errors made in the past. Further information may be found in David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip (2007), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook from Historical Forecasting Errors,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2007-60 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November). 1. Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure that has been most widely used in government and private economic forecasts. Projection is percent change, fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. Nearly all of the participants judged their current levels of uncertainty about real GDP growth and unemployment to be higher than was the norm during the previous 20 years (figure 4).1 Seven participants judged that the levels of uncertainty associated with their forecasts of total PCE inflation were higher as well, while another 10 participants viewed uncertainty about inflation as broadly similar to historical norms. The main factors cited as contributing to the elevated uncertainty about economic outcomes were the difficulties involved in predicting fiscal policy in the United States, the continuing potential for European developments to threaten financial stability, and the possibility of a general slowdown in global economic growth. As in September, participants noted the challenges associated with forecasting the path of the 1. Table 2 provides estimates of the forecast uncertainty for the change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, and total consumer price inflation over the period from 1992 through 2011. At the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty” discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty in the economic forecasts and explains the approach used to assess the uncertainty and risks attending the participants’ projections. Figure 3.E. Distribution of participants’ projections for the target federal funds rate, 2012–15 and over the longer run 0.00 0.37 0.38 0.62 0.63 0.87 0.88 1.12 1.13 1.37 1.38 1.62 1.63 1.87 1.88 2.12 2.13 2.37 2.38 2.62 2.63 2.87 2.88 3.12 3.13 3.37 3.38 3.62 3.63 3.87 3.88 4.12 4.13 4.37 4.38 4.62 0.00 0.37 0.38 0.62 0.63 0.87 0.88 1.12 1.13 1.37 1.38 1.62 1.63 1.87 1.88 2.12 2.13 2.37 2.38 2.62 2.63 2.87 2.88 3.12 3.13 3.37 3.38 3.62 3.63 3.87 3.88 4.12 4.13 4.37 4.38 4.62 0.00 0.37 0.38 0.62 0.63 0.87 0.88 1.12 1.13 1.37 1.38 1.62 1.63 1.87 1.88 2.12 2.13 2.37 2.38 2.62 2.63 2.87 2.88 3.12 3.13 3.37 3.38 3.62 3.63 3.87 3.88 4.12 4.13 4.37 4.38 4.62 0.00 0.37 0.38 0.62 0.63 0.87 0.88 1.12 1.13 1.37 1.38 1.62 1.63 1.87 1.88 2.12 2.13 2.37 2.38 2.62 2.63 2.87 2.88 3.12 3.13 3.37 3.38 3.62 3.63 3.87 3.88 4.12 4.13 4.37 4.38 4.62 Longer run 0.00 0.37 0.38 0.62 0.63 0.87 0.88 1.12 1.13 1.37 1.38 1.62 1.63 1.87 1.88 2.12 2.13 2.37 2.38 2.62 2.63 2.87 2.88 3.12 3.13 3.37 3.38 3.62 3.63 3.87 3.88 4.12 4.13 4.37 4.38 4.62 Note: The target federal funds rate is measured as the level of the target rate at the end of the calendar year or in the longer run. Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Risks to core PCE inflation Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Note: For definitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” Defini- tions of variables are in the general note to table 1. U.S. economic recovery following a financial crisis and recession that differed markedly from recent historical experience. A number of participants also commented that in the aftermath of the financial crisis, they were more uncertain about the level of potential output and its rate of growth. It was noted that some of the uncertainty about potential output arose from the risk that a continuation of elevated levels of long-term unemployment might impair the skills of the affected individuals or cause some of them to drop out of the labor force, thereby reducing potential output in the medium term. A majority of participants reported that they saw the risks to their forecasts of real GDP growth as weighted toward the downside and, accordingly, the risks to their projections of the unemployment rate as tilted to the upside. The most frequently identified sources of risk were U.S. fiscal policy, which many participants thought had the potential to slow economic activity significantly over the near term, and the situation in Europe. Most participants continued to judge the risks to their projections for inflation as broadly balanced, with several highlighting the recent stability of longer-term inflation expectations. However, three participants saw the risks to inflation as tilted to the downside, reflecting, for example, risks of disinflation that could arise from adverse shocks to the economy that policy would have limited scope to offset. A couple of participants saw the risks to inflation as weighted to the upside in light of concerns about U.S. fiscal imbalances, the current highly accommodative stance of monetary policy, and uncertainty about the Committee’s ability to shift to a less accommodative policy stance when it becomes appropriate to do so. The economic projections provided by the members of the Board of Governors and the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks inform discussions of monetary policy among policymakers and can aid public understanding of the basis for policy actions . Considerable uncertainty attends these projections, however . The economic and statistical models and relationships used to help produce economic forecasts are necessarily imperfect descriptions of the real world, and the future path of the economy can be affected by myriad unforeseen developments and events . Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, participants consider not only what appears to be the most likely economic outcome as embodied in their projections, but also the range of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of their occurring, and the potential costs to the economy should they occur . Table 2 summarizes the average historical accuracy of a range of forecasts, including those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports and those prepared by the Federal Reserve Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee . The projection error ranges shown in the table illustrate the considerable uncertainty associated with economic forecasts . For example, suppose a participant projects that real gross domestic product (GDP) and total consumer prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, 3 percent and 2 percent . If the uncertainty attending those projections is similar to that experienced in the past and the risks around the projections are broadly balanced, the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a probability of about 70 percent that actual GDP would expand within a range of 2 .4 to 3 .6 percent in the current year, 1 .6 to 4 .4 percent in the second year, and 1 .3 to 4 .7 percent in the third and fourth years . The corresponding 70 percent confidence intervals for overall inflation would be 1 .5 to 2 .5 percent in the current year, 1 .1 to 2 .9 percent in the second year, 0 .9 to 3 .1 percent in the third year, and 1 .0 to 3 .0 percent in the fourth year . Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over history, participants provide judgments as to whether the uncertainty attached to their projections of each variable is greater than, smaller than, or broadly similar to typical levels of forecast uncertainty in the past, as shown in table 2 . Participants also provide judgments as to whether the risks to their projections are weighted to the upside, are weighted to the downside, or are broadly balanced . That is, participants judge whether each variable is more likely to be above or below their projections of the most likely outcome . These judgments about the uncertainty and the risks attending each participant’s projections are distinct from the diversity of participants’ views about the most likely outcomes . Forecast uncertainty is concerned with the risks associated with a particular projection rather than with divergences across a number of different projections . As with real activity and inflation, the outlook for the future path of the federal funds rate is subject to considerable uncertainty . This uncertainty arises primarily because each participant’s assessment of the appropriate stance of monetary policy depends importantly on the evolution of real activity and inflation over time . If economic conditions evolve in an unexpected manner, then assessments of the appropriate setting of the federal funds rate would change from that point forward . bank holding company emerging market economy The Board of Governors is pleased to submit its Monetary Policy Report pursuant to section 2B of the Federal Reserve Act. Statement on Longer-run goaLS and monetary PoLicy Strategy Adopted effective January 24, 2012; as amended effective January 29, 2019 The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) is firmly committed to fulfilling its statutory mandate from the Congress of promoting maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates. The Committee seeks to explain its monetary policy decisions to the public as clearly as possible. Such clarity facilitates well-informed decisionmaking by households and businesses, reduces economic and financial uncertainty, increases the effectiveness of monetary policy, and enhances transparency and accountability, which are essential in a democratic society. Inflation, employment, and long-term interest rates fluctuate over time in response to economic and financial disturbances. Moreover, monetary policy actions tend to influence economic activity and prices with a lag. Therefore, the Committee’s policy decisions reflect its longer-run goals, its medium- term outlook, and its assessments of the balance of risks, including risks to the financial system that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. The inflation rate over the longer run is primarily determined by monetary policy, and hence the Committee has the ability to specify a longer-run goal for inflation. The Committee reaffirms its judgment that inflation at the rate of 2 percent, as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, is most consistent over the longer run with the Federal Reserve’s statutory mandate. The Committee would be concerned if inflation were running persistently above or below this objective. Communicating this symmetric inflation goal clearly to the public helps keep longer-term inflation expectations firmly anchored, thereby fostering price stability and moderate long-term interest rates and enhancing the Committee’s ability to promote maximum employment in the face of significant economic disturbances. The maximum level of employment is largely determined by nonmonetary factors that affect the structure and dynamics of the labor market. These factors may change over time and may not be directly measurable. Consequently, it would not be appropriate to specify a fixed goal for employment; rather, the Committee’s policy decisions must be informed by assessments of the maximum level of employment, recognizing that such assessments are necessarily uncertain and subject to revision. The Committee considers a wide range of indicators in making these assessments. Information about Committee participants’ estimates of the longer-run normal rates of output growth and unemployment is published four times per year in the FOMC’s Summary of Economic Projections. For example, in the most recent projections, the median of FOMC participants’ estimates of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment was 4.4 percent. In setting monetary policy, the Committee seeks to mitigate deviations of inflation from its longer-run goal and deviations of employment from the Committee’s assessments of its maximum level. These objectives are generally complementary. However, under circumstances in which the Committee judges that the objectives are not complementary, it follows a balanced approach in promoting them, taking into account the magnitude of the deviations and the potentially different time horizons over which employment and inflation are projected to return to levels judged consistent with its mandate. The Committee intends to reaffirm these principles and to make adjustments as appropriate at its annual organizational meeting each January. Employment Disparities between Rural and Urban Areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 Developments Related to Financial Stability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26 Monetary Policy Rules and Systematic Monetary Policy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36 The Role of Liabilities in Determining the Size of the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet . . . . . 41 Federal Reserve Transparency: Rationale and New Initiatives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45 Forecast Uncertainty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62 note: This report reflects information that was publicly available as of noon EST on February 21, 2019. Unless otherwise stated, the time series in the figures extend through, for daily data, February 20, 2019; for monthly data, January 2019; and, for quarterly data, 2018:Q4. In bar charts, except as noted, the change for a given period is measured to its final quarter from the final quarter of the preceding period. For figures 16 and 34, note that the S&P 500 Index and the Dow Jones Bank Index are products of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates and have been licensed for use by the Board. Copyright © 2019 S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC, a division of S&P Global, and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Redistribution, reproduction, and/or photocopying in whole or in part are prohibited without written permission of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC. For more information on any of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC’s indices please visit www.spdji.com. S&P® is a registered trademark of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC, and Dow Jones® is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. Neither S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC, Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC, their affiliates nor their third party licensors make any representation or warranty, express or implied, as to the ability of any index to accurately represent the asset class or market sector that it purports to represent, and neither S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC, Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC, their affiliates nor their third party licensors shall have any liability for any errors, omissions, or interruptions of any index or the data included therein. summary Economic activity in the United States appears to have increased at a solid pace, on balance, over the second half of 2018, and the labor market strengthened further. Inflation has been near the Federal Open Market Committee’s (FOMC) longer-run objective of 2 percent, aside from the transitory effects of recent energy price movements. In this environment, the FOMC judged that, on balance, current and prospective economic conditions called for a further gradual removal of policy accommodation. In particular, the FOMC raised the target range for the federal funds rate twice in the second half of 2018, putting its level at 2¼ to 2½ percent following the December meeting. In light of softer global economic and financial conditions late in the year and muted inflation pressures, the FOMC indicated at its January meeting that it will be patient as it determines what future adjustments to the federal funds rate may be appropriate to support the Committee’s congressionally mandated objectives of maximum employment and price stability. The labor market. The labor market has continued to strengthen since the middle of last year. Payroll employment growth has remained strong, averaging 224,000 per month since June 2018. The unemployment rate has been about unchanged over this period, averaging a little under 4 percent—a low level by historical standards—while the labor force participation rate has moved up despite the ongoing downward influence from an aging population. Wage growth has also picked up recently. Inflation. Consumer price inflation, as measured by the 12-month change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, moved down from a little above the FOMC’s objective of 2 percent in the middle of last year to an estimated 1.7 percent in December, restrained by recent declines in consumer energy prices. The 12-month measure of inflation that excludes food and energy items (so-called core inflation), which historically has been a better indicator of where overall inflation will be in the future than the headline measure that includes those items, is estimated to have been 1.9 percent in December—up ¼ percentage point from a year ago. Survey- based measures of longer-run inflation expectations have generally been stable, though market-based measures of inflation compensation have moved down some since the first half of 2018. Economic growth. Available indicators suggest that real gross domestic product (GDP) increased at a solid rate, on balance, in the second half of last year and rose a little under 3 percent for the year as a whole—a noticeable pickup from the pace in recent years. Consumer spending expanded at a strong rate for most of the second half, supported by robust job gains, past increases in household wealth, and higher disposable income due in part to the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, though spending appears to have weakened toward year-end. Business investment grew as well, though growth seems to have slowed somewhat from a sizable gain in the first half. However, housing market activity declined last year amid rising mortgage interest rates and higher material and labor costs. Indicators of both consumer and business sentiment remain at favorable levels, but some measures have softened since the fall, likely a reflection of financial market volatility and increased concerns about the global outlook. Financial conditions. Domestic financial conditions for businesses and households have become less supportive of economic growth since July. Financial market participants’ appetite for risk deteriorated markedly in the latter part of last year amid investor concerns about downside risks to the growth outlook and rising trade tensions between the United States and China. As a result, Treasury yields and risky asset prices declined substantially between early October and late December in the midst of heightened volatility, although those moves partially retraced early this year. On balance since July, the expected path of the federal funds rate over the next several years shifted down, long-term Treasury yields and mortgage rates moved lower, broad measures of U.S. equity prices increased somewhat, and spreads of yields on corporate bonds over those on comparable-maturity Treasury securities widened modestly. Credit to large nonfinancial firms remained solid in the second half of 2018; corporate bond issuance slowed considerably toward the end of the year but has rebounded since then. Despite increases in interest rates for consumer loans, consumer credit expanded at a solid pace, and financing conditions for consumers largely remain supportive of growth in household spending. The foreign exchange value of the U.S. dollar strengthened slightly against the currencies of the U.S. economy’s trading partners. Financial stability. The U.S. financial system remains substantially more resilient than in the decade preceding the financial crisis. Pressures associated with asset valuations eased compared with July 2018, particularly in the equity, corporate bond, and leveraged loan markets. Regulatory capital and liquidity ratios of key financial institutions, including large banks, are at historically high levels. Funding risks in the financial system are low relative to the period leading up to the crisis. Borrowing by households has risen roughly in line with household incomes and is concentrated among prime borrowers. While debt owed by businesses is high and credit standards—especially within segments of the loan market focused on lower-rated or unrated firms—deteriorated in the second half of 2018, issuance of these loans has slowed more recently. International Developments. Foreign economic growth stepped down significantly last year from the brisk pace in 2017. Aggregate growth in the advanced foreign economies slowed markedly, especially in the euro area, and several Latin American economies continued to underperform. The pace of economic activity in China slowed noticeably in the second half of 2018. Inflation pressures in major advanced foreign economies remain subdued, prompting central banks to maintain accommodative monetary policies. Financial conditions abroad tightened in the second half of 2018, in part reflecting political uncertainty in Europe and Latin America, trade policy developments in the United States and its trading partners, as well as concerns about moderating global growth. Although financial conditions abroad improved in recent weeks, alongside those in the United States, on balance since July 2018, global equity prices were lower, sovereign yields in many economies declined, and sovereign credit spreads in the European periphery and the most vulnerable emerging market economies increased somewhat. Market-implied paths of policy rates in advanced foreign economies generally edged down. Interest rate policy. As the labor market continued to strengthen and economic activity expanded at a strong rate, the FOMC increased the target range for the federal funds rate gradually over the second half of 2018. Specifically, the FOMC decided to raise the federal funds rate in September and in December, bringing it to the current range of 2¼ to 2½ percent. In December, against the backdrop of increased concerns about global growth, trade tensions, and volatility in financial markets, the Committee indicated it would monitor global economic and financial developments and assess their implications for the economic outlook. In January, the FOMC stated that it continued to view sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near the Committee’s 2 percent objective as the most likely outcomes. Nonetheless, in light of global economic and financial developments and muted inflation pressures, the Committee noted that it will be patient as it determines what future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate may be appropriate to support these outcomes. FOMC communications continued to emphasize that the Committee’s approach to setting the stance of policy should be importantly guided by the implications of incoming data for the economic outlook. In particular, the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate will depend on the Committee’s assessment of realized and expected economic conditions relative to its maximum-employment objective and its symmetric 2 percent inflation objective. Balance sheet policy. The FOMC continued to implement the balance sheet normalization program that has been under way since October 2017. Specifically, the FOMC reduced its holdings of Treasury and agency securities in a gradual and predictable manner by reinvesting only principal payments it received from these securities that exceeded gradually rising caps. Consequently, the Federal Reserve’s total assets declined by about $260 billion since the middle of last year, ending the period close to $4 trillion. Together with the January postmeeting statement, the Committee released an updated Statement Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation and Balance Sheet Normalization to provide additional information about its plans to implement monetary policy over the longer run. In particular, the FOMC stated that it intends to continue to implement monetary policy in a regime with an ample supply of reserves so that active management of reserves is not required. In addition, the Committee noted that it is prepared to adjust any of the details for completing balance sheet normalization in light of economic and financial developments. Labor markets in urban versus rural areas. The recovery in the U.S. labor market since the end of the recession has been uneven across the country, with rural areas showing markedly less improvement than cities and their surrounding metropolitan areas. In particular, the employment-to-population ratio and labor force participation rate in rural areas remain well below their pre-recession levels, while the recovery in urban areas has been more complete. Differences in the mix of industries in rural and urban areas—a larger share of manufacturing in rural areas and a greater concentration of fast-growing services industries in urban areas—have contributed to the stronger rebound in urban areas. (See the box “Employment Disparities between Rural and Urban Areas” in Part 1.) Monetary policy rules. In evaluating the stance of monetary policy, policymakers consider a wide range of information on the current economic conditions and the outlook. Policymakers also consult prescriptions for the policy interest rate derived from a variety of policy rules for guidance, without mechanically following the prescriptions of any specific rule. The FOMC’s approach for conducting systematic monetary policy provides sufficient flexibility to address the intrinsic complexities and uncertainties in the economy while keeping monetary policy predictable and transparent. (See the box “Monetary Policy Rules and Systematic Monetary Policy” in Part 2.) Balance sheet normalization and monetary policy implementation. Since the financial crisis, the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet has been determined in large part by its decisions about asset purchases for economic stimulus, with growth in total assets primarily matched by higher reserve balances of depository institutions. However, liabilities other than reserves have grown significantly over the past decade. In the longer run, the size of the balance sheet will be importantly determined by the various factors affecting the demand for Federal Reserve liabilities. (See the box “The Role of Liabilities in Determining the Size of the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet” in Part 2.) Federal Reserve transparency and accountability. For central banks, transparency provides an essential basis for accountability. Transparency also enhances the effectiveness of monetary policy and a central bank’s efforts to promote financial stability. For these reasons, the Federal Reserve uses a wide variety of communications to explain its policymaking approach and decisions as clearly as possible. Through several new initiatives, including a review of its monetary policy framework that will include outreach to a broad range of stakeholders, the Federal Reserve seeks to enhance transparency and accountability regarding how it pursues its statutory responsibilities. (See the box “Federal Reserve Transparency: Rationale and New Initiatives” in Part 2.) The labor market strengthened further during the second half of 2018 and early this year . . . 1. Net change in payroll employment Payroll employment gains have remained strong, averaging 224,000 per month since June 2018 (figure 1). This pace is similar to the pace in the first half of last year, and it is faster than the average pace of job gains in 2016 and 2017. The strong pace of job gains over this period has primarily been manifest in a rising labor force participation rate (LFPR)—the share of the population that is either working or actively looking for work—rather than a declining unemployment rate.1 Since June 2018, the LFPR has moved up about ¼ percentage point and was 63.2 percent in January—a bit higher than the narrow range it has maintained in recent years (figure 2). The improvement is especially notable because the aging of the population—and, in particular, the movement of members of the baby- boom cohort into their retirement years—has otherwise imparted a downward influence on the LFPR. Indeed, the LFPR for individuals between 25 and 54 years old—which is much less sensitive to population aging—has NOTE: The data are 3-month moving averages. SOURCE: Bureau of Labor Statistics via Haver Analytics. 2. Labor force participation rates and employment-to-population ratio 1. The observed pace of payroll job gains would have been sufficient to push the unemployment rate lower had the LFPR not risen. Indeed, monthly payroll gains in the range of 115,000 to 145,000 appear consistent with an unchanged unemployment rate around 4.0 percent and an unchanged LFPR around 62.9 percent (which are the June 2018 values of these rates). If instead the LFPR were declining 0.2 percentage point per year—roughly the influence of population aging—the range of job gains needed to maintain an unchanged unemployment rate would be about 40,000 per month lower. There is considerable uncertainty around these estimates, as the difference between monthly payroll gains and employment changes from the Current Population Survey (the source of the unemployment rate and LFPR) can be quite volatile over short periods. NOTE: The data are monthly. The prime-age labor force participation rate is a percentage of the population aged 25 to 54. The labor force participation rate and the employment-to-population ratio are percentages of the population aged 16 and over. 3. Measures of labor underutilization NOTE: Unemployment rate measures total unemployed as a percentage of the labor force. U-4 measures total unemployed plus discouraged workers, as a percentage of the labor force plus discouraged workers. Discouraged workers are a subset of marginally attached workers who are not currently looking for work because they believe no jobs are available for them. U-5 measures total unemployed plus all marginally attached to the labor force, as a percentage of the labor force plus persons marginally attached to the labor force. Marginally attached workers are not in the labor force, want and are available for work, and have looked for a job in the past 12 months. U-6 measures total unemployed plus all marginally attached workers plus total employed part time for economic reasons, as a percentage of the labor force plus all marginally attached workers. The shaded bar indicates a period of business recession as defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research. improved considerably more than the overall LFPR, including a ½ percentage point rise since June 2018.2 At the same time, the unemployment rate has remained little changed and has generally been running a little under 4 percent.3 Nevertheless, the unemployment rate remains at a historically low level and is ½ percentage point below the median of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants’ estimates of its longer-run normal level (figure 3).4 Combining the movements in both unemployment and labor force participation, 2. Since 2015, the increase in the prime-age LFPR for women was nearly 2 percentage points, while the increase for men was only about 1 percentage point. In January, the LFPR for prime-age women was slightly above where it stood in 2007, whereas for men it was still about 2 percentage points below. 3. The unemployment rate in January was 4.0 percent, boosted somewhat by the partial government shutdown, as some furloughed federal workers and temporarily laid- off federal contractors are treated as unemployed in the household employment survey. 4. See the Summary of Economic Projections in Part 3 the employment-to-population ratio for individuals 16 and over—the share of that segment of the population who are working— was 60.7 percent in January and has been gradually increasing since 2011. Other indicators are also consistent with a strong labor market. As reported in the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey (JOLTS), the job openings rate has moved higher since the first half of 2018, and in December, it was at its highest level since the data began in 2000. The quits rate in the JOLTS is also near the top of its historical range, an indication that workers have become more confident that they can successfully switch jobs when they wish to. In addition, the JOLTS layoff rate has remained low, and the number of people filing initial claims for unemployment insurance benefits has also remained low. Survey evidence indicates that households perceive jobs as plentiful and that businesses see vacancies as hard to fill. . . . and unemployment rates have fallen for all major demographic groups over the past several years The flattening in unemployment since mid- 2018 has been evident across racial and ethnic groups (figure 4). Even so, over the past several years, the decline in the unemployment rates for blacks or African Americans and for Hispanics has been particularly notable, and the unemployment rates for these groups are near their lowest readings since these series began in the early 1970s. Differences in unemployment rates across ethnic and racial groups have narrowed in recent years, as they typically do during economic expansions, after having widened during the recession; on net, unemployment rates for African Americans and Hispanics remain substantially above those for whites and Asians, with differentials generally a bit below pre-recession levels. The rise in LFPRs for prime-age individuals over the past few years has also been apparent in each of these racial and ethnic groups. Nonetheless, the LFPR for whites remains 4. Unemployment rate by race and ethnicity NOTE: Unemployment rate measures total unemployed as a percentage of the labor force. Persons whose ethnicity is identified as Hispanic or Latino may be of any race. The shaded bar indicates a period of business recession as defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research. 5. Prime-age labor force participation rate by race and ethnicity higher than that for other groups (figure 5). Important differences in economic outcomes persist across other characteristics as well (see, for example, the box “Employment Disparities between Rural and Urban Areas,” which highlights that there has been less improvement since 2010 in the LFPR and employment-to-population ratio for prime-age individuals in rural areas compared with urban areas). Increases in labor compensation have picked up recently but remain moderate by historical standards . . . NOTE: The prime-age labor force participation rate is a percentage of the population aged 25 to 54. Persons whose ethnicity is identified as Hispanic or Latino may be of any race. The data are seasonally adjusted by Board staff and are 3-month moving averages. The shaded bar indicates a period of business recession as defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research. Most available indicators suggest that growth of hourly compensation has stepped up further since June 2018 after having firmed somewhat over the past few years; however, growth rates remain moderate compared with those that prevailed in the decade before the recession. Compensation per hour in the business sector—a broad-based measure of wages and benefits, but one that is quite volatile—rose 2¼ percent over the four quarters ending in 2018:Q3, about the same as the average annual increase over the past seven years or so (figure 6). The employment cost index, a less volatile measure of both wages and the cost to employers of providing benefits, increased 3 percent over the same period, while average hourly earnings—which do not take account of benefits—increased 3.2 percent over the 12 months ending in January of this year; the annual increases in both of these measures were the strongest in nearly 10 years. The measure of wage growth computed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta that tracks median 12-month wage growth of individuals reporting to the Current Population Survey showed an increase of 3.7 percent in January, near the upper end of its readings in the past three years and well above the average increase in the preceding few years.5 . . . and have likely been restrained by slow growth of labor productivity over much of the expansion These moderate rates of compensation gains likely reflect the offsetting influences of a strong labor market and productivity growth that has been weak through much of the expansion. From 2008 to 2017, labor productivity increased a little more than 1 percent per year, on average, well below the average pace from 1996 to 2007 of nearly 3 percent and also below the average gain in the 1974–95 period (figure 7). Although considerable debate remains about the reasons for the slowdown over this period, the weakness in productivity growth may be partly attributable to the sharp pullback in capital investment during the most recent recession and the relatively slow recovery that followed. More recently, however, labor productivity is estimated to have increased almost 2 percent at an annual rate in the first three quarters of 2018—still moderate relative to earlier periods, but its fastest three-quarter gain since 2010. While it is uncertain whether this faster rate of growth will persist, a sustained pickup in productivity growth, as well as additional labor market strengthening, would likely support stronger gains in labor compensation. 5. The Atlanta Fed’s measure differs from others in that it measures the wage growth only of workers who were employed both in the current survey month and 12 months earlier. 6. Measures of change in hourly compensation NOTE: Business-sector compensation is on a 4-quarter percentage change basis and extends through 2018:Q3. For the private-sector employment cost index, change is over the 12 months ending in the last month of each quarter; for private-sector average hourly earnings, the data are 12-month percent changes and begin in March 2007; for the Atlanta Fed's Wage Growth Tracker, the data are shown as a 3-month moving average of the 12-month percent change. 7. Change in business-sector output per hour NOTE: Changes are measured from Q4 of the year immediately preceding the period through Q4 of the final year of the period. The bar for 2018 reports growth from 2017:Q4 through 2018:Q3 at an annual rate. The U.S. labor market has recovered substantially since 2010. For people in their prime working years (ages 25 to 54), the unemployment rate has moved down steadily to levels below the previous business cycle peak in 2007, the labor force participation rate (LFPR) has retraced much of its decline, and the share of the population who are employed—known as the employment-to-population ratio, or EPOP ratio— has returned to about its level before the recession. However, the labor market recovery has been uneven across the country, with “rural” (or nonmetro) areas showing markedly less improvement than cities and their surroundings (metro areas).1 The extent of the initial decline and subsequent improvement in the EPOP ratio varied by metropolitan status. The gap between the EPOP ratios in rural and larger urban areas is now noticeably wider than it was before the recession, and the cyclical recovery started later in rural areas. Specifically, as shown in figure A, the prime-age EPOP is now slightly above its pre- recession level in larger urban areas, whereas it is just below its pre-recession average in smaller urban areas and much below its pre-recession level in rural areas.2 NOTE: Data are for persons aged 25 to 54. Larger metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs) consist of 500,000 people or more, and smaller MSAs consist of 100,000 to 500,000 people. The shaded bars indicate periods of business recession as defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research. SOURCE: References listed in box note 2. The EPOP ratio can usefully be viewed as summarizing both the LFPR—that is, the share of the population that either has a job or is actively looking for work—and the unemployment rate, which measures the share of the labor force without a job and actively searching.3 The divergence in rural and urban EPOP ratios during the economic expansion almost entirely reflects divergences in LFPRs rather than in unemployment rates (figures B and C). In particular, the rural and urban unemployment rates have tracked each (continued) 1. For convenience, we refer to metropolitan counties with strong commuting ties to an urbanized center as “urban” and nonmetropolitan counties that lack such ties as “rural.” 2. For all figures in this discussion, the raw data are from the U.S. Census Bureau, Current Population Survey; note that the Bureau of Labor Statistics is involved in the survey process for the Current Population Survey. Calculations of the series shown are as described in Alison Weingarden (2017), “Labor Market Outcomes in Metropolitan and Non-metropolitan Areas: Signs of Growing Disparities,” FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 25), www.federalreserve. gov/econres/notes/feds-notes/labor-market-outcomes-in- metropolitan-and-non-metropolitan-areas-signs-of-growing- disparities-20170925.htm. The figures show 12-month moving averages of the monthly time-series. NOTE: Data are for persons aged 25 to 54. Larger metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs) consist of 500,000 people or more, and smaller MSAs consist of 100,000 to 500,000 people. The shaded bars indicate periods of business recession as defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research. SOURCE: References listed in box note 2. 3. Specifically, the EPOP ratio equals (LFPR) x (1 – unemployment rate), where LFPR is defined as “labor force/ population” and the unemployment rate is defined as “persons unemployed/labor force.” These numbers are multiplied by 100 for presentation purposes in the figures. other fairly closely in this expansion, though they have diverged a little in the past few years. In contrast, the difference between rural and urban LFPRs has widened significantly over the past decade. On average, people in rural areas tend to have fewer years of schooling than people in urban areas, and because the EPOP ratio tends to be lower for individuals with less education, this demographic difference has contributed to the persistent rural–urban divide. However, these educational differences do not appear responsible for the fact that the gap between rural and urban EPOP ratios have widened. Figure D shows that, in recent years, rural and urban EPOP ratios diverged substantially even within educational categories, similar to the divergence in EPOPs more generally. The left panel of figure D shows that the EPOP ratio of non-college-educated adults ages 25 to 54 has been much lower in rural areas than in urban ones beginning in 2012. The right panel of figure D shows that the EPOP ratio of college-educated adults used to be higher in rural areas than in urban ones, but that is no longer so. Thus, the recent widening of the rural–urban disparity in EPOP ratios has not been primarily driven by differences in years of education. Nevertheless, because the recovery in the EPOP ratio for non-college-educated adults in rural areas NOTE: Data are for persons aged 25 to 54. Larger metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs) consist of 500,000 people or more, and smaller MSAs consist of 100,000 to 500,000 people. The shaded bars indicate periods of business recession as defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research. SOURCE: References listed in box note 2. (continued on next page) NOTE: Data are for persons aged 25 to 54. MSA is metropolitan statistical area. The shaded bars indicate periods of business recession as defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research. SOURCE: References listed in box note 2. has been particularly weak, it is likely that broader macroeconomic trends—including the ongoing shift in labor demand that has favored individuals with more education—have had more adverse consequences for the populations in rural areas than in urban areas. For example, manufacturing, where employment has stagnated, accounts for a larger share of employment in rural areas than in urban areas, while fast-growing services industries, such as health-care and professional services that tend to employ workers with more education, are more concentrated in urban areas. Indeed, employment in manufacturing has not yet fully recovered from the recession. And, despite the strength in the past two years, the share of total employment in manufacturing has remained near its post-recession low. The fact that most of the EPOP divergence is seen in labor force participation rather than unemployment rates suggests that many rural workers who experienced a permanent job loss, perhaps due to a factory closing, decided to eventually exit the labor force rather than continue their job search. Some individuals who had been working, despite ongoing health problems, may have responded to job loss and poor reemployment opportunities by applying for Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI) benefits, and, in fact, take-up increased a little more in rural areas than it did in urban ones over the past decade.4 When regions are faced with adverse changes in labor demand, some residents may respond by migrating to more prosperous areas. The more out- migration that occurs from areas with relatively fewer labor market opportunities, the smaller should be the observed decline in local-area EPOPs.5 However, some research suggests that the average migration response to adverse demand shocks has decreased in recent decades, which could amplify the labor market effects of local shocks and lead to persistent disparities in EPOP ratios across areas.6 4. This increase could reflect growing public health problems (which expands the pool of individuals who qualify for SSDI) and sluggish labor demand in rural areas (which increases the propensity of individuals to apply for SSDI benefits). 5. Although a higher rate of rural out-migration would help close the EPOP gap, depopulation might exacerbate economic difficulties for those who remain in rural areas. 6. See, for example, Mai Dao, Davide Furceri, and Prakash Loungani (2017), “Regional Labor Market Adjustment in the United States: Trend and Cycle,” Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 99 (May), pp. 243–57. Price inflation is close to 2 percent Consumer price inflation has fluctuated around the FOMC’s objective of 2 percent, largely reflecting movements in energy prices. As measured by the 12-month change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), inflation is estimated to have been 1.7 percent in December after being above 2 percent for much of 2018 (figure 8).6 Core PCE inflation—that is, inflation excluding consumer food and energy prices—is estimated to have been 1.9 percent in December. Because food and energy prices are often quite volatile, core inflation typically provides a better indication than the total measure of where overall inflation will be in the future. Total inflation was below core inflation for the year as a whole not only because of softness in energy prices, but also because food price inflation has remained relatively low. Core inflation has moved up since 2017, when inflation was held down by some unusually large price declines in a few relatively small categories of spending, such as mobile phone services. The trimmed mean PCE price index, produced by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, provides an alternative way to purge inflation of transitory influences, and it may be less sensitive than the core index to idiosyncratic price movements such as those noted earlier. The 12-month change in this measure did not decline as much as core PCE inflation in 2017, and it was 2.0 percent in November.7 Inflation likely has been increasingly supported by the strong labor market in an environment of stable inflation expectations; inflation last year was 6. The partial government shutdown has delayed publication of the Bureau of Economic Analysis’s estimate for PCE price inflation in December, and the numbers reported here are estimates based on the December consumer and producer price indexes. 7. The trimmed mean index excludes whichever prices showed the largest increases or decreases in a given month. Note that over the past 20 years, changes in the trimmed mean index have averaged about ¼ percentage point above core PCE inflation and 0.1 percentage point above total PCE inflation. 8. Change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures Trimmed mean Excluding food and energy NOTE: The data for total and excluding food and energy extend through December 2018; final values are staff estimates. The trimmed data extend through November 2018. SOURCE: For trimmed mean, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas; for all else, 9. Spot and futures prices for crude oil NOTE: The data are weekly averages of daily data and extend through 10. Nonfuel import prices and industrial metals indexes NOTE: The data for nonfuel import prices are monthly. The data for industrial metals are a monthly average of daily data and extend through February 20, 2019. also boosted slightly by the tariffs that were imposed throughout 2018. Oil prices have dropped markedly in recent months . . . As noted, the slower pace of total inflation in late 2018 relative to core inflation largely reflected softening in consumer energy prices toward the end of the year. After peaking at about $86 per barrel in early October, the price of crude oil subsequently fell sharply and has averaged around $60 per barrel this year (figure 9). The recent decline in oil prices has led to moderate reductions in the cost of gasoline and heating oil. Supply factors, including surging oil production in Saudi Arabia, Russia, and the United States, appear to be most responsible for the recent price declines, but concerns about weaker global growth likely also played a role. . . . while prices of imports other than energy have also declined After climbing steadily since their early 2016 lows, nonfuel import prices peaked in May 2018 and declined for much of the rest of 2018 in response to dollar appreciation, lower foreign inflation, and declines in commodity prices. In particular, metal prices fell markedly in the second half of 2018, partly reflecting concerns about prospects for the global economy (figure 10). Nonfuel import prices, before accounting for the effects of tariffs on the price of imported goods, had roughly a neutral influence on U.S. price inflation in 2018. Survey-based measures of inflation expectations have been stable . . . Expectations of inflation likely influence actual inflation by affecting wage- and price- setting decisions. Survey-based measures of inflation expectations at medium- and longer- term horizons have remained generally stable over the second half of 2018. In the Survey of Professional Forecasters, conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, the median expectation for the annual rate of increase in the PCE price index over the next 10 years has been very close to 2 percent for the past several years (figure 11). In the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers, the median value for inflation expectations over the next 5 to 10 years has been around 2½ percent since the end of 2016, though this level is about ¼ percentage point lower than had prevailed through 2014. In contrast, in the Survey of Consumer Expectations, conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the median of respondents’ expected inflation rate three years hence—while relatively stable around 3 percent since early 2018—is nonetheless at the top of the range it has occupied over the past couple of years. . . . while market-based measures of inflation compensation have come down since the first half of 2018 Inflation expectations can also be gauged by market-based measures of inflation compensation. However, the inference is not straightforward, because market- based measures can be importantly affected by changes in premiums that provide compensation for bearing inflation and liquidity risks. Measures of longer-term inflation compensation—derived either from differences between yields on nominal Treasury securities and those on comparable-maturity Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS) or from inflation swaps—moved down in the fall and are below levels that prevailed earlier in 2018 (figure 12).8 The TIPS-based measure of 5-to-10-year-forward inflation compensation and the analogous measure from inflation swaps are now about 1¾ percent 8. Inflation compensation implied by the TIPS breakeven inflation rate is based on the difference, at comparable maturities, between yields on nominal Treasury securities and yields on TIPS, which are indexed to the total consumer price index (CPI). Inflation swaps are contracts in which one party makes payments of certain fixed nominal amounts in exchange for cash flows that are indexed to cumulative CPI inflation over some horizon. Inflation compensation derived from inflation swaps typically exceeds TIPS-based compensation, but week-to-week movements in the two measures are highly correlated. 11. Median inflation expectations NOTE: The Michigan survey data are monthly and extend through February 2019; the February data are preliminary. The SPF data for inflation expectations for personal consumption expenditures are quarterly and begin in 2007:Q1. 12. 5-to-10-year-forward inflation compensation NOTE: The data are weekly averages of daily data and extend through February 15, 2019. TIPS is Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities. 13. Change in real gross domestic product and gross domestic income 14. Change in real personal consumption expenditures and disposable personal income Personal consumption expenditures Disposable personal income and 2¼ percent, respectively, with both measures below their respective ranges that persisted for most of the 10 years before the start of the notable declines in mid-2014.9 Real gross domestic product growth was solid, on balance, in the second half of 2018 Real gross domestic product (GDP) rose at an annual rate of 3½ percent in the third quarter, and available indicators point to a moderate gain in the fourth quarter.10 For the year, GDP growth appears to have been a little less than 3 percent, up from the 2½ percent pace in 2017 and the 2 percent pace in the preceding two years (figure 13). Last year’s growth reflects, in part, solid growth in household and business spending, on balance, as well as an increase in government purchases of goods and services; by contrast, housing-sector activity turned down last year. Private domestic final purchases—that is, final purchases by households and businesses, which tend to provide a better indication of future GDP growth than most other components of overall spending—likely posted a strong gain for the year. Some measures of consumer and business sentiment have recently softened—likely reflecting concerns about financial market volatility, the global economic outlook, trade policy tensions, and the government shutdown—and consumer spending appears to have weakened at the end of the year. Nevertheless, the economic expansion continues to be supported by steady job gains, past increases in household wealth, expansionary fiscal policy, and still-favorable domestic financial conditions, including 9. As these measures are based on CPI inflation, one should probably subtract about ¼ percentage point—the average differential with PCE inflation over the past two decades—to infer inflation compensation on a PCE basis. 10. The initial estimate of GDP by the Bureau of Economic Analysis for the fourth quarter was delayed because of the partial government shutdown and will now be released on February 28. Ongoing improvements in the labor market continue to support household income and consumer spending . . . Real consumer spending picked up after some transitory weakness in the first half of 2018, rising at a strong annual rate of 3½ percent in the third quarter and increasing robustly through November (figure 14). However, despite anecdotal reports of favorable holiday sales, retail sales were reported to have declined sharply in December. Real disposable personal income—that is, income after taxes and adjusted for price changes—looks to have increased around 3 percent over the year, boosted by ongoing improvements in the labor market and the reduction in income taxes due to the implementation of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (TCJA). With consumer spending rising at about the same rate as gains in disposable income in 2018 through the third quarter (the latest data available), the personal saving rate was roughly unchanged, on net, over this period (figure 15). . . . although wealth gains have moderated and consumer confidence has recently softened While increases in household wealth have likely continued to support consumer spending, gains in net worth slowed last year. House prices continued to move up in 2018, boosting the wealth of homeowners, but the pace of growth moderated (figure 16). U.S. equity prices are, on net, similar to their levels at the end of 2017. Still, the level of equity and housing wealth relative to income remains very high by historical standards (figure 17).11 11. Indeed, in the third quarter of 2018—the most recent period for which data are available—household net worth was seven times the value of disposable income, the highest-ever reading for that ratio, which dates back to 1947. However, following the decline in stock prices since the summer, this ratio has likely fallen somewhat. 15. Personal saving rate NOTE: Data extend through November 2018. SOURCE: Bureau of Economic Analysis via Haver Analytics. 16. Prices of existing single-family houses NOTE: The data for the S&P/Case-Shiller index extend through November 2018. The data for the CoreLogic index extend through December 2018. SOURCE: CoreLogic Home Price Index; Zillow; S&P/Case-Shiller U.S. National Home Price Index. The S&P/Case-Shiller Index is a product of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. (For Dow Jones Indices licensing information, see the note on the Contents page.) 17. Wealth-to-income ratio NOTE: Data extend through 2018:Q3. The series is the ratio of household NOTE: The data are monthly. Michigan data extend through February 2019; the February data are preliminary. The Conference Board data are indexed to 100 in 1985. The Michigan survey data are indexed to 100 in 1966. 19. Changes in household debt NOTE: Changes are calculated from year-end to year-end except 2018 changes, which are calculated from 2017:Q3 to 2018:Q3. 20. Change in real private nonresidential fixed investment Consumer sentiment as measured by the Michigan survey flattened out at a high level through much of 2018, and the sentiment measure from the Conference Board survey climbed through most of the year, with both measures posting their highest annual averages since 2000 (figure 18). However, consumer sentiment has turned down since around year-end, on net, with the declines primarily reflecting consumers’ expectations for future conditions rather than their assessment of current conditions. Consumer attitudes about car buying have also weakened. Nevertheless, these indicators of consumers’ outlook remain at generally favorable levels, likely reflecting rising income, job gains, and low inflation. Borrowing conditions for consumers remain generally favorable despite interest rates being near the high end of their post-recession range Despite increases in interest rates for consumer loans and some reported further tightening in credit card lending standards, financing conditions for consumers largely remain supportive of growth in household spending, and consumer credit growth in 2018 expanded further at a solid pace (figure 19). Mortgage credit has continued to be readily available for households with solid credit profiles. For borrowers with low credit scores, mortgage underwriting standards have eased somewhat since the first half of 2018 but remain noticeably tighter than before the recession. Financing conditions in the student loan market remain stable, with over 90 percent of such credit being extended by the federal government. Delinquencies on such loans, though staying elevated, continued to improve gradually on net. Business investment growth has moderated after strong gains early in 2018 . . . Investment spending by businesses rose rapidly in the first half of last year, and the available data are consistent with growth having slowed in the second half (figure 20). The apparent slowdown reflects, in part, more moderate growth in investment in equipment and intangibles as well as a likely decline in investment in nonresidential structures after strong gains earlier in the year. Forward- looking indicators of business spending— such as business sentiment, capital spending plans, and profit expectations from industry analysts—have softened recently but remain positive overall. And while new orders of capital goods flattened out toward the end of last year, the backlog of unfilled orders for this equipment has continued to rise. . . . as corporate financing conditions tightened somewhat but remained accommodative overall Spreads of yields on nonfinancial corporate bonds over those on comparable-maturity Treasury securities widened modestly, on balance, since the middle of 2018 as investors’ risk appetite appeared to recede some. Nonetheless, a net decrease in Treasury yields over the past several months has left interest rates on corporate bonds still low by historical standards, and financing conditions appear to have remained accommodative overall. Aggregate net flows of credit to large nonfinancial firms remained solid in the third quarter (figure 21). The gross issuance of corporate bonds and new issuance of leveraged loans both fell considerably toward the end of the year but have since rebounded, mirroring movements in financial market volatility. Respondents to the January Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices, or SLOOS, reported that lending standards for commercial and industrial (C&I) loans remained basically unchanged in the fourth quarter after having reported easing standards over the past several quarters. However, banks reported tightening lending standards on all categories of commercial real estate (CRE) loans in the fourth quarter on net. Meanwhile, financing conditions for small businesses have remained generally 21. Selected components of net debt financing for nonfinancial businesses 22. Private housing starts and permits NOTE: The data extend through November 2018. SOURCE: U.S. Census Bureau via Haver Analytics. 23. New and existing home sales Existing home sales NOTE: Data are monthly. New home sales extends through November 2018 and includes only single-family sales. Existing home sales extends through December 2018 and includes single-family, condo, townhome, and co-op sales. SOURCE: For new home sales, U.S. Census Bureau; for existing home 24. Mortgage rates and housing affordability through December 2018, and the mortgage rate data are weekly through February 14, 2019. At an index value of 100, a median-income family has exactly enough income to qualify for a median-priced home mortgage. Housing affordability is seasonally adjusted by Board staff. index data are monthly accommodative. Lending volumes to small businesses rebounded a bit in recent months, and indicators of recent loan performance stayed strong. Activity in the housing sector has been declining Residential investment declined in 2018, as housing starts held about flat and sales of existing homes moved lower (figures 22 and 23). The drop in residential investment reflects rising mortgage rates—which remain higher than in 2017 despite coming down some recently—as well as higher material and labor building costs, which have likely restrained new home construction. Consumers’ perceptions of homebuying conditions deteriorated sharply over 2018, consistent with the decline in the affordability of housing associated with both higher mortgage rates and still-rising house prices (figure 24). Net exports likely subtracted from GDP growth in 2018 After a strong performance in the first half of last year supported by robust exports of agricultural products, real exports declined in the third quarter, and available indicators suggest only a partial rebound in the fourth quarter (figure 25). At the same time, growth in real imports seems to have picked up in the second half of 2018. As a result, real net exports—which lifted U.S. real GDP growth during the first half of 2018—appear to have subtracted from growth in the second half. For the year as a whole, net exports likely subtracted a little from real GDP growth, similar to 2016 and 2017. The nominal trade deficit and the current account deficit in 2018 were little changed as a percent of GDP from 2017 (figure 26). Federal fiscal policy actions boosted economic growth in 2018 . . . Fiscal policy at the federal level boosted GDP growth in 2018, both because of lower income and business taxes from the TCJA and because federal purchases appear to have risen significantly faster than in 2017 as a result of the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018 (figure 27).12 The partial government shutdown, which was in effect from December 22 through January 25, likely held down GDP growth in the first quarter of this year somewhat, largely because of the lost work of furloughed federal government workers and temporarily affected federal contractors. The federal unified deficit widened in fiscal year 2018 to 3¾ percent of nominal GDP because receipts moved lower, to roughly 16½ percent of GDP (figure 28). Expenditures edged down, to 20¼ percent of GDP, but remain above the levels that prevailed in the decade before the start of the 2007–09 recession. The ratio of federal debt held by the public to nominal GDP equaled 78 percent at the end of fiscal 2018 and remains quite elevated relative to historical norms (figure 29). The Congressional Budget Office projects that this ratio will rise over the next several years. . . . and the fiscal position of most state and local governments is stable The fiscal position of most state and local governments is stable, although there is a range of experiences across these governments. After several years of slow growth, revenue gains of state governments strengthened notably as sales and income tax collections have picked up over the past few quarters. At the local level, property tax collections continue to rise at a solid clip, pushed higher by past house price gains. After declining a bit in 2017, real state and local government purchases grew moderately last year, driven largely by a boost in construction but also reflecting modest growth in employment at these governments. 12. The Joint Committee on Taxation estimated that the TCJA would reduce average annual tax revenue by a little more than 1 percent of GDP starting in 2018 and for several years thereafter. This revenue estimate does not account for the potential macroeconomic effects of the legislation. 25. Change in real imports and exports of goods and services 26. U.S. trade and current account balances NOTE: Data for 2018 are the average of the first three quarters of the year, at an annualized rate. GDP is gross domestic product. 27. Change in real government expenditures on consumption and investment 28. Federal receipts and expenditures NOTE: The receipts and expenditures data are on a unified-budget basis and are for fiscal years (October through September); gross domestic product (GDP) data are for the four quarters ending in Q3. 29. Federal government debt held by the public NOTE: The data extend through 2018:Q3. The data for gross domestic product (GDP) are at an annual rate. Federal debt held by the public equals federal debt less Treasury securities held in federal employee defined benefit retirement accounts, evaluated at the end of the quarter. The expected path of the federal funds rate over the next several years has moved down Despite the further strengthening in the labor market and continued expansion in the U.S. economy, market-based measures of the expected path for the federal funds rate over the next several years have declined, on net, since the middle of last year (figure 30). Various factors contributed to this shift, including increased investor concerns about downside risks to the global economic outlook and rising trade tensions, as well as FOMC communications that were viewed as signaling patience and greater flexibility in the conduct of monetary policy in response to adverse macroeconomic or financial market developments. Survey-based measures of the expected path of the policy rate through 2020 also shifted down, on net, relative to the levels observed in the first half of 2018. According to the results of the most recent Survey of Primary Dealers and Survey of Market Participants, both conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York just before the January FOMC meeting, the median of respondents’ modal projections for the path of the federal funds rate implies two additional 25 basis point rate increases in 2019. Relative to the December survey, these increases are expected to occur later in 2019. Looking further ahead, respondents to the January survey forecast no rate increases in 2020 and in 2021.13 Meanwhile, market-based measures of uncertainty about the policy rate approximately one to two years ahead were little changed, on balance, from their levels at the end of last June. 13. The results of the Survey of Primary Dealers and the Survey of Market Participants are available on the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s website at https://www.newyorkfed.org/markets/primarydealer_ survey_questions.html and https://www.newyorkfed.org/ markets/survey_market_participants, respectively. The nominal Treasury yield curve continued to flatten The nominal Treasury yield curve flattened somewhat further since the first half of 2018, with the 2-year nominal Treasury yield little changed and the 5- and 10-year nominal Treasury yields declining about 25 basis points on net (figure 31). At the same time, yields on inflation-protected Treasury securities edged up, leaving market-based measures of inflation compensation moderately lower. In explaining movements in Treasury yields since mid-2018, market participants have pointed to developments related to the global economic outlook and trade tensions, FOMC communications, and fluctuations in oil prices. Option-implied volatility on swap rates—an indicator of uncertainty about Treasury yields—declined slightly on net. Consistent with changes in yields on nominal Treasury securities, yields on 30-year agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS)—an important determinant of mortgage interest rates—decreased about 20 basis points, on balance, since the middle of last year and remain low by historical standards (figure 32). Meanwhile, yields on both investment-grade and high-yield corporate debt declined a bit (figure 33). As a result, the spreads on corporate bond yields over comparable- maturity Treasury yields are modestly wider than at the end of June. The cumulative increases over the past year have left spreads for high-yield and investment-grade corporate bonds close to their historical medians, with both spreads notably above the very low levels that prevailed a year ago. Broad equity price indexes increased somewhat Broad U.S. stock market indexes increased somewhat since the middle of last year, on net, amid substantial volatility (figure 34). Concerns over the sustainability of corporate earnings growth, the global growth outlook, international trade tensions, and some Federal 30. Market-implied federal funds rate path NOTE: The federal funds rate path is implied by quotes on overnight index swaps—a derivative contract tied to the effective federal funds rate. The implied path as of February 20, 2019, is compared with that as of June 29, 2018. The path is estimated with a spline approach, assuming a term premium of 0 basis points. The current path extends through November 2021 and the previous one through September 2021. 31. Yields on nominal Treasury securities 32. Yield and spread on agency mortgage-backed securities NOTE: The data are daily. Yield shown is for the Fannie Mae 30-year current coupon, the coupon rate at which new mortgage-backed securities would be priced at par, or face, value. Spread shown is to the average of the 5- and 10-year nominal Treasury yields. 33. Corporate bond yields, by securities rating NOTE: Investment-grade is the 10-year triple-B, which reflects the effective yield of the ICE BofAML 7-to-10-year triple-B U.S. Corporate Index (C4A4). High-yield is the 10-year high-yield and reflects the effective yield of the ICE BofAML 7-to-10-year U.S. Cash Pay High Yield Index (J4A0). 34. Equity prices Jones Indices licensing information, see the note on the Contents page.) 35. S&P 500 volatility Realized volatility NOTE: The VIX is a measure of implied volatility that represents the expected annualized change in the S&P 500 index over the following 30 days. For realized volatility, five-minute returns are used in an exponentially weighted moving average with 75 percent of weight distributed over the past 20 days. Reserve communications that were perceived as less accommodative than expected weighed on investor sentiment for a time. There were considerable differences in stock returns across sectors, reflecting their varying degrees of sensitivities to energy price declines, trade tensions, and rising interest rates. In particular, stock prices of companies in the utilities sector—which tend to benefit from falling interest rates—and in the health-care sector outperformed broader indexes. Conversely, stock prices in the energy sector substantially underperformed the broad indexes, as oil prices dropped sharply. Basic materials—a sector that was particularly sensitive to concerns about the global growth outlook and trade tensions—also underperformed. Bank stock prices declined slightly, on net, as the yield curve flattened and funding costs rose. Measures of implied and realized stock price volatility for the S&P 500 index—the VIX and the 20-day realized volatility— increased sharply in the fourth quarter of last year to near the high levels observed in early February 2018 amid sharp equity price declines. These volatility measures partially retraced following the turn of the year, with the VIX returning to near the 30th percentile of its historical distribution and with realized volatility ending the period close to the 70th percentile of its historical range (figure 35). (For a discussion of financial stability issues, see the box “Developments Related to Financial Stability.”) Markets for Treasury securities, mortgage- backed securities, and municipal bonds have functioned well Available indicators of Treasury market functioning have generally remained stable since the first half of 2018, with a variety of liquidity metrics—including bid-ask spreads, bid sizes, and estimates of transaction costs— displaying few signs of liquidity pressures. Liquidity conditions in the agency MBS market were also generally stable. Overall, the functioning of Treasury and agency MBS markets has not been materially affected by the implementation of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet normalization program over the past year and a half. Credit conditions in municipal bond markets have remained stable since the middle of last year, though yield spreads on 20 year general obligation municipal bonds over comparable-maturity Treasury securities were modestly higher on net. Money market rates have moved up in line with increases in the FOMC’s target range Conditions in domestic short-term funding markets have also remained generally stable since the beginning of the summer. Increases in the FOMC’s target range were transmitted effectively through money markets, with yields on a broad set of money market instruments moving higher in response to the FOMC’s policy actions in September and December. The effective federal funds rate moved to parity with the interest rate paid on reserves and was closely tracked by the overnight Eurodollar rate. Other short-term interest rates, including those on commercial paper and negotiable certificates of deposits, also moved up in light of increases in the policy rate. Bank credit continued to expand, and bank profitability improved Aggregate credit provided by commercial banks expanded through the second half of 2018 at a stronger pace than the one observed in the first half of last year, as the strength in C&I loan growth more than offset the moderation in the growth in CRE loans and loans to households. In the fourth quarter of last year, the pace of bank credit expansion was about in line with that of nominal GDP, leaving the ratio of total commercial bank credit to current-dollar GDP little changed relative to last June (figure 36). Overall, measures of bank profitability improved further in the third quarter despite a flattening yield curve, but they remain below their pre- crisis levels (figure 37). 36. Ratio of total commercial bank credit to nominal gross domestic product NOTE: Data for 2018:Q4 are estimated. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Board, Statistical Release H.8, “Assets and Liabilities of Commercial Banks in the United States”; Bureau of Economic Analysis via Haver Analytics. 37. Profitability of bank holding companies NOTE: The data are quarterly and are seasonally adjusted. The data extend The Federal Reserve Board’s financial stability monitoring framework The framework used by the Federal Reserve Board to monitor financial stability distinguishes between shocks to and vulnerabilities of the financial system. Shocks, such as sudden changes to financial or economic conditions, are typically surprises and are inherently difficult to predict, whereas vulnerabilities tend to build up over time and are the aspects of the financial system that are most expected to cause widespread problems in times of stress. Some vulnerabilities are cyclical in nature, rising and falling over time, while others are structural, stemming from longer-term forces shaping the nature of credit intermediation. As a result, the framework focuses primarily on monitoring vulnerabilities and emphasizes four broad categories based on academic research.1 Since the publication of the Federal Reserve Board’s first Financial Stability Report on November 28, 2018, some areas where valuation pressures were a concern have cooled, particularly those related to below- investment-grade corporate debt.2 Regulatory capital and liquidity ratios of key financial institutions, especially large banks, are at historically high levels. Funding risks in the financial system are low relative to the period leading up to the crisis. Borrowing by households has risen roughly in line with household incomes and has been concentrated among prime borrowers. Nonetheless, debt owed by businesses is high, and credit standards, especially within segments of the loan market focused on lower-rated or unrated firms, deteriorated in the second half of 2018. 1. Elevated valuation pressures are signaled by asset prices that are high relative to economic fundamentals or historical norms and are often driven by an increased willingness of investors to take on risk. As such, elevated valuation pressures imply a greater possibility of outsized drops in asset prices. 2. Excessive borrowing by businesses and households leaves them vulnerable to distress if their incomes decline or the assets they own fall in value. 3. Excessive leverage within the financial sector increases the risk that financial institutions will not have the ability to absorb losses when hit by adverse shocks. 4. Funding risks expose the financial system to the possibility that investors will “run” by withdrawing their funds from a particular institution or sector. Facing a run, financial institutions may need to sell assets quickly at “fire sale” prices, thereby incurring substantial losses and potentially even becoming insolvent. Historians and economists often refer to widespread investor runs as “financial panics.” Asset valuations increased to the high end of their historical ranges in many markets over 2017 and the first half of 2018, supported by the solid economic expansion and an apparent increase in investors’ appetite for risk. However, compared with July 2018, around the time of the previous Monetary Policy Report, valuation pressures have eased somewhat in the equity, corporate bond, and leveraged loan markets. Over the same period, amid substantial market volatility, the forward equity price-to-earnings ratio of S&P 500 firms, a metric of valuations in equity markets, declined a touch, on net, and it currently stands just below the top quartile of its historical distribution (figure A). Spreads on both investment- and speculative- grade corporate bonds over comparable-maturity Treasury securities widened modestly to levels close to the medians of their historical ranges since 1997 (figure B). Spreads on newly issued leveraged loans widened markedly in the fourth quarter of 2018. In real estate markets, commercial real estate prices have been growing faster than rents for several years, leaving valuations stretched. While this framework provides a systematic way to assess financial stability, some potential risks do not fit neatly into it because they are novel or difficult to quantify, such as cybersecurity or developments in crypto-assets. In addition, some vulnerabilities are difficult to measure with currently available data, and the set of vulnerabilities may evolve over time. Given these limitations, we continually rely on ongoing business debt have diverged (figure C). Over the past several years, borrowing by households has stayed in line with income growth and has been concen- trated among borrowers with strong credit histories. (continued) 1. For a review of the research literature in this area and further discussion, see Tobias Adrian, Daniel Covitz, and Nellie Liang (2015), “Financial Stability Monitoring,” Annual Review of Financial Economics, vol. 7 (December), pp. 357–95. 2. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System NOTE: Aggregate forward price-to-earnings ratio of S&P 500 firms. Data are based on expected earnings for 12 months ahead. The plus sign shows daily data corresponding to February 20, 2019. NOTE: The 10-year triple-B reflects the effective yield of the ICE BofAML 7-to-10-year triple-B U.S. Corporate Index (C4A4), and the 10-year high-yield reflects the effective yield of the ICE BofAML 7-to-10-year U.S. Cash Pay High Yield Index (J4A0). Treasury yields from smoothed yield curve estimated from off-the-run securities. By contrast, borrowing by businesses, including riskier firms, has expanded significantly. For speculative- grade and unrated firms, the ratio of debt to assets has increased steadily since 2010 and remains near its historical peak. Further, growth in debt to businesses with lower credit ratings and with already elevated levels of borrowing, such as high-yield bonds and leveraged loans, has been substantial over the past NOTE: Data are quarterly and extend through 2018:Q3. The shaded bars indicate periods of business recession as defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research. GDP is gross domestic product. two years (figure D). Issuance of these instruments slowed significantly in November and December 2018 because of the sharply higher spreads demanded by investors to hold them, but issuance has rebounded somewhat in early 2019. deteriorated over the second half of 2018. The share of newly issued large loans to corporations with high leverage—defined as those with ratios of debt to EBITDA (earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization) above 6—increased through 2018 to levels exceeding previous peaks observed in 2007 and 2014, when underwriting quality was notably poor. In addition, issuance of covenant-lite loans—loans with few or no traditional maintenance covenants—remained high during the second half of 2018, although this elevated level may reflect, in part, a greater prevalence of investors who do not traditionally monitor and exercise loan covenants.3 Nonetheless, the strong economy has helped sustain solid credit performance of leveraged loans in 2018, with the default rate on such loans near the low end of its historical range. (continued on next page) 3. Collateralized loan obligations, which are predominantly backed by leveraged loans, have grown rapidly over the past year and, as of year-end 2018, purchase about 60 percent of leveraged loans at origination. Similarly, mutual funds hold about 20 percent of leveraged loans. NOTE: Total net issuance of risky debt is the sum of the net issuance of speculative-grade and unrated bonds and leveraged loans. The data are four-quarter moving averages. The credit quality of nonfinancial high-yield corporate bonds was roughly stable over the past several years, with the share of high-yield bonds outstanding that are rated B3/B- or below staying flat and below the financial crisis peak. In contrast, the distribution of ratings among investment-grade corporate bonds deteriorated. The share of bonds rated at the lowest investment-grade level (for example, an S&P rating of triple-B) reached near-record levels. As of December 2018, around 42 percent of corporate bonds outstanding were at the lowest end of the investment- grade segment, amounting to about $3 trillion. vulnerabilities from financial-sector leverage continue to be low relative to historical standards, in part because of regulatory reforms enacted since the financial crisis. Core financial intermediaries, including large banks, insurance companies, and broker-dealers, appear well positioned to weather economic stress. As of the third quarter of 2018, regulatory capital ratios for the U.S. global systemically important banks remained well above regulatory requirements and were close to historical highs. Those banks will be subject to the 2019 Dodd-Frank Act stress tests and Comprehensive Capital Assessment and Review. Consistent with the Federal Reserve Board’s public framework, this year’s scenarios feature a larger increase in unemployment and a deeper recession than in 2018 as well as typically large declines in financial asset prices. Capital levels at insurance companies and broker- dealers also remained relatively robust by historical standards. A range of indicators suggest that hedge fund leverage was roughly unchanged over 2018; however, comprehensive data, available with a significant time lag, from early 2018 showed that leverage remained at the upper end of its range over the past eight years. vulnerabilities associated with funding risk—that is, the financing of illiquid assets or long-maturity assets with short-maturity debt—continue to be low, in part because of the post-crisis implementation of liquidity regulations for banks and the 2016 money market reforms.4 Banks are holding higher levels of liquid assets, while their use of short-term wholesale funding as a share of liabilities is near historical lows. Assets under management at prime funds, institutions that proved vulnerable to runs in the past, have risen somewhat in recent months but remained far below pre-reform levels. stability include a downturn in global growth, political and policy uncertainty, an intensification of trade tensions, and broadening stress in emerging market economies (EMEs). In many advanced foreign economies, financial conditions tightened somewhat in the second half of 2018, partly reflecting a deterioration in the fiscal outlook of Italy and Brexit uncertainty. The United Kingdom and the European Union (EU) have not yet ratified the terms for the United Kingdom’s March 2019 withdrawal from the EU (Brexit). Without such a withdrawal agreement, there will be no transition period for important trade and financial interactions between U.K. and EU residents, and, despite preparations for a “no-deal Brexit,” a wide range of economic and financial activities could be disrupted. EMEs also experienced heightened financial stress in the second half of 2018. Although that stress has receded somewhat more recently, many EMEs continue to harbor important vulnerabilities, reflecting one or more of substantial corporate leverage, fiscal concerns, or excessive reliance on foreign funding. 4. See U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (2014), “SEC Adopts Money Market Fund Reform Rules,” press release, July 23, https://www.sec.gov/news/press-release/2014-143. Economic activity in most foreign economies weakened in the second half of 2018 After expanding briskly in 2017, foreign GDP growth moderated in 2018. While part of this slowdown is likely due to temporary factors, it also appears to reflect weaker underlying momentum against the backdrop of somewhat tighter financial conditions, increased policy uncertainty, and ongoing debt deleveraging. The growth slowdown was particularly pronounced in advanced foreign economies Real GDP growth in several advanced foreign economies (AFEs) slowed markedly in the second half of the year (figure 38). This slowdown was concentrated in the manufacturing sector against the backdrop of softening global trade flows. In Japan, real GDP contracted in the second half of 2018, as economic activity, which was disrupted by a series of natural disasters in the third quarter, rebounded only partly in the fourth quarter. Growth in the euro area slowed in the second half of the year: Transportation bottlenecks and complications in meeting tighter emissions standards for new motor vehicles weighed on German economic activity, while output contracted in Italy. Although some of these headwinds appear to be fading, recent indicators—especially for the manufacturing sector—point to only a limited recovery of activity in the euro area at the start of 2019. Inflation pressures remain contained in advanced foreign economies . . . In recent months, headline inflation has fallen below central bank targets in many major AFEs, reflecting large declines in energy prices (figure 39). In the euro area and Japan, low headline inflation rates also reflect subdued core inflation. In Canada and the United Kingdom, instead, core inflation rates have been close to 2 percent. 38. Real gross domestic product growth in selected advanced foreign economies NOTE: The data for the euro area, Japan, and the U.K. incorporate preliminary estimates for 2018:Q4. The data for Canada extend through 2018:Q3. 39. Consumer price inflation in selected advanced foreign economies NOTE: The data for the euro area incorporate the flash estimate for January 2019. The data for the United Kingdom extend through January 2019. The data for Canada and Japan extend through December 2018. 40. Equity indexes for selected foreign economies NOTE: The data are weekly averages of daily data and extend through 41. Nominal 10-year government bond yields in selected advanced economies NOTE: The data are weekly averages of daily benchmark yields and extend . . . prompting central banks to withdraw accommodation only gradually With underlying inflation still subdued, the Bank of Japan and the European Central Bank (ECB) kept their short-term policy rates at negative levels. Although the ECB concluded its asset purchase program in December, it signaled an only very gradual removal of policy accommodation going forward. The Bank of England (BOE) and the Bank of Canada, which both began raising interest rates in 2017, increased their policy rates further in the second half of 2018 but to levels that are still low by historical standards. The BOE noted that elevated uncertainty around the United Kingdom’s exit from the European Union (EU) weighed on the country’s economic outlook. Political uncertainty and slower economic growth weighed on AFE asset prices Moderation in global growth, protracted budget negotiations between the Italian government and the EU, and developments related to the United Kingdom’s withdrawal from the EU weighed on AFE asset prices in the second half of 2018 (figure 40). Broad stock price indexes in the AFEs fell, interest rates on sovereign bonds in several countries in the European periphery remained elevated, and European bank shares underperformed, although these moves have partially retraced in recent weeks. Market-implied paths of policy in major AFEs and long-term sovereign bond yields declined somewhat, as economic data disappointed (figure 41). Growth slowed in many emerging market economies Chinese GDP growth slowed in the second half of 2018 as an earlier tightening of credit policy, aimed at restraining the buildup of debt, caused infrastructure investment to fall sharply and squeezed household spending (figure 42). However, increased concerns about a sharper-than-expected slowdown in growth, as well as prospective effects of trade policies, prompted Chinese authorities to ease monetary and fiscal policy somewhat. Elsewhere in emerging Asia, growth remained well below its 2017 pace amid headwinds from moderating global growth. Tighter financial conditions also weighed on growth in other EMEs—notably, Argentina and Turkey. Economic activity strengthened somewhat in Mexico and Brazil, but uncertainty about policy developments remains elevated In Mexico, economic activity increased at a more rapid rate in the third quarter after modest advances earlier in the year. However, growth weakened again in the fourth quarter, as perceptions that the newly elected government would pursue less market-friendly policies led to a sharp tightening in financial conditions. Amid a sharp peso depreciation and above-target inflation, the Bank of Mexico raised its policy rate to 8.25 percent in December. Brazilian real GDP growth rebounded in the third quarter after being held down by a nationwide trucker’s strike in May, and financial markets have rallied on expectations that Brazil’s new government will pursue economic policies that support growth. However, investors continued to focus on whether the new administration would pass significant fiscal reforms. Financial conditions in many emerging market economies were volatile but are, on net, little changed since July Financial conditions in the EMEs generally tightened in the second half of 2018, as investor concerns about vulnerabilities in several EMEs intensified against the backdrop of higher policy uncertainty, slowing global growth, and rising U.S. interest rates. Trade policy tensions between the United States and China weighed on asset prices, especially in China and other Asian economies. Broad measures of EME sovereign bond spreads over U.S. Treasury yields rose, and benchmark EME equity indexes declined. However, 42. Real gross domestic product growth in selected emerging market economies NOTE: The data for China are seasonally adjusted by Board staff. The data for Korea, Mexico, and Brazil are seasonally adjusted by their respective government agencies. The data for Korea and Mexico incorporate preliminary estimates for 2018:Q4. The data for Brazil extend through 2018:Q3. 43. Emerging market mutual fund flows and spreads Bond fund flows (right axis) Equity fund flows (right axis) EMBI+ (left axis) NOTE: The bond and equity fund flows data are quarterly sums of weekly data from January 1, 2015, to December 31, 2018, and monthly sums of weekly data from January 1, 2019, to February 20, 2019. The fund flows data exclude funds located in China. The J.P. Morgan Emerging Markets Bond Index Plus (EMBI+) data are weekly averages of daily data and extend through February 19, 2019. SOURCE: For bond and equity fund flows, EPFR Global; for EMBI+, J.P. 44. U.S. dollar exchange rate indexes NOTE: The data, which are in foreign currency units per dollar, are weekly averages of daily data and extend through February 20, 2019. As indicated by the arrow, increases in the data represent U.S. dollar appreciation, and decreases represent U.S. dollar depreciation. financial conditions improved significantly in recent months, supported in part by more positive policy developments—including the U.S.-Mexico-Canada Agreement and progress on U.S.–China trade negotiations—and FOMC communications indicating a more gradual normalization of U.S. interest rates. EME mutual fund inflows resumed in recent months after experiencing outflows in the middle of 2018 (figure 43). While movements in asset prices and capital flows have been sizable for a number of economies, broad indicators of financial stress in EMEs are below those seen during other periods of stress in recent years. The dollar appreciated slightly The foreign exchange value of the U.S. dollar is bit a higher than in July (figure 44). Concerns about the global outlook, uncertainty about trade policy, and monetary policy normalization in the United States contributed to the appreciation of the dollar. The Chinese renminbi depreciated against the dollar slightly, on net, amid ongoing trade negotiations and increased concerns about growth prospects in China. The Mexican peso has been volatile amid ongoing political developments and trade negotiations but has, on net, declined only modestly against the dollar. Sharp declines in oil prices also weighed on the currencies of some energy-exporting economies. The Federal Open Market Committee continued to gradually increase the federal funds rate in the second half of last year reflected the solid performance of the U.S. economy, the continued strengthening of the labor market, and the fact that inflation had moved near the Committee’s 2 percent longer- run objective. From late 2015 through the first half of last year, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) gradually increased its target range for the federal funds rate as the economy continued to make progress toward the Committee’s congressionally mandated objectives of maximum employment and price stability. In the second half of 2018, the FOMC continued this gradual process of monetary policy normalization, raising the federal funds rate at its September and December meetings, bringing the target range to 2¼ to 2½ percent (figure 45).14 The FOMC’s decisions to increase the federal funds rate Looking ahead, the FOMC will be patient as it determines what future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate may be appropriate With the gradual reductions in the amount of policy accommodation to date, the federal funds rate is now at the lower end of the range of estimates of its longer-run neutral level— that is, the level of the federal funds rate that is neither expansionary nor contractionary. 14. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Developments at the time of the December FOMC meeting, including volatility in financial markets and increased concerns about global growth, made the appropriate extent and timing of future rate increases more uncertain than earlier. Against that backdrop, the Committee indicated it would monitor global economic and financial developments and assess their implications for the economic outlook. In the Summary 45. Selected interest rates NOTE: The 2-year and 10-year Treasury rates are the constant-maturity yields based on the most actively traded securities. SOURCE: Department of the Treasury; Federal Reserve Board. of Economic Projections (SEP) from the December meeting—the most recent SEP available—participants generally revised down their individual assessments of the appropriate path for monetary policy relative to their assessments at the time of the September meeting.15 In January, the Committee stated that it continued to view sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objective as the most likely outcomes. Nonetheless, in light of global economic and financial developments and muted inflation pressures, the Committee will be patient as it determines what future adjustments to the federal funds rate may be appropriate to support these outcomes. Future changes in the federal funds rate will depend on the economic outlook as informed by incoming data The FOMC has continued to emphasize that the actual path of monetary policy will depend on the evolution of the economic outlook as informed by incoming data. Specifically, in deciding on the timing and size of future adjustments to the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. This assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. In addition to evaluating a wide range of economic and financial data and information gathered from business contacts and other informed parties around the country, policymakers routinely consult 15. See the December Summary of Economic Projections, which appeared as an addendum to the minutes of the December 18–19, 2018, meeting of the FOMC and is presented in Part 3 of this report. prescriptions for the policy interest rate from a variety of rules, which can serve as useful guidance to the FOMC. However, many practical considerations make it undesirable for the FOMC to mechanically follow the prescriptions of any specific rule. Consequently, the FOMC’s framework for conducting systematic monetary policy respects key principles of good monetary policy and, at the same time, provides flexibility to address many of the limitations of these policy rules (see the box “Monetary Policy Rules and Systematic Monetary Policy”). The FOMC has continued to implement its program to gradually reduce the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet The Committee has continued to implement the balance sheet normalization program that has been under way since October 2017.16 Under this program, the FOMC has been reducing its holdings of Treasury and agency securities in a gradual and predictable manner by decreasing its reinvestment of the principal payments it received from these securities. Specifically, such payments have been reinvested only to the extent that they exceeded gradually rising caps (figure 46). In the third quarter of 2018, the Federal Reserve reinvested principal payments from its holdings of Treasury securities maturing during each calendar month in excess of $24 billion. It also reinvested in agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) the amount of principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency MBS received during each calendar month in excess of $16 billion. In the fourth quarter, the FOMC increased the caps for Treasury securities and for agency securities to their respective maximums of $30 billion and $20 billion. Of note, 16. For more information, see the Addendum to the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans, which is available on the Board’s website at https://www. federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_ PolicyNormalization.20170613.pdf. 46. Principal payments on SOMA securities Note: Reinvestment and redemption amounts of Treasury securities are projections starting in February 2019. Reinvestment and redemption amounts of agency debt and mortgage-backed securities are projections starting in February 2019. Cap amounts are projections beyond March 2019. The data extend through December 2019. Source: Federal Reserve Bank of New York; Federal Reserve Board staff calculations. 47. Federal Reserve assets and liabilities Treasury securities held outright NOTE: “Credit and liquidity facilities” consists of primary, secondary, and seasonal credit; term auction credit; central bank liquidity swaps; support for Maiden Lane, Bear Stearns, and AIG; and other credit facilities, including the Primary Dealer Credit Facility, the Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility, the Commercial Paper Funding Facility, and the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility. “Other assets” includes unamortized premiums and discounts on securities held outright. “Capital and other liabilities” includes reverse repurchase agreements, the U.S. Treasury General Account, and the U.S. Treasury Supplementary Financing Account. The data extend through February 13, 2019. reinvestments of agency debt and agency MBS ceased in October as principal payments fell below the maximum redemption caps. The Federal Reserve’s total assets have continued to decline from about $4.3 trillion last July to about $4.0 trillion at present, with holdings of Treasury securities at approximately $2.2 trillion and holdings of As the Federal Reserve has continued to gradually reduce its securities holdings, the level of reserve balances in the banking system has declined. In particular, the level of reserve balances has decreased by about $350 billion since the middle of last year, and Monetary policy rules are mathematical formulas Economists have analyzed many monetary policy that relate a policy interest rate, such as the federal funds rate, to a small number of other economic variables—typically including the deviation of inflation from its target value and a measure of resource slack in the economy. The prescriptions for the policy interest rate from these rules can provide helpful guidance for the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). This discussion provides information on how policy rules inform the FOMC’s systematic conduct of monetary policy, as well as practical considerations that make it undesirable for the FOMC to mechanically follow the prescriptions of any specific rule. The FOMC’s approach for conducting monetary policy provides sufficient flexibility to address the intrinsic complexities and uncertainties in the economy while keeping monetary policy predictable and transparent. rules, including the well-known Taylor (1993) rule. Other rules include the “balanced approach” rule, the “adjusted Taylor (1993)” rule, the “price level” rule, and the “first difference” rule (figure A).3 These policy rules embody the three key principles of good monetary policy and take into account estimates of how far the economy is from the Federal Reserve’s dual-mandate goals of maximum employment and price stability. Four of the five rules include the difference between the rate of unemployment that is sustainable in the longer run and the current unemployment rate (the unemployment rate gap); the first-difference rule includes the change in the unemployment gap rather than its level.4 In addition, four of the five rules include the difference (continued) The effectiveness of monetary policy is enhanced when it is well understood by the public.1 In simple models of the economy, good economic performance can be achieved by following a specific monetary policy rule that fosters public understanding and that incorporates key principles of good monetary policy.2 One such principle is that monetary policy should respond in a predictable way to changes in economic conditions and the economic outlook. A second principle is that monetary policy should be accommodative when inflation is below policymakers’ longer-run inflation objective and employment is below its maximum sustainable level; conversely, monetary policy should be restrictive when the opposite holds. A third principle is that, to stabilize inflation, the policy rate should be adjusted by more than one-for-one in response to persistent increases or decreases in inflation. 3. The Taylor (1993) rule was suggested in John B. Taylor (1993), “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie- Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 39 (December), pp. 195–214. The balanced-approach rule was analyzed in John B. Taylor (1999), “A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules,” in John B. Taylor, ed., Monetary Policy Rules (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), pp. 319–41. The adjusted Taylor (1993) rule was studied in David Reifschneider and John C. Williams (2000), “Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Era,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 32 (November), pp. 936–66. A price-level rule was discussed in Robert E. Hall (1984), “Monetary Strategy with an Elastic Price Standard,” in Price Stability and Public Policy, proceedings of a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 2–3 (Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City), pp. 137–59, https://www.kansascityfed.org/publicat/ sympos/1984/s84.pdf. Finally, the first-difference rule is based on a rule suggested by Athanasios Orphanides (2003), “Historical Monetary Policy Analysis and the Taylor Rule,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 50 (July), pp. 983–1022. A comprehensive review of policy rules is in John B. Taylor and John C. Williams (2011), “Simple and Robust Rules for Monetary Policy,” in Benjamin M. Friedman and Michael Woodford, eds., Handbook of Monetary Economics, vol. 3B (Amsterdam: North-Holland), pp. 829–59. The same volume of the Handbook of Monetary Economics also discusses approaches other than policy rules for deriving policy rate prescriptions. 1. For a discussion of how the public’s understanding of monetary policy matters for the effectiveness of monetary policy, see Janet L. yellen (2012), “Revolution and Evolution in Central Bank Communications,” speech delivered at the Haas School of Business, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, Calif., November 13, https://www.federalreserve.gov/ newsevents/speech/yellen20121113a.htm. 2. For a discussion regarding principles for the conduct of monetary policy, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2018), “Monetary Policy Principles and Practice,” Board of Governors, https://www.federalreserve.gov/ monetarypolicy/monetary-policy-principles-and-practice.htm. 4. The Taylor (1993) rule represented slack in resource utilization using an output gap (the difference between the current level of real gross domestic product (GDP) and the level that GDP would be if the economy were operating at maximum employment). The rules in figure A represent slack in resource utilization using the unemployment gap instead, because that gap better captures the FOMC’s statutory goal to promote maximum employment. However, movements in these alternative measures of resource utilization are highly correlated. For more information, see the note below figure A. Taylor (1993) rule, adjusted Note: Rt balanced-approach, adjusted Taylor (1993), price-level, and first-difference rules, respectively. Rt denotes the actual nominal federal funds rate for quarter t, πt is four-quarter price inflation for quarter t, ut is the LR is the level of the neutral real federal funds rate in the longer run that, on average, is unemployment rate in quarter t, and rt expected to be consistent with sustaining maximum employment and inflation at the FOMC’s 2 percent longer-run objective, LR is the rate of unemployment in the longer run. Zt is the cumulative sum of past deviations of the federal πLR. In addition, ut funds rate from the prescriptions of the Taylor (1993) rule when that rule prescribes setting the federal funds rate below zero. PLgapt is the percent deviation of the actual level of prices from a price level that rises 2 percent per year from its level in a specified starting period. The Taylor (1993) rule and other policy rules are generally written in terms of the deviation of real output from its full capacity level. In these equations, the output gap has been replaced with the gap between the rate of unemployment in the longer run and its actual level (using a relationship known as Okun’s law) in order to represent the rules in terms of the FOMC’s statutory goals. Historically, movements in the output and unemployment gaps have been highly correlated. Box note 3 provides references for the policy rules. FD represent the values of the nominal federal funds rate prescribed by the Taylor (1993), between recent inflation and the FOMC’s longer- run objective (2 percent as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, or PCE), while the price-level rule includes the gap between the level of prices today and the level of prices that would be observed if inflation had been constant at 2 percent from a specified starting year (PLgapt).5 The price-level rule thereby takes account of the deviation of inflation from the long-run objective in earlier periods as well as the current period. The adjusted Taylor (1993) rule recognizes that the federal funds rate cannot be reduced materially below zero, and that following the prescriptions of the standard Taylor (1993) rule after a recession during which the federal funds rate has fallen to its lower bound may therefore not provide enough policy accommodation. To make up for the cumulative shortfall in accommodation (Zt), the adjusted rule prescribes only a gradual return of the policy rate to the (positive) levels prescribed by the standard Taylor (1993) rule after the economy begins to recover. The version of the price- level rule specified in figure A also recognizes that the federal funds rate cannot be reduced materially below zero. If inflation runs below the 2 percent objective during periods when the price-level rule prescribes setting the federal funds rate well below zero, the rule will, over time, call for more accommodation to make up for the past inflation shortfall. As shown in figure B, the different monetary policy rules often differ in their prescriptions for the federal funds rate.6 Although almost all of the simple policy (continued on next page) 5. Calculating the prescriptions of the price-level rule requires selecting a starting year for the price level from which to cumulate the 2 percent annual rate of inflation. Figure B uses 1998 as the starting year. Around that time, the underlying trend of inflation and longer-term inflation expectations stabilized at a level consistent with PCE price inflation being close to 2 percent. 6. These prescriptions are calculated using (1) published data for inflation and the unemployment rate and (2) survey- based estimates of the longer-run value of the neutral real interest rate and the longer-run value of the unemployment rate. Taylor (1993) rule, adjusted NOTE: The rules use historical values of inflation, the federal funds rate, and the unemployment rate. Inflation is measured as the 4-quarter percent change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) excluding food and energy. Quarterly projections of long-run values for the federal funds rate and the unemployment rate are derived through interpolations of biannual projections from Blue Chip Economic Indicators. The long-run value for inflation is taken as 2 percent. The target value of the price level is the average level of the price index for PCE excluding food and energy in 1998 extrapolated at 2 percent per year. The data extend through 2018:Q3, with the exception of the target federal funds rate data, which go through 2018:Q4. rules would have called for values for the federal funds rate that were increasing over time in recent years, the prescribed values vary widely across rules. In general, there is no unique criterion for favoring one rule over another. Although monetary policy rules seem appealing for obtaining and communicating current and future policy rate prescriptions, the usefulness of these rules for policymakers is limited by a range of practical considerations. According to simple monetary policy rules, the policy interest rate must respond mechanically to a small number of variables. However, these variables may not reflect important information available to policymakers at the time they make decisions. For example, none of the inputs into the Taylor (1993) rule include financial and credit market conditions or indicators of consumer and business sentiment; these factors are often very informative for the future course of the economy. Similarly, monetary policy rules tend to include only the current values of the selected variables in the rule. But the relationship between the current values of these variables and the outlook for the economy changes over time for a number of reasons. For example, the structure of the economy is evolving over time and is not known with certainty at any given point in time.7 To complicate 7. The box “Complexities of Monetary Policy Rules” in the July 2018 Monetary Policy Report discusses how shifts in the matters further, monetary policy affects the Federal Reserve’s goal variables of inflation and employment with long and variable lags. For these reasons, good monetary policy must take into account the information contained in the real-time forecast of the economy. Finally, simple policy rules do not take into account that the risks to the economic outlook may be asymmetric, such as during the period when the federal funds rate was still close to zero. At that time, the FOMC took into consideration that it would have limited scope to respond to an unexpected weakening in the economy by cutting the federal funds rate, but that it would have ample scope to increase the policy rate in response to an unexpected strengthening in the economy. This asymmetric risk provided a rationale for increasing the federal funds rate more gradually than prescribed by some policy rules shown in figure B.8 (continued) structure of the economy cause the longer-run value of the neutral real interest rate to vary over time and thus complicate its estimation. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2018), Monetary Policy Report (Washington: Board of Governors, July), pp. 37–41, https://www.federalreserve.gov/ monetarypolicy/files/20180713_mprfullreport.pdf. 8. For further discussion regarding the challenges of using monetary policy rules in practice, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2018), “Challenges Associated with Using Rules to Make Monetary Policy,” Board of Governors, https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/ challenges-associated-with-using-rules-to-make-monetary- policy.htm. The FOMC conducts systematic monetary policy in a framework that respects the key principles of good monetary policy while providing sufficient flexibility to address many of the practical concerns described earlier. At the core of this framework lies the FOMC’s firm commitment to the Federal Reserve’s statutory mandate of promoting maximum employment and price stability, a commitment that the Committee reaffirms on a regular basis.9 To explain its monetary policy decisions to the public as clearly as possible, the FOMC communicates about the economic data that are relevant to its policy decisions. As part of this communication strategy, the Federal Reserve regularly describes the economic and financial data used to inform its policy decisions in the Monetary Policy Report and the FOMC meeting minutes. These data include, but are not limited to, measures of labor market conditions, inflation, household spending and business investment, asset prices, and the global economic environment. The FOMC postmeeting statements and the meeting minutes detail how the data inform the Committee’s overall economic outlook, the risks to this outlook, and, in turn, the Committee’s assessment about the appropriate stance of monetary policy. This appropriate stance depends on the FOMC’s longer-run goals, the economic outlook and the risks to the outlook, and the channels through which monetary policy actions influence economic activity and prices. The FOMC combines all of these elements in determining the timing and size of adjustments of the policy interest rates. The quarterly Summary of Economic Projections provides additional information about each FOMC participant’s forecasts for the economy and the longer-run assessments of the economy, under her or his individual views concerning appropriate policy. These policy communications help the public understand the FOMC’s approach to monetary policymaking and the principles that underlie it. Consequently, in response to incoming information, market participants tend to adjust their expectations regarding monetary policy in the direction consistent with achieving the maximum-employment and price- stability goals of the FOMC.10 Evidence that market 9. See the Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, which is available on the Board’s website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_ LongerRunGoals.pdf. 10. New economic information can be composed of data surprises or of factors that may pose risks to future economic outcomes but are not yet reflected in the data. C. Change in 10-year yield in response to Employment 100 50 NOTE: The data are monthly, and the sample period starts in February 2010. The change in 10-year yields on Treasury securities is measured within a 1-hour window after the data release. The surprise in nonfarm payroll job gains is measured as the difference in the actual nonfarm payroll job gains in thousands and the median expected nonfarm payroll job gains in the Bloomberg Survey of Economists before the data release. participants adjust their expectations for policy in this manner is shown in figure C. The figure plots the change in the 10-year yield on Treasury securities in a one-hour window around the release of employment reports on the vertical axis against the difference in the actual value of nonfarm payroll job gains and the expectations of private-sector analysts immediately before the release of the data on the horizontal axis— that is, a proxy for “surprises” in nonfarm payroll job gains. When actual nonfarm payroll job gains turn out to be higher than market participants expect, the yield on 10-year Treasury securities tends to increase. The rise in the 10-year yield reflects market participants’ expectation that, as a result of stronger-than-expected labor market data, the path of short-term interest rates will be higher in the future. Conversely, the 10-year yield tends to decline after negative surprises in nonfarm payroll data, reflecting the path of short-term interest rates will be somewhat lower in the future. These adjustments in the 10-year yield help stabilize the economy even before the FOMC changes the level of the federal funds rate in the direction consistent with achieving its goals, as higher long-term interest rates tend to slow the labor market while lower rates tend to strengthen it. by about $1.2 trillion since its peak in 2014.17 At the January meeting, the Committee released an updated Statement Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation and Balance Sheet Normalization to provide additional information regarding its plans to implement monetary policy over the longer run.18 In this statement, the Committee indicated that it intends to continue to implement monetary policy in a regime in which an ample supply of reserves ensures that control over the level of the federal funds rate and other short-term interest rates is exercised primarily through the setting of the Federal Reserve’s administered rates, and in which active management of the supply of reserves is not required. This operating procedure is often called a “floor system.” The FOMC judges that this approach provides good control of short-term money market rates in a variety of market conditions and effective transmission of those rates to broader financial conditions. In addition, the FOMC stated that it is prepared to adjust any of the details for completing balance sheet normalization in light of economic and financial developments. Although reserve balances play a central role in the ongoing balance sheet normalization process, in the longer run, the size of the balance sheet will also be importantly determined by trend growth in nonreserve liabilities. The box “The Role of Liabilities in Determining the Size of the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet” discusses various factors that influence the size of reserve and nonreserve liabilities. Meanwhile, interest income on the Federal Reserve’s securities holdings has continued to support substantial remittances to the U.S. 17. Since the start of the normalization program, reserve balances have dropped by approximately $600 billion. 18. See the Statement Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation and Balance Sheet Normalization, which is available on the Board’s website at https:// www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/ monetary20190130c.htm. Treasury. Preliminary financial statement results indicate that the Federal Reserve remitted about $65 billion in 2018. The Federal Reserve’s implementation of monetary policy has continued smoothly As with the previous federal funds rate increases since late 2015, the Federal Reserve successfully raised the effective federal funds rate in September and December by increasing the interest rate paid on reserve balances and the interest rate offered on overnight reverse repurchase agreements (ON RRPs). Specifically, the Federal Reserve raised the interest rate paid on required and excess reserve balances to 2.20 percent in September and to 2.40 percent in December. In addition, the Federal Reserve increased the ON RRP offering rate to 2.00 percent in September and to 2.25 percent in December. The Federal Reserve also approved a ¼ percentage point increase in the discount rate (the primary credit rate) in both September and December. Yields on a broad set of money market instruments moved higher, roughly in line with the federal funds rate, in response to the FOMC’s policy decisions in September and December. Usage of the ON RRP facility has remained low, excluding quarter-ends. The effective federal funds rate moved to parity with the interest rate paid on reserve balances in the months before the December meeting. At its December meeting, the Committee made a second small technical adjustment by setting the interest on excess reserves rate 10 basis points below the top of the target range for the federal funds rate; this adjustment was intended to foster trading in the federal funds market at rates well within the FOMC’s target range. The Federal Reserve will conduct a review of its strategic framework for monetary policy in 2019 With labor market conditions close to maximum employment and inflation near the Committee’s 2 percent objective, the FOMC The size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet increased from $900 billion at the end of 2006 to about $4.5 trillion at the end of 2014—or from 6 percent of gross domestic product (GDP) to about 25 percent of GDP—mainly as a result of the large-scale asset purchase (LSAP) programs conducted in response to persistent economic weakness following the financial crisis. The expansion of total assets that stemmed from the LSAPs was primarily matched by higher reserve balances of depository institutions, which peaked in the fall of 2014 at $2.8 trillion, or almost 16 percent of GDP, rising from about $10 billion at the end of 2006. Liabilities other than reserves have also grown significantly and played a role in the expansion of the balance sheet. The magnitude of these nonreserve liabilities as well as the flows affecting their variability are not closely related to monetary policy decisions. Since October 2017, the Federal Reserve has been gradually reducing its securities holdings resulting from crisis-era purchases. Once these holdings have unwound to the point at which reserve balances have declined to their longer-run level, the size of the balance sheet will be determined by factors affecting the demand for Federal Reserve liabilities. This discussion describes the Federal Reserve’s most significant liabilities and reviews the factors that influenced their size since the financial crisis. Many of the Federal Reserve’s liabilities arise from statutory responsibilities, such as supplying currency and serving as the Treasury Department’s fiscal agent. Each liability provides social benefits to the economy and plays an important role as a safe and liquid asset for the public, the banking system, the U.S. government, or other institutions. Figure A plots the evolution of the Federal Reserve’s main liabilities relative to nominal GDP over the post– World War II period. Federal Reserve notes outstanding have traditionally been the largest Federal Reserve liability and, over the past three decades, have been slowly growing as a share of U.S. nominal GDP. U.S. currency is an important medium of exchange and store of value, both domestically and abroad. Despite the increasing use of electronic means of payment, currency remains widely used in retail transactions in the United States. Demand for currency tends to increase with the size of the economy because households and businesses need more currency to use in exchange for a growing volume of economic transactions. In addition, with heavy usage of U.S. currency overseas, changes in global growth as well as in financial and geopolitical stability can also (continued on next page) through 2017 are from the 104th Annual Report, 2017. Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2018), 104th Annual Report, 2017, Table 6: Reserves of Depository Institutions, Federal Reserve Bank Credit, and Related Items (Table 6A: Year-End 1984-2017 and Month-End 2017; Table 6B: Year-End 1918-1983) (Washington: Board of Governors), pp. 302-09, https://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/files/2017-annual-report.pdf; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2018), Federal Reserve Banks Combined Quarterly Financial Report (Unaudited), Table: Combined Statements of Condition (Washington: Board of Governors, September 30), p. 3, https://www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/files/quarterly-report-20180930.pdf. materially affect the rate of currency growth. Since the start of the Global Financial Crisis, notes in circulation have more than doubled and, as of the end of 2018, stood at about $1.67 trillion, equivalent to about 8 percent of U.S. GDP, implying that accommodating demand for currency alone requires a larger balance sheet than before the crisis. Reserve balances are currently the second- largest liability in the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet, totaling $1.66 trillion at the end of 2018, or nearly 8 percent of nominal GDP. This liability item consists of deposits held at Federal Reserve Banks by depository institutions, including commercial banks, savings banks, credit unions, thrift institutions, and most U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks. These balances include reserves held to fulfill reserve requirements as well as reserves held in excess of these requirements. Reserve balances allow banks to facilitate daily payment flows, both in ordinary times and in stress scenarios, without borrowing funds or selling assets. Reserve balances have been declining for several years, in part as a result of the ongoing balance sheet normalization program initiated in October 2017, and now stand about $1.2 trillion below their peak in 2014. At its January 2019 meeting, the Federal Open Market Committee decided that it would continue to implement monetary policy in a regime with an ample supply of reserves, which is often called a “floor system” or an “abundant reserves system.”1 Going forward, the banking system’s overall demand for reserve balances and the Committee’s judgment about the quantity that is appropriate for the efficient and effective implementation of monetary policy will determine the longer-run level of reserve balances. Although the level of reserve balances that banks will eventually demand is not yet known with certainty, it is likely to be appreciably higher than before the crisis. 1. See footnote 18 in the main text. Banks’ higher demand for reserves appears to reflect in part an increased focus on liquidity risk management in the context of regulatory changes. include the Treasury General Account (TGA), reverse repurchase agreements conducted with foreign official account holders, and deposits held by designated financial market utilities (DFMUs). By statute, the Federal Reserve serves a special role as fiscal agent or banker for the federal government. Consequently, the U.S. Treasury holds cash balances at the Federal Reserve in the TGA, using this account to receive taxes and proceeds of securities sales and to pay the government’s bills, including interest and principal on maturing securities. Before 2008, the Treasury targeted a steady, low balance of $5 billion in the TGA on most days, and it used private accounts at commercial banks to manage the variability in its cash flows. Since 2008, the Treasury has used the TGA as the primary account for managing cash flows. In May 2015, the Treasury announced its intention to hold in the TGA a level of cash generally sufficient to cover one week of outflows, subject to a minimum balance objective of roughly $150 billion. Since this policy change, the TGA balance has generally been well above this minimum; at the end of 2018, it was about $370 billion, or nearly 2 percent of GDP. The current policy helps protect against the risk that extreme weather or other technical or operational events might cause an interruption in access to debt markets and leave the Treasury unable to fund U.S. government operations—a scenario that could have serious consequences for financial stability. Reverse repurchase agreements with foreign official accounts, also known as the foreign repo pool, also rose during recent years. The Federal Reserve has long offered this service as part of a suite of banking and custody services to foreign central banks, foreign governments, and international official institutions. (continued) Accounts at the Federal Reserve provide foreign official institutions with access to immediate dollar liquidity to support operational needs, to clear and settle securities in their accounts, and to address unexpected dollar shortages or exchange rate volatility. The foreign repo pool has grown from an average level of around $30 billion before the crisis to a current average of about $250 billion, equivalent to a little more than 1 percent of GDP. The rise in foreign repo pool balances has reflected in part central banks’ preference to maintain robust dollar liquidity buffers. Finally, “other deposits” with the Federal Reserve Banks have also risen steadily over recent years, from less than $1 billion before the crisis to about $80 billion at the end of 2018. Although “other deposits” include balances held by international and multilateral organizations, government-sponsored enterprises, and other miscellaneous items, the increase has largely been driven by the establishments of accounts for DFMUs. DFMUs provide the infrastructure for transferring, clearing, and settling payments, securities, and other transactions among financial institutions. The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act provides that DFMUs—those financial market utilities designated as systemically important by the Financial Stability Oversight Council—can maintain accounts at the Federal Reserve and earn interest on balances maintained in those accounts. Putting together all of these elements—that is, projected trend growth for currency in circulation, the Committee’s decision to continue operating with ample reserves, and the higher levels for the TGA, the foreign repo pool, and DFMU balances—explains why the longer-run size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet will be considerably larger than before the crisis. At the end of 2018, the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet totaled $4.1 trillion, or about 20 percent of GDP. Figure B considers the size of the balance sheet in an international context. In response to the Global Financial Crisis, central bank balance sheets increased in many jurisdictions. Relative to GDP, the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet remains smaller than those of other reserve-currency central banks in major advanced foreign economies that currently operate with abundant reserves—such as the European Central Bank, the Bank of Japan, and the Bank of England—although this difference is partly due to the Federal Reserve being much further along in the policy normalization process after the crisis. In addition, the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet relative to GDP is only modestly larger than those of central banks, such as the Norges Bank and the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, that aim to operate at a relatively low level of abundant reserves. Of course, differences in central bank balance sheets also reflect differences in financial systems across countries. B. Central bank balance sheets relative to gross domestic NOTE: Data for 2018 pertain to Q3, except for the Bank of England, whose data pertain to 2017:Q3. Norges Bank data exclude assets of Norway's Government Pension Fund Global. judges it is an opportune time for the Federal Reserve to conduct a review of its strategic framework for monetary policy—including the policy strategy, tools, and communication practices. The goal of this assessment is to identify possible ways to improve the Committee’s current policy framework in order to ensure that the Federal Reserve is best positioned going forward to achieve its statutory mandate of maximum employment and price stability. Specific to the communications practices, the Federal Reserve judges that transparency is essential to accountability and the effectiveness of policy, and therefore the Federal Reserve seeks to explain its policymaking approach and decisions to the Congress and the public as clearly as possible. The box “Federal Reserve Transparency: Rationale and New Initiatives” discusses the steps and new initiatives the Federal Reserve has taken to improve transparency. Over the past 25 years, the Federal Reserve and other major central banks have taken steps to improve transparency, which provides three important benefits. First, transparency helps ensure that central banks are held accountable to the public and its elected representatives. Accountability is essential to democratic legitimacy and is particularly important for central banks that have been granted extensive operational independence, as is the case for the Federal Reserve. Second, transparency enhances the effectiveness of monetary policy. If the public understands the central bank’s views on the economy and monetary policy, then households and businesses will take those views into account in making their spending and investment plans. Third, transparency supports a central bank’s efforts to promote the safety and soundness of financial institutions and the overall financial system, including by helping financial institutions know what is expected of them. Thus, for each of these reasons, the Federal Reserve seeks to explain its policymaking approach and decisions to the Congress and the public as clearly as possible. To foster transparency and accountability, the Federal Reserve uses a wide variety of communications, including semiannual testimony by the Chairman in conjunction with this report, the Monetary Policy Report. In addition, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has released a statement after every regularly scheduled meeting for almost 20 years, and detailed minutes of FOMC meetings have been released since 1993.1 In 2007, the Federal Reserve expanded the economic projections that have accompanied the Monetary Policy Report since 1979 into the Summary of Economic Projections, which FOMC participants submit every quarter. And in 2012, the FOMC first released its Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, which it reaffirms annually.2 The Federal Reserve continues to make improvements to its communications. In January, the 1. In December 2004, the FOMC decided to begin publishing the minutes three weeks after every meeting, expediting the publication schedule to provide the public with more timely information. 2. The statement is reprinted at the beginning of this report on p. ii. The FOMC also publishes transcripts of its meetings after a five-year lag. For a review of the main communication tools used by the Federal Reserve and other central banks, see the document “Monetary Policy Strategies of Major Central Banks,” which is available on the webpage “Monetary Policy Principles and Practice” on the Board’s website at https://www. federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/monetary-policy-principles- and-practice.htm. Chairman began holding a press conference after each FOMC meeting, doubling the frequency of the press conferences that were introduced in 2011. These press conferences are held 30 minutes after the release of the postmeeting statement and provide additional information about the economic outlook, the Committee’s policy decision, and policy tools. Press conferences also allow the Chairman to answer questions on monetary policy and other issues in a timely fashion. that it would conduct a broad review of its monetary policy framework—specifically, of the policy strategy, tools, and communication practices that the FOMC uses in the pursuit of its dual-mandate goals of maximum employment and price stability. The Federal Reserve’s existing policy framework is the result of decades of learning and refinements and has allowed the FOMC to pursue effectively its dual-mandate goals. Central banks in a number of other advanced economies have also found it useful, at times, to conduct reviews of their monetary policy frameworks. Such a review seems particularly appropriate when the economy appears to have changed in ways that matter for the conduct of monetary policy. For example, the neutral level of the policy interest rate appears to have fallen in the United States and abroad, increasing the risk that a central bank’s policy rate will be constrained by its effective lower bound in future economic downturns. The review will consider ways to ensure that the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy strategy, tools, and communications going forward provide the best means to achieve and maintain the dual-mandate objectives. The review will include outreach to and consultation with a broad range of stakeholders in the U.S. economy through a series of “Fed Listens” events. The Reserve Banks will hold forums around the country, in a town hall format, allowing the Federal Reserve to gather perspectives from the public, including representatives of business and industry, labor leaders, community and economic development officials, academics, nonprofit organizations, community bankers, local government officials, and representatives of congressional offices in Reserve Bank Districts.3 In addition, the Federal Reserve (continued on next page) 3. “Fed Listens” events will be held at the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas this February and at the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis this April. Other “Fed Listens” events will be announced in coming weeks. System will sponsor a research conference this June at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, with academic speakers and non-academic panelists from outside the Federal Reserve System. Beginning around the middle of 2019, as part of their review of how to best pursue the Fed’s statutory mandate, Federal Reserve policymakers will discuss relevant economic research as well as the perspectives offered during the outreach events. At the end of the process, policymakers will assess the information and perspectives gathered and will report their findings and conclusions to the public. This review complements other recent changes to the Federal Reserve’s communication practices. In November 2018, the Board inaugurated two reports, the Supervision and Regulation Report and the Financial Stability Report.4 These reports provide information about the Board’s responsibility, shared with other government agencies, to foster the safety and soundness of the U.S. banking system and to promote financial stability. Transparency is key to these efforts, as it enhances public confidence, allows for the consideration of outside ideas, and makes it easier for regulated entities to know what is expected of them and how best to comply. 4. The Supervision and Regulation Report and the Financial Stability Report are available on the Board’s website at, respectively, https://www.federalreserve.gov/ publications/2018-november-supervision-and-regulation- report-preface.htm and https://www.federalreserve.gov/ publications/2018-november-financial-stability-report- purpose.htm. The Supervision and Regulation Report provides an overview of banking conditions and the current areas of focus of the Federal Reserve’s regulatory policy framework, including pending rules, and key themes, trends, and priorities regarding supervisory programs. The report distinguishes between large financial institutions and regional and community banking organizations because supervisory approaches and priorities for these institutions frequently differ. The report provides information to the public in conjunction with semiannual testimony before the Congress by the vice Chairman for Supervision. The Financial Stability Report summarizes the Board’s monitoring of vulnerabilities in the financial system. The Board monitors four broad categories of vulnerabilities, including elevated valuation pressures (as signaled by asset prices that are high relative to economic fundamentals or historical norms), excessive borrowing by businesses and households, excessive leverage within the financial sector, and funding risks (risks associated with a withdrawal of funds from a particular financial institution or sector, for example as part of a “financial panic”). Assessments of these vulnerabilities inform Federal Reserve actions to promote the resilience of the financial system, including through its supervision and regulation of financial institutions. Through all of these efforts to improve its communications, the Federal Reserve seeks to enhance transparency and accountability regarding how it pursues its statutory responsibilities. The following material appeared as an addendum to the minutes of the December 18–19, 2018, meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee. In conjunction with the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting held on December 18–19, 2018, meeting participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real gross domestic product (GDP) growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for each year from 2018 to 2021 and over the longer run.19 Each participant’s projections were based on information available at the time of the meeting, together with his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy—including a path for the federal funds rate and its longer-run value— and assumptions about other factors likely to affect economic outcomes. The longer- run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the value to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy.20 “Appropriate monetary policy” is defined as the future path of policy that each participant deems most likely to foster outcomes for economic activity and inflation that best satisfy his or her individual interpretation of the statutory mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability. All participants who submitted longer-run projections expected that, under appropriate monetary policy, growth in real GDP in 2019 would run somewhat above their individual estimate of its longer-run rate. Most 19. Five members of the Board of Governors, one more than in September 2018, were in office at the time of the December 2018 meeting and submitted economic projections. 20. One participant did not submit longer-run participants continued to expect real GDP growth to slow throughout the projection horizon, with a majority of participants projecting growth in 2021 to be a little below their estimate of its longer-run rate. Almost all participants who submitted longer-run projections continued to expect that the unemployment rate would run below their estimate of its longer-run level through 2021. Most participants projected that inflation, as measured by the four-quarter percentage change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), would increase slightly over the next two years, and nearly all participants expected that it would be at or slightly above the Committee’s 2 percent objective in 2020 and 2021. Compared with the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) from September, many participants marked down slightly their projections for real GDP growth and inflation in 2019. Table 1 and figure 1 provide summary statistics for the projections. As shown in figure 2, participants generally continued to expect that the evolution of the economy, relative to their objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation, would likely warrant some further gradual increases in the federal funds rate. Compared with the September submissions, the median projections for the federal funds rate for the end of 2019 through 2021 and over the longer run were a little lower. Most participants expected that the federal funds rate at the end of 2020 and 2021 would be modestly higher than their estimate of its level over the longer run; however, many marked down the extent to which it would exceed their estimate of the longer-run level relative to their September projections. Table 1. Economic projections of Federal Reserve Board members and Federal Reserve Bank presidents, under their individual assessments of projected appropriate monetary policy, December 2018 Percent Longer run Longer run Longer run Memo: Projected appropriate policy path Note: Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP) and projections for both measures of inflation are percent changes from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. PCE inflation and core PCE inflation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index for personal consump- tion expenditures (PCE) and the price index for PCE excluding food and energy. Projections for the unemployment rate are for the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. Each participant’s projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy. Longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the econ- omy. The projections for the federal funds rate are the value of the midpoint of the projected appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the projected appropriate target level for the federal funds rate at the end of the specified calendar year or over the longer run. The September projections were made in conjunction with the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on September 25–26, 2018. One participant did not submit longer-run projections for the change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, or the federal funds rate in conjunction with the September 25–26, 2018, meeting, and one participant did not submit such projections in conjunction with the December 18–19, 2018, meeting. 1. For each period, the median is the middle projection when the projections are arranged from lowest to highest. When the number of projections is even, the median is the 2. The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each year. 3. The range for a variable in a given year includes all participants’ projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year. 4. Longer-run projections for core PCE inflation are not collected. On balance, participants continued to view the uncertainty around their projections as broadly similar to the average of the past 20 years. While most participants viewed the risks to the outlook as balanced, a couple more participants than in September saw risks to real GDP growth as weighted to the downside, and one less participant viewed the risks to inflation as weighted to the upside. growth for 2018 and 2019 were slightly lower, while the median for the longer-run rate of growth was a bit higher. Several participants mentioned tighter financial conditions or a softer global economic outlook as factors behind the downward revisions to their near- term growth estimates. The median of participants’ projections for the growth rate of real GDP for 2019, conditional on their individual assessment of appropriate monetary policy, was 2.3 percent, slower than the 3.0 percent pace expected for 2018. Most participants continued to expect GDP growth to slow throughout the projection horizon, with the median projection at 2.0 percent in 2020 and at 1.8 percent in 2021, a touch lower than the median estimate of its longer-run rate of 1.9 percent. Relative to the September SEP, the medians of the projections for real GDP The median of projections for the unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of 2019 was 3.5 percent, unchanged from the September SEP and almost 1 percentage point below the median assessment of its longer- run normal level. With participants generally continuing to expect the unemployment rate to bottom out in 2019 or 2020, the median projections for 2020 and 2021 edged back up to 3.6 percent and 3.8 percent, respectively. Nevertheless, most participants continued to project that the unemployment rate in 2021 would still be well below their estimates of its longer-run level. The median estimate of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment was slightly lower than in September. Figure 1. Medians, central tendencies, and ranges of economic projections, 2018–21 and over the longer run Longer run Longer run Longer run Longer run Note: Definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. The data for the actual values of the variables are annual. Longer run Note: Each shaded circle indicates the value (rounded to the nearest 1/8 percentage point) of an individual participant’s judgment of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the appropriate target level for the federal funds rate at the end of the specified calendar year or over the longer run. One participant did not submit longer-run projections for the federal funds rate. Figures 3.A and 3.B show the distributions of participants’ projections for real GDP growth and the unemployment rate from 2018 to 2021 and in the longer run. The distributions of individual projections for real GDP growth for 2019 and 2020 shifted down relative to those in the September SEP, while the distributions for 2021 and for the longer-run rate of GDP growth were little changed. The distribution of individual projections for the unemployment rate in 2019 was a touch more dispersed relative to the distribution of the September projections; the distribution moved slightly higher for 2020, while the distribution for the longer-run normal rate shifted toward the lower end of its range. The median of projections for total PCE price inflation was 1.9 percent in 2019, a bit lower than in the September SEP, while the medians for 2020 and 2021 were 2.1 percent, the same as in the previous projections. The medians of projections for core PCE price inflation over the 2019–21 period were 2.0 percent, a touch lower than in September. Some participants pointed to softer incoming data or recent declines in oil prices as reasons for shaving their projections for inflation. the outlook for inflation. On the whole, the distributions of projections for total PCE price inflation and core PCE price inflation beyond this year either shifted slightly to the left or were unchanged relative to the September SEP. Most participants revised down slightly their projections of total PCE price inflation for 2019. All participants expected that total PCE price inflation would be in a range from 2.0 to 2.3 percent in 2020 and 2021. Most participants projected that core PCE inflation would run at 2.0 to 2.1 percent throughout the projection horizon. Figure 3.E shows distributions of participants’ judgments regarding the appropriate target— or midpoint of the target range—for the federal funds rate at the end of each year from 2018 to 2021 and over the longer run. The distributions for 2019 through 2021 were less dispersed and shifted slightly toward lower values. Compared with the projections prepared for the September SEP, the median federal funds rate was 25 basis points lower over the 2019–21 period. For the end of 2019, the median of federal funds rate projections was 2.88 percent, consistent with two 25 basis point rate increases over the course of 2019. Thereafter, the medians of the projections were 3.13 percent at the end of 2020 and 2021. Most participants expected that the federal funds rate at the end of 2020 and 2021 would be modestly higher than their estimate of its level over the longer run; however, many marked down the extent to which it would exceed their estimate of the longer-run level relative to their September projections. The median of the longer-run projections of the federal funds rate was 2.75 percent, 25 basis points lower than in September. In discussing their projections, many participants continued to express the view that any further increases in the federal funds rate over the next few years would likely be gradual. That anticipated pace reflected a few factors, such as a short-term neutral real interest rate that is currently low and an inflation rate that has been rising only gradually to the Committee’s 2 percent objective. Some participants cited a weaker near-term trajectory for economic growth or a muted response of inflation to tight labor market conditions as factors contributing to the downward revisions in their assessments of the appropriate path for the policy rate. In assessing the appropriate path of the federal funds rate, FOMC participants take account of the range of possible economic outcomes, the likelihood of those outcomes, and the potential benefits and costs should they occur. As a reference, table 2 provides measures of forecast uncertainty—based on the forecast errors of various private and government forecasts over the past 20 years—for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and total PCE price inflation. Those measures are represented graphically in the “fan charts” shown in the top panels of figures 4.A, 4.B, and 4.C. The fan charts display the median SEP projections for the three variables surrounded by symmetric confidence intervals derived from the forecast errors reported in table 2. If the degree of uncertainty attending these projections is similar to the typical magnitude Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges Percentage points Note: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root mean squared error of projections for 1998 through 2017 that were released in the winter by various private and government forecasters. As described in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain assumptions, there is about a 70 percent probability that actual outcomes for real GDP, unemployment, consumer prices, and the federal funds rate will be in ranges implied by the average size of projection errors made in the past. For more information, see David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip (2017), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook Using Historical Forecasting Errors: The Federal Reserve’s Approach,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-020 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February), https://dx.doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2017.020. 1. Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure that has been most widely used in government and private economic forecasts. Projections are percent changes on a fourth quarter to fourth quarter basis. 3. For Federal Reserve staff forecasts, measure is the federal funds rate. For other forecasts, measure is the rate on 3-month Treasury bills. Projection errors are calculated using average levels, in percent, in the fourth quarter. Figure 3.A. Distribution of participants’ projections for the change in real GDP, 2018–21 and over the longer run Longer run Note: Definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Figure 3.B. Distribution of participants’ projections for the unemployment rate, 2018–21 and over the longer run Longer run Note: Definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Figure 3.C. Distribution of participants’ projections for PCE inflation, 2018–21 and over the longer run Longer run Note: Definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Note: Definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Figure 3.E. Distribution of participants’ judgments of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the appropriate target level for the federal funds rate, 2018–21 and over the longer run Longer run Note: Definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. of past forecast errors and the risks around the projections are broadly balanced, then future outcomes of these variables would have about a 70 percent probability of being within these confidence intervals. For all three variables, this measure of uncertainty is substantial and generally increases as the forecast horizon lengthens. Participants’ assessments of the level of uncertainty surrounding their individual economic projections are shown in the bottom-left panels of figures 4.A, 4.B, and 4.C. Participants generally continued to view the degree of uncertainty attached to their economic projections for real GDP growth and inflation as broadly similar to the average of the past 20 years.21 A couple more participants than in September viewed the uncertainty around the unemployment rate as higher than average. Because the fan charts are constructed to be symmetric around the median projections, they do not reflect any asymmetries in the balance of risks that participants may see in their economic projections. Participants’ assessments of the balance of risks to their economic projections are shown in the bottom-right panels of figures 4.A, 4.B, and 4.C. Most participants generally judged the risks to the outlook for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, headline inflation, and core inflation as broadly balanced—in other words, as broadly consistent with a symmetric fan chart. Two more participants than in September saw the risks to real GDP growth as weighted to the downside, and one less judged the risks as weighted to the upside. The balance of risks to the projection for the unemployment rate was unchanged, 21. At the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty” discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty surrounding the economic forecasts and explains the approach used to assess the uncertainty and risks attending the participants’ projections. with three participants judging the risks to the unemployment rate as weighted to the downside and two participants viewing the risks as weighted to the upside. In addition, the balance of risks to the inflation projections shifted down slightly relative to September, as one less participant judged the risks to both total and core inflation as weighted to the upside and one more participant viewed the risks as weighted to the downside. In discussing the uncertainty and risks surrounding their economic projections, participants mentioned trade tensions as well as financial and foreign economic developments as sources of uncertainty or downside risk to the growth outlook. For the inflation outlook, the effects of trade restrictions were cited as upside risks and lower energy prices and the stronger dollar as downside risks. Those who commented on U.S. fiscal policy viewed it as an additional source of uncertainty and noted that it might present two-sided risks to the outlook, as its effects could be waning faster than expected or turn out to be more stimulative than anticipated. Participants’ assessments of the appropriate future path of the federal funds rate were also subject to considerable uncertainty. Because the Committee adjusts the federal funds rate in response to actual and prospective developments over time in real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation, uncertainty surrounding the projected path for the federal funds rate importantly reflects the uncertainties about the paths for those key economic variables along with other factors. Figure 5 provides a graphical representation of this uncertainty, plotting the median SEP projection for the federal funds rate surrounded by confidence intervals derived from the results presented in table 2. As with the macroeconomic variables, the forecast uncertainty surrounding the appropriate path of the federal funds rate is substantial and increases for longer horizons. Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the percent change in real gross domestic product (GDP) from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The confidence interval around the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the confidence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reflect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections; these current assessments are summarized in the lower panels. Generally speaking, participants who judge the uncertainty about their projections as “broadly similar” to the average levels of the past 20 years would view the width of the confidence interval shown in the historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise, participants who judge the risks to their projections as “broadly balanced” would view the confidence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For definitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The confidence interval around the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the confidence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reflect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections; these current assessments are summarized in the lower panels. Generally speaking, participants who judge the uncertainty about their projections as “broadly similar” to the average levels of the past 20 years would view the width of the confidence interval shown in the historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise, participants who judge the risks to their projections as “broadly balanced” would view the confidence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For definitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Risks to core PCE inflation Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the percent change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The confidence interval around the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the confidence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reflect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections; these current assessments are summarized in the lower panels. Generally speaking, participants who judge the uncertainty about their projections as “broadly similar” to the average levels of the past 20 years would view the width of the confidence interval shown in the historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise, participants who judge the risks to their projections as “broadly balanced” would view the confidence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For definitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors Note: The blue and red lines are based on actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the Committee’s target for the federal funds rate at the end of the year indicated. The actual values are the midpoint of the target range; the median projected values are based on either the midpoint of the target range or the target level. The confidence interval around the median projected values is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years. The confidence interval is not strictly consistent with the projections for the federal funds rate, primarily because these projections are not forecasts of the likeliest outcomes for the federal funds rate, but rather projections of participants’ individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy. Still, historical forecast errors provide a broad sense of the uncertainty around the future path of the federal funds rate generated by the uncertainty about the macroeconomic variables as well as additional adjustments to monetary policy that may be appropriate to offset the effects of shocks to the economy. The confidence interval is assumed to be symmetric except when it is truncated at zero—the bottom of the lowest target range for the federal funds rate that has been adopted in the past by the Committee. This truncation would not be intended to indicate the likelihood of the use of negative interest rates to provide additional monetary policy accommodation if doing so was judged appropriate. In such situations, the Committee could also employ other tools, including forward guidance and large-scale asset purchases, to provide additional accommodation. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the confidence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reflect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections. * The confidence interval is derived from forecasts of the average level of short-term interest rates in the fourth quarter of the year indicated; more information about these data is available in table 2. The shaded area encompasses less than a 70 percent confidence interval if the confidence interval has been truncated at zero. The economic projections provided by the members of the Board of Governors and the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks inform discussions of monetary policy among policymakers and can aid public understanding of the basis for policy actions. Considerable uncertainty attends these projections, however. The economic and statistical models and relationships used to help produce economic forecasts are necessarily imperfect descriptions of the real world, and the future path of the economy can be affected by myriad unforeseen developments and events. Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, participants consider not only what appears to be the most likely economic outcome as embodied in their projections, but also the range of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of their occurring, and the potential costs to the economy should they occur. Table 2 summarizes the average historical accuracy of a range of forecasts, including those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports and those prepared by the Federal Reserve Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). The projection error ranges shown in the table illustrate the considerable uncertainty associated with economic forecasts. For example, suppose a participant projects that real gross domestic product (GDP) and total consumer prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty attending those projections is similar to that experienced in the past and the risks around the projections are broadly balanced, the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a probability of about 70 percent that actual GDP would expand within a range of 2.2 to 3.8 percent in the current year, 1.4 to 4.6 percent in the second year, and 0.9 to 5.1 percent in the third and fourth years. The corresponding 70 percent confidence intervals for overall inflation would be 1.8 to 2.2 percent in the current year and 1.0 to 3.0 percent in the second, third, and fourth years. Figures 4.A through 4.C illustrate these confidence bounds in “fan charts” that are symmetric and centered on the medians of FOMC participants’ projections for GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation. However, in some instances, the risks around the projections may not be symmetric. In particular, the unemployment rate cannot be negative; furthermore, the risks around a particular projection might be tilted to either the upside or the downside, in which case the corresponding fan chart would be asymmetrically positioned around the median projection. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over history, participants provide judgments as to whether the uncertainty attached to their projections of each economic variable is greater than, smaller than, or broadly similar to typical levels of forecast uncertainty seen in the past 20 years, as presented in table 2 and reflected in the widths of the confidence intervals shown in the top panels of figures 4.A through 4.C. Participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty surrounding their projections are summarized in the bottom-left (continued) panels of those figures. Participants also provide judgments as to whether the risks to their projections are weighted to the upside, are weighted to the downside, or are broadly balanced. That is, while the symmetric historical fan charts shown in the top panels of figures 4.A through 4.C imply that the risks to participants’ projections are balanced, participants may judge that there is a greater risk that a given variable will be above rather than below their projections. These judgments are summarized in the lower-right panels of figures 4.A through 4.C. As with real activity and inflation, the outlook for the future path of the federal funds rate is subject to considerable uncertainty. This uncertainty arises primarily because each participant’s assessment of the appropriate stance of monetary policy depends importantly on the evolution of real activity and inflation over time. If economic conditions evolve in an unexpected manner, then assessments of the appropriate setting of the federal funds rate would change from that point forward. The final line in table 2 shows the error ranges for forecasts of short- term interest rates. They suggest that the historical confidence intervals associated with projections of the federal funds rate are quite wide. It should be noted, however, that these confidence intervals are not strictly consistent with the projections for the federal funds rate, as these projections are not forecasts of the most likely quarterly outcomes but rather are projections of participants’ individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy and are on an end-of- year basis. However, the forecast errors should provide a sense of the uncertainty around the future path of the federal funds rate generated by the uncertainty about the macroeconomic variables as well as additional adjustments to monetary policy that would be appropriate to offset the effects of shocks to the economy. around the federal funds rate were to extend below zero, it would be truncated at zero for purposes of the fan chart shown in figure 5; zero is the bottom of the lowest target range for the federal funds rate that has been adopted by the Committee in the past. This approach to the construction of the federal funds rate fan chart would be merely a convention; it would not have any implications for possible future policy decisions regarding the use of negative interest rates to provide additional monetary policy accommodation if doing so were appropriate. In such situations, the Committee could also employ other tools, including forward guidance and asset purchases, to provide additional accommodation. While figures 4.A through 4.C provide information on the uncertainty around the economic projections, figure 1 provides information on the range of views across FOMC participants. A comparison of figure 1 with figures 4.A through 4.C shows that the dispersion of the projections across participants is much smaller than the average forecast errors over the past 20 years. designated financial market utility emerging market economy implied volatility for the S&P 500 index The Board of Governors is pleased to submit its Monetary Policy Report pursuant to section 2B of the Federal Reserve Act. Statement on Longer-run goaLS and monetary PoLicy Strategy As amended effective on January 29, 2013 The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) is firmly committed to fulfilling its statutory mandate from the Congress of promoting maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates. The Committee seeks to explain its monetary policy decisions to the public as clearly as possible. Such clarity facilitates well-informed decisionmaking by households and businesses, reduces economic and financial uncertainty, increases the effectiveness of monetary policy, and enhances transparency and accountability, which are essential in a democratic society. Inflation, employment, and long-term interest rates fluctuate over time in response to economic and financial disturbances. Moreover, monetary policy actions tend to influence economic activity and prices with a lag. Therefore, the Committee’s policy decisions reflect its longer-run goals, its medium-term outlook, and its assessments of the balance of risks, including risks to the financial system that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. The inflation rate over the longer run is primarily determined by monetary policy, and hence the Committee has the ability to specify a longer-run goal for inflation. The Committee judges that inflation at the rate of 2 percent, as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, is most consistent over the longer run with the Federal Reserve’s statutory mandate. Communicating this inflation goal clearly to the public helps keep longer-term inflation expectations firmly anchored, thereby fostering price stability and moderate long-term interest rates and enhancing the Committee’s ability to promote maximum employment in the face of significant economic disturbances. The maximum level of employment is largely determined by nonmonetary factors that affect the structure and dynamics of the labor market. These factors may change over time and may not be directly measurable. Consequently, it would not be appropriate to specify a fixed goal for employment; rather, the Committee’s policy decisions must be informed by assessments of the maximum level of employment, recognizing that such assessments are necessarily uncertain and subject to revision. The Committee considers a wide range of indicators in making these assessments. Information about Committee participants’ estimates of the longer-run normal rates of output growth and unemployment is published four times per year in the FOMC’s Summary of Economic Projections. For example, in the most recent projections, FOMC participants’ estimates of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment had a central tendency of 5.2 percent to 6.0 percent, unchanged from one year ago but substantially higher than the corresponding interval several years earlier. In setting monetary policy, the Committee seeks to mitigate deviations of inflation from its longer-run goal and deviations of employment from the Committee’s assessments of its maximum level. These objectives are generally complementary. However, under circumstances in which the Committee judges that the objectives are not complementary, it follows a balanced approach in promoting them, taking into account the magnitude of the deviations and the potentially different time horizons over which employment and inflation are projected to return to levels judged consistent with its mandate. The Committee intends to reaffirm these principles and to make adjustments as appropriate at its annual organizational meeting each January. otherwise noted, the time series in the figures extend through, for daily data, July 12, 2013; for monthly data, June 2013; and, for quarterly data, 2013:Q1 . In bar charts, except as noted, the change for a given period is measured to its final quarter from the final quarter of the preceding period . Thus far this year, labor market conditions have improved further, while consumer price inflation has run below the Federal Open Market Committee’s (FOMC) longer-run objective of 2 percent. Gains in payroll employment since the start of the year have averaged about 200,000 jobs per month, and various measures of underutilization in labor markets have continued to trend down. Even so, the unemployment rate, at 7½ percent in June, was still well above levels prevailing prior to the recent recession and well above the levels that FOMC participants think can be sustained in the longer term consistent with price stability. Consumer price inflation has slowed this year. Over the first five months of the year, the price index for personal consumption expenditures increased at an annual rate of only ½ percent, while the index excluding food and energy prices rose at a rate of 1 percent, both down from increases of about 1½ percent over 2012. This slowing appears to owe partly to transitory factors. Survey measures of longer- term inflation expectations have remained in the narrow ranges seen over the past several years, while market-based measures have declined so far this year, reversing their rise over the second half of 2012. Meanwhile, real gross domestic product (GDP) continued to increase at a moderate pace in the first quarter of this year. Available indicators suggest that the growth of real GDP proceeded at a somewhat slower pace in the second quarter. Although federal fiscal policy is imposing a substantial drag on growth this year and export demand is still damped by subdued growth in foreign economies, some of the other headwinds that have weighed on the economic recovery have begun to dissipate. Against this backdrop, a sustained housing market recovery now appears to be under way, and consumption growth is estimated to have held up reasonably well despite the increase in taxes earlier this year. Credit conditions generally have eased further, though they remain relatively tight for households with lower credit scores— and especially for such households seeking mortgage loans. However, beginning in May, longer-term interest rates rose significantly and asset price volatility increased as investors responded to somewhat better-than-expected economic data as well as Federal Reserve communications about monetary policy. Despite their recent moves, interest rates have generally remained low by historical standards, importantly due to the Federal Reserve’s highly accommodative monetary policy stance. With unemployment still well above normal levels and inflation quite low, and with the economic recovery anticipated to pick up only gradually, the FOMC has continued its highly accommodative monetary policy this year in order to support progress toward maximum employment and price stability. The FOMC kept its target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and anticipated that this exceptionally low range would be appropriate at least as long as the unemployment rate remains above 6½ percent, inflation between one and two years ahead is projected to be no more than a half percentage point above the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal, and longer-term inflation expectations continue to be well anchored. The Committee also stated that when it decides to begin to remove policy accommodation, it would take a balanced approach consistent with its longer-run goals of maximum employment and inflation of 2 percent. The FOMC also has continued its asset purchase program, purchasing additional agency mortgage-backed securities at a pace of $40 billion per month and longer-term Treasury securities at a pace of $45 billion per month. The Committee has reiterated that the purchase program will continue until the outlook for the labor market has improved substantially in a context of price stability. In addition, the FOMC has indicated that the size, pace, and composition of purchases will be adjusted in light of the Committee’s assessment of the likely efficacy and costs of such purchases as well as the extent of progress toward its economic objectives. The Committee has noted that it is prepared to increase or reduce the pace of purchases to maintain appropriate policy accommodation as the outlook for the labor market or inflation changes. At the June FOMC meeting, Committee participants generally thought it would be helpful to provide greater clarity about the Committee’s approach to decisions about its asset purchase program and thereby reduce investors’ uncertainty about how the Committee might react to future economic developments. In choosing to provide this clarification, the Committee made no changes to its approach to monetary policy. Against this backdrop, Chairman Bernanke, at his postmeeting press conference, described a possible path for asset purchases that the Committee would anticipate implementing if economic conditions evolved in a manner broadly consistent with the outcomes the Committee saw as most likely. The Chairman noted that such economic outcomes involved continued gains in labor markets, supported by moderate growth that picks up over the next several quarters, and inflation moving back toward its 2 percent objective over time. If the economy were to evolve broadly in line with the Committee’s expectations, the FOMC would moderate the pace of purchases later this year and continue to reduce the pace of purchases in measured steps until purchases ended around the middle of next year, at which time the unemployment rate would likely be in the vicinity of 7 percent, with solid economic growth supporting further job gains and inflation moving back toward the FOMC’s 2 percent target. In emphasizing that the Committee’s policy was in no way predetermined, the Chairman noted that the pace of asset purchases could increase or decrease depending on the evolution of the outlook and its implications for further progress in the labor market. The Chairman also drew a strong distinction between the asset purchase program and the forward guidance regarding the target for the federal funds rate, noting that the Committee anticipates that there will be a considerable period between the end of asset purchases and the time when it becomes appropriate to increase the target for the federal funds rate. In conjunction with the most recent FOMC meeting in June, Committee participants submitted individual economic projections under each participant’s judgment of appropriate monetary policy. According to the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), Committee participants saw the downside risks to the outlook for the economy and the labor market as having diminished since the fall. (The June SEP is included as Part 3 of this report.) Committee participants also projected that, with appropriate monetary policy accommodation, economic growth would pick up, the unemployment rate would gradually decline, and inflation would move up over the medium term from recent very low readings and subsequently move back toward the FOMC’s 2 percent longer-run objective. Committee participants saw increases in the target for the federal funds rate as being quite far in the future, with most expecting the first increase to occur in 2015 or 2016. Real economic activity continued to increase at a moderate pace in the first quarter of 2013, though available indicators suggest that the pace of economic growth was somewhat slower in the second quarter. Federal fiscal policy is imposing a substantial drag on economic growth this year, and subdued growth in foreign economies continues to weigh on export demand. However, some other headwinds have diminished, and interest rates, despite recent increases, have generally remained low by historical standards, importantly due to the ongoing monetary accommodation provided by the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). A sustained housing market recovery appears to be under way, and, despite the increase in taxes earlier this year, consumption growth is estimated to have held up reasonably well, supported by higher equity and home prices, more-upbeat consumer sentiment, and the improving jobs situation. Payroll employment has continued to rise at a moderate pace, and various measures of underutilization in labor markets have improved further. But, at 7½ percent in June, the unemployment rate was still well above levels prevailing prior to the recent recession. Meanwhile, consumer price inflation has slowed further this year, in part because of falling energy and import prices and other factors that are expected to prove transitory, and it remains below the FOMC’s longer-run objective of 2 percent. Survey measures of longer-term inflation expectations have remained in the fairly narrow ranges seen over the past several years. Economic growth continued at a moderate pace early this year Output appears to have risen further in the first half of 2013 despite the substantial drag on economic growth from federal fiscal policy this year and the restraint on export demand from subdued foreign growth. Real gross domestic product (GDP) increased at an estimated annual rate of 1¾ percent in the first quarter of the year (figure 1), the same as the average pace in 2012, though available indicators point at present to a somewhat smaller gain in the second quarter. Economic activity so far this year has been supported by the continued expansion in demand by U.S. households and businesses, including what appears to be a sustained recovery in the housing market. Private demand has been bolstered by the historically low interest rates and rising prices of houses and other assets, partly associated with the FOMC’s continued policy accommodation. 1. Change in real gross domestic product, 2007–13 In addition, some of the other headwinds that have held back the economy in recent years have dissipated further. Risks of heightened financial stresses in Europe appear to have diminished 2. Net change in payroll employment, 2007–13 3. Change in output per hour, 1948–2013 NOTE: The data are from the nonfarm business sector. SOURCE: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. somewhat, consumer confidence has improved noticeably, and credit conditions in the United States generally have eased. Nonetheless, tight credit conditions for some households are still likely restraining residential investment and consumer spending, and uncertainty about the foreign outlook continues to represent a downside risk for U.S. financial markets and for sales abroad. Conditions in the labor market have continued to improve . . . The labor market has continued to improve gradually. Gains in payroll employment averaged about 200,000 jobs per month over the first half of 2013, slightly above the average increase in each of the previous two years (figure 2). The combination of this year’s output and employment increases imply that gains in labor productivity have remained slow. According to the latest published data, output per hour in the nonfarm business sector rose at an annual rate of only ½ percent in the first quarter of 2013, similar to its average pace in both 2011 and 2012 (figure 3). Meanwhile, the unemployment rate declined to 7½ percent in the second quarter of this year from around 8¼ percent a year earlier. A variety of alternative, broader measures of labor force underutilization have also improved over the past year, roughly in line with the official unemployment rate (figure 4). While the unemployment rate and total payroll employment have improved further, the labor force participation rate has continued to decline, on balance. As a result, the employment– population ratio, a measure that combines the unemployment rate and labor force participation rate, has changed little so far this year. To an important extent, the decline in the participation rate likely reflects changing demographics—most notably the increasing share in the population of older persons, who have lower-than-average participation rates—that would have occurred regardless of the strength of the labor market. However, it is also likely that some of the decline in the participation rate reflects an increase in the number of workers who have stopped looking for work because of poor job prospects.1 . . . but considerable slack in labor markets remains . . . Although labor market conditions have improved moderately so far this year, the job market remains weak overall. The unemployment rate and other measures of 1. As was discussed in the box “Assessing Conditions in the Labor Market” in the February 2013 Monetary Policy Report, the unemployment rate typically provides a very good summary of labor market conditions; however, other indicators also provide important perspectives on the health of the labor market, with the most accurate assessment of labor market conditions obtained by combining the signals from many such indicators. For the box, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2013), Monetary Policy Report (Washington: Board of Governors, February), www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/ mpr_20130226_part1.htm. labor underutilization are still well above their pre-recession levels, despite payroll employment having now expanded by nearly 7 million jobs since its recent trough and the unemployment rate having fallen 2½ percentage points since its peak. Moreover, unemployment has been unusually concentrated among the long-term unemployed; in June, the fraction of the unemployed who had been out of work for more than six months remained greater than one-third, although this share has continued to edge down (figure 5). In addition, last month, 8 million people, or 5 percent of the workforce, were working part time because they were unable to find full-time work due to economic conditions. . . . and gains in compensation have been slow Increases in hourly compensation continue to be restrained by the weak condition of the labor market. The 12-month change in the employment cost index for private industry 4. Measures of labor underutilization, 2001–13 NOTE: U-4 measures total unemployed plus discouraged workers, as a percent of the labor force plus discouraged workers. Discouraged workers are not currently looking for work because they believe no jobs are available for them. U-5 measures total unemployed plus all marginally attached to the labor force, as a percent of the labor force plus persons marginally attached to the labor force. Marginally attached workers are not in the labor force, want and are available for work, and have looked for a job in the past 12 months. U-6 measures total unemployed plus all marginally attached workers plus total employed part time for economic reasons, as a percent of the labor force plus all marginally attached workers. 5. Long-term unemployed, 1979–2013 NOTE: The series shown is the percent of total unemployed persons who have been unemployed for 27 weeks or more. 6. Measures of change in hourly compensation, 2003–13 NOTE: For nonfarm business compensation, change is over four quarters; for the employment cost index, change is over the 12 months ending in the last month of each quarter. workers, which measures both wages and the cost to employers of providing benefits, has remained close to 2 percent throughout most of the recovery (figure 6). Compensation per hour in the nonfarm business sector—a measure derived from the labor compensation data in the national income and product accounts—rose 2 percent over the year ending in the first quarter of 2013. Similarly, average hourly earnings for all employees—the timeliest measure of wage developments— increased 2¼ percent in nominal terms over the 12 months ending in June. Even with relatively slow productivity gains, the change in unit labor costs faced by firms—an estimate of the extent to which nominal hourly compensation rises in excess of labor productivity—has remained subdued. Consumer price inflation has been especially low . . . The price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) increased at an annual rate of just ½ percent over the first five months of the year, down from a rise of 1½ percent over 2012 and below the FOMC’s long-run objective of 2 percent (figure 7). The very low rate of inflation so far this year partly reflects declines in consumer energy prices, but price inflation for other consumer goods and services has also been subdued. Consumer food prices have remained largely unchanged so far this year, and consumer prices excluding food and energy increased at an annual rate of 1 percent in the first five months of this year after rising 1½ percent over 2012. With wages growing slowly and materials prices flat or moving downward, firms have generally not faced cost pressures that they might otherwise try to pass on. . . . as some transitory factors weighed on prices . . . In addition to the decline in energy prices, this year’s especially low inflation reflects, in part, other special factors that are expected to be transitory. Notably, increases in both medical services prices and the nonmarket component of PCE prices have been unusually low. While the average rate of medical-price inflation as measured by the PCE index has been considerably lower during the past few years than it was earlier, the increase over the first five months of 2013—at below ½ percent—has been extraordinarily muted, largely reflecting the effects on medical services prices of cuts in Medicare reimbursements associated with federal budget sequestration. (In contrast, medical services prices in the consumer price index (CPI), which exclude most Medicare payments, have risen at an annual rate of nearly 2 percent so far this year.) Because medical services have a relatively large weight in PCE expenditures (as the PCE price index reflects payments by all payers, not just out-of-pocket expenses as in the CPI), price changes in this component of spending can have a sizable effect on top-line PCE inflation. The nonmarket PCE price index covers spending components for which market prices are not observed, such as financial services rendered without explicit charge; as a result, the Bureau of Economic Analysis imputes prices for those items. Overall, this nonmarket index declined early this year before moving up again in recent months; however, these prices tend to be volatile and appear to contain little signal for future inflation. . . . and as oil and other commodity prices declined . . . Global oil prices have come down, on net, from their February peak of nearly $120 per barrel, though in recent weeks they have increased somewhat from their spring lows to almost $110 per barrel (figure 8). Tensions in the Middle East have likely continued to put upward pressures on crude oil prices, but those pressures have been mitigated by concerns about the strength of oil demand in China and the rest of emerging Asia and by rising oil production in North America. Nonfuel commodity prices have eased since the beginning of the year, also reflecting slowing economic growth in emerging Asia. Notably, the 7. Change in the chain-type price index for personal consumption expenditures, 2007–13 Excluding food and energy NOTE: The data extend through May 2013; changes are from one year 8. Prices of oil and nonfuel commodities, 2008–13 NOTE: The data are weekly through July 12, 2013. The price of oil is the spot price of Brent crude oil, and the price of nonfuel commodities is an index of 23 primary-commodity prices. 9. Median inflation expectations, 2001–13 NOTE: The Michigan survey data are monthly and extend through a preliminary estimate for July 2013. The SPF data for inflation expectations for personal consumption expenditures are quarterly and extend from 2007:Q1 through 2013:Q2. 5-year (carry adjusted) NOTE: Inflation compensation is the difference between yields on nominal Treasury securities and Treasury inflation-protected securities (TIPS) of comparable maturities, based on yield curves fitted to off-the-run nominal Treasury securities and on- and off-the-run TIPS. The 5-year measure is adjusted for the effect of indexation lags. price of iron ore, widely viewed as an indicator of Chinese demand for commodities, has fallen roughly 20 percent since early January. Along with falling commodity prices, prices of non- oil imported goods declined in the first half of 2013, also likely holding down domestic price increases this year. . . . but longer-term inflation expectations remained in their historical range The Federal Reserve monitors the public’s expectations of inflation, in part because these expectations may influence wage- and price- setting behavior and thus actual inflation. Survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations have changed little, on net, so far this year. Median expected inflation over the next 5 to 10 years, as reported in the Thomson Reuters/University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers (Michigan survey), was 2.9 percent in early July, within the narrow range of the past decade (figure 9).2 In the Survey of Professional Forecasters, conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, the median expectation for the increase in the PCE price index over the next 10 years was 2 percent in the second quarter of this year, similar to its level in recent years. Measures of medium- and longer-term inflation compensation derived from the differences between yields on nominal and inflation- protected Treasury securities have declined between ¼ and ½ percentage point so far this year (figure 10). Nonetheless, these measures of inflation compensation also remain within their respective ranges observed over the past several years, as the recent declines reversed the rise over the second half of last year. In general, movements in inflation compensation can reflect not only market participants’ expectations of future inflation but also changes in investor risk aversion and fluctuations in the relative liquidity of nominal versus inflation- protected securities; the recent declines in inflation compensation may have been amplified 2. The question in the Michigan survey asks about inflation generally but does not refer to any specific price index. Fiscal consolidation has quickened, leading to stronger headwinds but smaller deficits Fiscal policy at the federal level has tightened significantly this year. As discussed in the box “Economic Effects of Federal Fiscal Policy,” fiscal policy changes—including the expiration of the payroll tax cut, the enactment of other tax increases, the effects of the budget caps on discretionary spending, the onset of the sequestration, and the declines in defense spending for overseas military operations— are estimated, collectively, to be exerting a substantial drag on economic activity this year. Even prior to the bulk of the spending cuts associated with the sequestration that started in March, total real federal purchases contracted at an annual rate of nearly 9 percent in the first quarter, reflecting primarily a significant decline in defense spending (figure 11). The sequestration will induce further reductions in real federal expenditures over the next few quarters. For example, many federal agencies have announced plans to furlough workers, especially in the third quarter. However, considerable uncertainty continues to surround the timing of these effects. These fiscal policy changes—along with the ongoing economic recovery and positive net payments to the Treasury by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac—have resulted in a narrower federal deficit this year. Nominal outlays have declined substantially as a share of GDP since their peak during the previous recession, and tax receipts have moved up to about 17 percent of GDP, their highest level since the recession (figure 12). As a result, the deficit in the federal unified budget fell to about $500 billion over the first nine months of the current fiscal year, almost $400 billion less than over the same period a year earlier. Accordingly, the Congressional Budget Office projects that the budget deficit for fiscal year 2013 as a whole will be 4 percent of GDP, markedly narrower than 11. Change in real government expenditures on consumption and investment, 2007–13 12. Federal receipts and expenditures, 1995–2013 NOTE: Through 2012, receipts and expenditures are for fiscal years (October–September); GDP is for the four quarters ending in Q3. For 2013, receipts and expenditures are for the 12 months ending in June, and GDP is the average of 2012:Q4 and 2013:Q1. Receipts and expenditures are on a unified-budget basis. Federal fiscal policy has had important effects on the pace of economic growth in recent years . One useful indicator of the stance of fiscal policy is the structural component of the federal budget deficit . The structural deficit excludes the cyclical part of the deficit—that is, changes in government revenues and expenditures that occur automatically over the business cycle . (It also excludes the budgetary effects of financial stabilization programs .1) Changes in the structural deficit mainly result from fiscal policy actions: Expansionary fiscal policies that can boost near-term economic growth generate increases in the structural deficit, whereas contractionary policies that can temporarily restrain growth generate reductions in the structural deficit . The evolution of one measure of the structural deficit is shown by the blue line in figure A .2 During 1 . Financial stabilization programs include the Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP), the conservatorship of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, and deposit insurance . These programs are excluded from the structural deficit because, although the programs helped stabilize financial markets and alleviate the crisis, neither their budgetary nor their economic effects are well captured in the deficit figures, owing in part to the accounting procedures used to score these programs in the budget . For example, in the case of the TARP, the budget scores the estimated net subsidy cost of the program (adjusted for market risk) as an outlay . Reassessments of the subsidy cost have led to large fluctuations in TARP-related outlays from year to year that do not reflect changes in policy . 2 . The structural deficit used here is constructed based on estimates by the Congressional Budget Office . For estimates of the cyclical component of the deficit, see Congressional NOTE: The data are on a unified-budget basis and are for fiscal years (October–September); GDP is for the four quarters ending in Q3. Deficits appear as positive numbers. The structural deficit excludes the cyclical part of the deficit as well as the budgetary effects of financial stabilization programs, which include the Troubled Asset Relief Program, the conservatorship of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, and deposit insurance. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Board calculations based on Congressional Budget Office data and projections. the recession and early in the recovery, federal fiscal policy was quite expansionary, as indicated by the widening of the structural deficit from 1¼ percent of gross domestic product (GDP) in fiscal year 2007 to 7 percent in fiscal 2010 . The tax cuts and federal spending increases put in place by the Economic Stimulus Act of 2008; the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009; and the Tax Relief, Unemployment Insurance Reauthorization, and Job Creation Act of 2010 were the primary policy changes contributing to the increase in the structural deficit over this period .3 In addition, the so-called automatic stabilizers caused the total deficit to be wider than the structural deficit . Starting in 2011, however, fiscal policy transitioned from expansionary to contractionary as the structural deficit began to narrow . The narrowing intensified somewhat last year as the structural deficit decreased from 6¼ percent of GDP in 2011 to 4½ percent of GDP in 2012: As some temporary stimulus-related policies expired, federal policymakers shifted to deficit-reduction efforts with the enactment of the Budget Control Act of 2011, and spending on overseas military operations continued to decrease . Budget Office (2013), The Effects of Automatic Stabilizers on the Federal Budget as of 2013 (Washington: CBO, March), available at www .cbo .gov/publication/43977 . For projections of the total deficit, and of transactions related to financial stabilization programs, for fiscal years 2013–18, see Congressional Budget Office (2013), Updated Budget Projections: Fiscal Years 2013 to 2023 (Washington: CBO, May), available at www .cbo .gov/ publication/44172 . 3 . Several supplemental appropriations bills enacted during this period also contributed to the increase in the structural deficit . This year, the structural deficit is expected to decline a further 2¼ percent of GDP . This large decrease reflects the expiration of the temporary payroll tax cut and the enactment of some income tax increases, as well as significant restraint on government expenditures from the budget caps on discretionary spending specified in the Budget Control Act, the onset of the spending sequestration, and further declines in defense spending for overseas operations . The Congressional Budget Office estimated that the deficit-reduction policies in current law generating the 2¼ percentage point narrowing in the structural deficit will also restrain the pace of real GDP growth by 1½ percentage points this calendar year, relative to what it would have been otherwise .4 Under current law, fiscal policy is slated during the next couple of years to continue restraining economic growth, albeit to a diminishing extent compared with the current year, as the structural deficit shrinks further but at a slowing pace . Despite the substantial near-term narrowing of the structural deficit, the federal government continues to face significant longer-term fiscal pressures . Indeed, under current policies, the structural deficit is projected to begin rising again later in this decade, in large part reflecting the budgetary effects of population aging and rising health-care costs, along with mounting debt service payments . 13. Federal government debt held by the public, 1963–2013 NOTE: The data for debt through 2012 are as of year-end, and the corresponding values for GDP are for Q4 at an annual rate. The observation for 2013:Q2 is based on an estimate for debt in Q2 and GDP in Q1. Excludes securities held as investments of federal government accounts. 14. Private housing starts, 1999–2013 NOTE: The data extend through May 2013. SOURCE: Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. the deficit of 7 percent of GDP in fiscal 2012. In addition, as shown in box figure A, the deficit is projected to narrow further over the next couple of years in light of ongoing policy actions and continued improvement in the economy. Despite the substantial decline in the deficit, federal debt held by the public has continued to rise and stood at 75 percent of nominal GDP in the first quarter of 2013 (figure 13). At the state and local level as well, the strengthening economy has helped foster a gradual improvement in the budget situations of most jurisdictions. In the first quarter of 2013, state tax receipts came in 9 percent higher than a year earlier. (Some of the recent strength in receipts, though, likely reflects tax payments on income that was shifted into 2012 in anticipation of higher federal tax rates this year.) Consistent with improving sector finances, states and municipalities are no longer reducing their workforces; employment in the nonfederal government sector edged up over the first half of the year after contracting only slightly in 2012. However, construction expenditures by these governments have declined significantly further this year. In all, real government purchases at the state and local level decreased in the first quarter and have imposed a drag on the pace of economic growth so far this year. The housing market recovery continued to gain traction . . . Activity in the housing market has continued to strengthen, supported by low mortgage rates, sustained job gains, and improved sentiment on the part of potential buyers. In the Michigan survey, many households report that low interest rates and house prices make it a good time to buy a home; a growing percentage of respondents also expect that house price gains will continue. Reflecting the improving demand conditions, sales of both new and existing homes have continued to move up, on net, this year. Construction of new housing units has also trended up over the past year (figure 14), contributing to solid rates of increase in real residential investment in the first half of 2013. Even so, the level of construction activity remains low by historical standards. The steep rise in mortgage interest rates since May could temper the pace of home sales and construction going forward, though the pace of purchase mortgage applications so far has shown no material signs of slowing, even as the pace of refinancing applications has tailed off sharply. The strengthening in housing demand has occurred despite the fact that mortgage credit remains limited for borrowers without excellent credit scores or the ability to make sizable down payments. Responses to special questions in the Federal Reserve’s April Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS) suggested that some banks had actually tightened standards over the past year on some loans that are eligible for purchase by the government-sponsored enterprises and loans guaranteed by the Federal Housing Administration, specifically those to borrowers with credit scores below 620 and with low down payments. Indeed, only about 10 percent of new prime mortgage originations made this spring were reported to be associated with FICO scores below 690, compared with a quarter of originations in 2005 (figure 15). . . . as house prices rose further House prices, as measured by several national indexes, have increased significantly further since the end of last year (figure 16). In particular, the CoreLogic repeat-sales index rose about 7 percent (not at an annual rate) over the first five months of 2013 to reach its highest level since the third quarter of 2008. Some of the largest recent gains have occurred where the housing market has been most severely depressed. Recent increases notwithstanding, house prices remain far below the peaks reached before the recession, and the national price-to-rent ratio continues to be near its long-run average. Still, the increase in house prices has helped to materially reduce the number of “underwater” mortgages and made households somewhat less likely to default on their mortgages. 15. Credit scores on new prime mortgages, 2003–13 NOTE: Includes purchase mortgages only. The data extend through May 16. Prices of existing single-family houses, 2002–13 The CoreLogic data extend through May 2013. 17. Mortgage interest rate and mortgage refinance index, 1990–2013 NOTE: The interest rate data are weekly through July 10, 2013. The refinance data are a seasonally adjusted 4-week moving average through July 5, 2013. 18. Change in real personal consumption expenditures, 2007–13 NOTE: The reading for 2013:H1 is the annualized May/Q4 change. SOURCE: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis. 19. Wealth-to-income ratio, 1993–2013 NOTE: The ratio is household net worth to disposable personal income. SOURCE: For net worth, Federal Reserve Board, flow of funds data; for Mortgage interest rates increased but remained low by historical standards Mortgage interest rates have increased significantly in the past couple of months from record lows reached earlier this year (figure 17). However, rates are still low by historical standards, reflecting in part the Federal Reserve’s ongoing purchases of mortgage-backed securities (MBS) and highly accommodative overall stance of monetary policy. The spread between rates on conforming mortgages and yields on agency-guaranteed MBS has decreased slightly since the end of 2012. Low mortgage rates, along with rising house prices, continued to facilitate a significant pace of refinancing for most of the first half of 2013, which has helped households reduce monthly debt service payments. However, refinancing remained difficult for households without solid credit ratings and those with limited home equity. Moreover, as mortgage rates moved higher, refinancing activity began to decrease sharply in May. Consumer spending has held up despite the drag from tax increases early this year Real consumption expenditures rose at an annual rate of about 2 percent over the first five months of this year, about the same as in the previous two years (figure 18). These increases have occurred despite higher taxes and have been supported by several factors. The gains this year in house prices and equity values have helped households recover some of the wealth lost during the recession; indeed, the ratio of household net wealth to income is estimated to have moved up sharply in the first quarter (figure 19). In recent months, indicators of consumer sentiment have become more upbeat as well (figure 20). Furthermore, in contrast to mortgage rates, interest rates on auto loans and credit cards have changed little, on balance, since the end of 2012. With interest rates low, the household debt service ratio—the ratio of required principal and interest payments on outstanding household debt to disposable personal income—remained near historical lows (figure 21). In addition, real disposable personal income has increased slightly, on balance, over the past year, as moderate gains in employment and wages have more than offset the implications for income of changes in tax policy.3 And household purchasing power has been supported so far this year by low consumer price inflation. On balance, moderate increases in spending have outpaced disposable income growth, pushing the personal saving rate down to around 3 percent in recent months, close to the level that prevailed before the recession (figure 22). The financial conditions of households continued to improve slowly Although mortgage debt continued to contract amid still-tight credit conditions for some borrowers, consumer credit expanded at an annual rate of about 6 percent in the first quarter of 2013. Student loans, the vast majority of which are guaranteed or originated by the federal government and subject to minimal underwriting criteria, are estimated to have increased rapidly and now total nearly $1 trillion, making them the largest category of consumer indebtedness outside of mortgages. Auto loans are also estimated to have increased at a robust pace. Stable collateral values and favorable conditions in the asset-backed securities market may have contributed to easier standards for such loans. In contrast, revolving consumer credit (primarily credit card lending) was little changed in the first 3. The income data have been quite volatile in recent months, reflecting both direct and indirect effects of the changes in tax policy this year. Personal income is reported to have surged late last year and then fallen back sharply early this year, as many firms apparently shifted dividend and employee bonus payments into 2012 in anticipation of higher marginal tax rates for high- income households this year. In addition, the rise in the payroll tax rate and a surge in personal income taxes at the beginning of the year pushed down disposable personal income in the first quarter. 20. Consumer sentiment indexes, 2000–13 NOTE: The Conference Board series equals 100 in 1985. The Michigan survey series equals 100 in 1966 and is a preliminary estimate for July 2013. SOURCE: The Conference Board; Thomson Reuters/University of Michigan 21. Household debt service, 1980–2013 NOTE: Debt service payments consist of estimated required payments on 22. Personal saving rate, 1993–2013 NOTE: The data are through 2013:Q2, which is the April–May average. SOURCE: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis. 23. Credit card balances, 2000–13 24. Financial ratios for nonfinancial corporations, 1990–2013 NOTE: The data are annual through 1998 and quarterly thereafter. SOURCE: Compustat, © 2013 Standard & Poor's Financial Services LLC (“S&P”). All rights reserved. No further distribution or reproduction permitted. quarter, and standards and terms on credit card loans appeared to remain tight, especially for consumers with less-than-pristine credit histories. For instance, spreads of interest rates on credit card loans over reference interest rates remained historically wide. Consequently, credit card debt extended to consumers with prime credit scores remained well below its pre- crisis levels, while debt extended to those with subprime credit scores—that is, Equifax Risk Scores below 660—continued to trend down (figure 23). According to the most recent available data, indicators of distress for most types of household debt have declined since the end of 2012. For home mortgages, for example, the fraction of current mortgages becoming 30 or more days delinquent has now reached relatively low levels as a result of strict underwriting conditions for new mortgages as well as improved conditions in housing and labor markets. Measures of late-stage mortgage delinquency, such as the inventory of properties in foreclosure, also improved but remained elevated. Delinquency rates on student loans also remained high, likely reflecting in part the lack of underwriting on the federally backed loans that make up the bulk of the student loans outstanding. The financial conditions of nonfinancial firms continued to be strong . . . In the first quarter, the aggregate ratio of liquid to total assets for nonfinancial firms ticked up and remained near its highest level in 20 years, while the aggregate ratio of debt to assets was still well below its average over the same period (figure 24). Strong balance sheets, in turn, have contributed to solid credit quality: Bond default rates, as of June, stayed low by historical standards, and the delinquency rate on commercial and industrial (C&I) loans continued to fall in the first quarter from already low levels. However, over the first half of the year, the volume of nonfinancial corporate bonds that were upgraded by Moody’s Investors Service was less than the volume downgraded. . . . and corporate bond and loan issuance remained robust With corporate credit quality strong and interest rates near historically low levels through much of the first half of 2013 (figure 25), nonfinancial firms continued to raise funds, especially using longer-duration instruments. The pace of bond issuance by both investment- and speculative-grade nonfinancial firms remained extraordinarily brisk until interest rates rose significantly in May, while nonfinancial commercial paper (CP) outstanding was little changed (figure 26). C&I loans outstanding at commercial banks in the United States continued to expand during the first half of 2013 but at a slower pace than in the second half of 2012, when firms reportedly ramped up their C&I borrowing in part to make larger-than-usual dividend and bonus payments in advance of anticipated year-end tax hikes. A relatively large fraction of respondents to the April SLOOS indicated that, over the preceding three months, they had eased standards and pricing terms for C&I loans to firms of all sizes. Meanwhile, issuance of leveraged loans extended by nonbank institutions in the syndicated loan market was very elevated (figure 27), boosted by strong investor demand for these floating-rate instruments manifested through inflows to loan mutual funds and rapid growth of newly established collateralized loan obligations. More than two-thirds of the proceeds from such syndicated loan issuance, however, were reportedly used to repay existing debt. Borrowing conditions for small businesses improved, though demand for credit remained subdued Some indicators of borrowing conditions for small businesses have improved since the end of 2012. According to the surveys conducted by the National Federation of Independent Business (NFIB) during the first half of 2013, the fraction of small businesses that found credit more difficult to obtain than three months prior declined on net. Recent 25. Corporate bond yields by securities rating, 1997–2013 NOTE: The yields shown are yields on 10-year bonds. SOURCE: Derived from smoothed corporate yield curves using Merrill 26. Selected components of net financing for nonfinancial businesses, 2006–13 NOTE: The data for the components except bonds are seasonally adjusted. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Board, flow of funds data. 27. Leveraged loans extended by nonbank institutions, 2006–13 NOTE: Refinancing represents the portion of syndicated loan issuance reportedly being used to repay existing debt. 28. Change in real business fixed investment, 2006–13 readings from the Federal Reserve’s Survey of Terms of Business Lending indicate that the spreads charged by commercial banks on newly originated C&I loans with original amounts less than $1 million—a large share of which likely consist of loans to small businesses—continued to edge down, though they remained elevated.4 However, demand for credit from small firms apparently remained subdued compared with demand from large and middle-market firms. Relatively large fractions of respondents in recent NFIB surveys indicated that they did not have any borrowing needs, and the total dollar volume of business loans with original amounts of $1 million or less outstanding at U.S. commercial banks was little changed in the first quarter. However, business spending on capital investment has been rising at only a modest pace Despite the large amount of business borrowing, businesses’ capital investment has been rising only modestly. Real spending on equipment and software (E&S) increased at an annual rate of 4 percent in the first quarter after having risen at a similar, below-average pace in 2012 (figure 28); these increases likely reflect the tepid growth in business output over the past year. Shipments and orders of nondefense capital goods and other forward-looking indicators of business spending are consistent with further moderate gains in E&S spending in the spring and summer of this year. Business investment in structures has also been relatively low so far this year, even apart from a sharp drop-off in expenditures on wind-power facilities following a tax-related burst of construction late last year. The level of investment in drilling and mining structures has stayed elevated, supported by high oil prices and the continued exploitation of new drilling technologies. However, investment in nonresidential buildings continues to be restrained by high vacancy 4. Data releases for the Survey of Terms of Business Lending are available on the Federal Reserve Board’s website at www.federalreserve.gov/releases/e2/ default.htm. rates for existing properties, low commercial real estate (CRE) prices, and tight financing conditions for new construction. Indeed, banks’ holdings of construction and land development loans have contracted every quarter since the first half of 2008. Despite weak fundamentals, conditions in markets for CRE financing appeared to loosen somewhat. A moderate fraction of banks in the April SLOOS again reported having eased their lending standards on CRE loans, while a somewhat larger fraction continued to report some increase in demand for these loans. In addition, the pace of issuance of commercial mortgage-backed securities has stepped up, on balance, this year, but it remained well below its peak reached in 2007 (figure 29). Foreign trade has been relatively weak Export demand, which provided substantial support to domestic activity earlier in the recovery, has weakened since the middle of 2012, partly reflecting subdued foreign economic activity. Real exports of goods and services declined at an annual rate of 1 percent in the first quarter of 2013 (figure 30), though data for the first two months of the second quarter suggest that they rebounded. Exports to Japan have been particularly weak, but those to Canada continue to rise. Real imports of goods and services edged down in the first quarter after falling substantially in the fourth quarter of 2012. Data for April and May suggest that imports recovered at a moderate pace in the second quarter. Although imports of non-oil goods and services rose, imports of oil declined further as U.S. oil production continued its climb of recent years. Altogether, net exports were a neutral influence on the growth of real GDP in the first quarter of 2013, and partial data suggest that the same was the case in the second quarter. The current account deficit remained at about 2½ percent of GDP in the first quarter of 2013 (figure 31), a level little changed since 2009. 29. Commercial mortgage-backed securities issuance, 2006–13 30. Change in real imports and exports of goods and services, 2007–13 31. U.S. trade and current account balances, 2004–13 32. U.S. net financial inflows, 2008–13 U.S. private (including banking) Foreign private (including banking) U.S. official Foreign official NOTE: Negative numbers indicate a balance of payments outflow, generated when U.S. residents, on net, purchase foreign assets or when foreign residents, on net, sell U.S. assets. A negative number for “U.S. private” or “U.S. official” indicates an increase in foreign positions. U.S. official flows include the foreign currency acquired when foreign central banks draw on their swap lines with the Federal Reserve. 33. Net saving, 1993–2013 NOTE: Nonfederal saving is the sum of personal and net business saving The current account deficit had narrowed substantially in late 2008 and early 2009 when U.S. imports dropped sharply, in part reflecting the steep decline in oil prices. In the first quarter of 2013, the current account deficit continued to be financed by strong financial inflows, mostly from purchases of Treasury securities by both foreign official and foreign private investors (figure 32). Consistent with continued improvement in market sentiment, U.S. investors made further strong purchases of foreign securities, especially equities. National saving is very low Net national saving—that is, the saving of U.S. households, businesses, and governments, net of depreciation charges—remains extremely low by historical standards (figure 33). In the first quarter of 2013, net national saving was 1 percent of nominal GDP, up from figures that averaged around zero over the past few years. As discussed earlier, the near-term federal deficit has narrowed because of fiscal policy changes and the economic recovery, and further declines in the federal budget deficit over the next few years should boost national saving somewhat. With the economy still weak and demand for investable funds limited, the low level of national saving is not constraining growth or leading to higher interest rates. However, if low levels of national saving persist over the longer run, they will likely be associated with both low rates of capital formation and heavy borrowing from abroad, limiting the rise in the standard of living for U.S. residents over time. The expected path for the federal funds rate in 2014 and 2015 steepened . . . Market-based measures of the expected future path of the federal funds rate moved higher over the first half of the year, as investors responded to somewhat better-than- expected incoming economic data and to communications from Federal Reserve officials that were seen as suggesting a tighter stance of monetary policy than had been anticipated. The modal path of the federal funds rate—that is, the values for future federal funds rates that market participants see as most likely— derived from interest rate options shifted up considerably, especially around the June FOMC meeting, suggesting that investors may now expect the target funds rate to lift off from its current range significantly earlier than they expected at the end of 2012. However, a part of this increase may have reflected a rise in term premiums associated with increased uncertainty about the monetary policy outlook. According to a survey of primary dealers conducted shortly after the June FOMC meeting by the Open Market Desk at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, dealers’ expectations of the date of liftoff have moved up one quarter since the end of last year, to the second quarter of 2015.5 . . . while yields on longer-term securities increased significantly but remained low by historical standards Reflecting the same factors, yields on longer- term Treasury securities and agency MBS are also substantially higher now than they were at the end of last year (figures 34 and 35). The rise in longer-term yields appears to have been amplified by a pullback from duration risk as well as technical factors, including rapid changes in trading strategies and positions that had been predicated on the continuation of very low rates and volatility. On balance, yields on 5-, 10-, and 30-year nominal Treasury securities have increased between 65 and 85 basis points, on net, to 1½ percent, 2½ percent, and 3¾ percent, respectively, since the end of last year. Yields on 30-year agency MBS increased more than those on Treasury securities, rising about 5. The results of the survey of primary dealers are available on the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s website at www.newyorkfed.org/markets/ primarydealer_survey_questions.html. 34. Yields on nominal Treasury securities, 2000–13 NOTE: The Treasury ceased publication of the 30-year constant maturity series on February 18, 2002, and resumed that series on February 9, 2006. 35. Yield and spread on agency mortgage-backed securities, 2000–13 NOTE: The data are daily. Yield shown is for the Fannie Mae 30-year current coupon, the coupon rate at which new mortgage-backed securities would be priced at par, or face, value. Spread shown is to the average of the 5- and 10-year nominal Treasury yields. 36. Dollar-roll-implied financing rates (front month), Fannie Mae 30-year, 2011–13 Fails charge announced Fails charge implemented 1¼ percentage points, on net, since the end of 2012, to about 3½ percent. Agency MBS yields also rose significantly more than the yields on comparable nominal Treasury securities after adjusting for the effects of higher interest rates on the likelihood that borrowers will prepay their mortgages (the option-adjusted spread), likely reflecting investors’ reassessment of the outlook for the Federal Reserve’s MBS purchases as well as subsequent market dynamics. Nonetheless, yields on longer-term securities continue to be low by historical standards. Those low levels reflect several factors, including subdued inflation expectations as well as still-modest economic growth prospects in the United States and other major developed economies. In addition, despite their recent rise, term premiums—the extra return investors expect to obtain from holding longer-term securities as opposed to holding and rolling over a sequence of short-term securities for the same period—remain small, reflecting both the FOMC’s ongoing large-scale asset purchase program and strong demand for longer-term securities from global investors. Indicators of market functioning in both the Treasury and agency MBS markets were generally solid over the first half of the year. In particular, the Desk’s outright purchases of Treasury securities and agency MBS did not appear to have a material adverse effect on liquidity in those markets. For example, available data suggest bid–asked spreads in Treasury and agency MBS markets continued to be in line with recent averages, though some widening has been observed of late amid increased market volatility. In the Treasury market, auctions generally continued to be well received by investors. In the agency MBS market, settlement fails remained low, and implied financing rates in the “dollar roll” market—an indicator of the scarcity of agency MBS for settlement—have drifted up over the past six months, indicating reduced settlement pressures (figure 36).6 6. Dollar roll transactions consist of a purchase or sale Short-term funding markets continued to function well Conditions in short-term funding markets remained good, with many money market rates having edged down from already low levels since the end of 2012 to near the bottom of the ranges they have occupied since the zero-lower- bound period began (figure 37). In the market for repurchase agreements, bid–asked spreads and haircuts for most collateral types were reportedly little changed, while rates moved down slightly, on net, for general collateral finance repurchase agreements. Despite the high level of reserve balances and the substantially reduced volume of trading in the federal funds market since 2008, the effective federal funds rate has continued to be strongly correlated with these money market rates. Rates on asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP) also fell, and spreads on ABCP with European bank sponsors have generally converged back to those on ABCP with U.S. bank sponsors. Rates on unsecured financial CP for both U.S. and European issuers have remained low, even during the temporary flare-up of concerns about European financial stability surrounding the banking problems in Cyprus, while forward measures of funding spreads have continued to be narrow by historical standards. Broad equity price indexes increased further . . . Broad equity price indexes notched substantial gains and reached record levels in nominal terms, boosted by improved market sentiment regarding the economic outlook, the FOMC’s sustained highly accommodative monetary policy, and stable expectations about medium- term earnings growth (figure 38). Despite the increased volatility around the time of the June FOMC meeting, as of mid-July, broad measures of equity prices were 18 percent higher, on net, than their levels at the end of 2012. Nonetheless, the spread between the or purchase substantially similar securities on a specified future date. The Committee directs the Desk to engage in these transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS purchases. 37. Overnight money market rates, 2009–13 4-week moving averages of daily data NOTE: GCF is general collateral finance; repo is repurchase agreement. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Bank of New York; Depository Trust & Clearing 38. Equity prices, 1996–2013 39. Market-implied equity premium, 1995–2013 Expected real yield on 10-year Treasury NOTE: The expected real yield on 10-year Treasury is defined as the off-the-run 10-year Treasury yield less the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia's Survey of Professional Forecasters' 10-year CPI inflation expectations. 12-month expected forward earnings–price ratio for the S&P 500 and a long-run real Treasury yield—a rough gauge of the equity risk premium—stayed very elevated by historical standards, suggesting that investors remain somewhat cautious in their attitudes toward equities (figure 39). Outside of the period surrounding the June FOMC meeting, implied volatility for the S&P 500 index, as calculated from option prices, generally remained near the bottom end of the range it has occupied since the onset of the financial crisis. . . . and market sentiment toward financial institutions continued to strengthen as credit quality improved On average, the equity prices of domestic financial institutions have outperformed broader equity indexes since the end of last year. Improved investor sentiment toward the financial sector reportedly was driven by perceptions of reduced downside risk in the housing market as well as expectations of continued improvements in credit quality and of increased net interest margins as the yield curve steepened over the past few months. However, prices of real estate investment trust (REIT) shares underperformed, especially after interest rates started rising in May, partially reflecting a broader shift on the part of investors from income-oriented shares toward more cyclically sensitive issues. Shares of mortgage REITs were particularly affected by the sharp rise in Treasury and agency MBS yields. Equity prices for large domestic banks have increased 24 percent since the end of 2012 (figure 38). However, they have yet to fully recover from the very depressed levels reached during the financial crisis. Standard measures of the profitability of bank holding companies (BHCs) edged down in the first quarter but remained in the upper end of their subdued post-crisis range. BHC profits were held down by modest noninterest income and a further narrowing of net interest margins. By contrast, profits were supported by additional reductions in noninterest expenses and decreases in provisioning for loan losses, as indicators of credit quality improved further in every major asset class. Banks’ allowances for loan and lease losses continued to trend down as charge-offs of bad loans once again exceeded provisions in the first quarter (figure 40). Risk-based capital ratios (based on current Basel I definitions) of the 25 largest BHCs decreased in the first quarter because of the adoption of the new market risk capital rule, while risk-based capital ratios at smaller BHCs edged up.7 Nonetheless, BHCs of all sizes remained well capitalized by historical standards as they prepare for the transition to stricter Basel III requirements (see the box “Developments Related to Financial Stability”). Aggregate credit provided by commercial banks continued to increase in the first half of 2013 (figure 41). M2 rose at a more moderate rate, but balances remain elevated M2 has increased at an annual rate of about 4¾ percent since the end of 2012, notably slower than the pace registered last year. However, holdings of M2 assets—including their largest component, liquid deposits— remained elevated relative to what would have been expected based on historical relationships with nominal income and interest rates, likely due to investors’ continued preference to hold safe and liquid assets. The monetary base—which is equal to the sum of currency and reserve balances—increased briskly over the first half of the year, driven mainly by the significant rise in reserve balances due to the Federal Reserve’s asset purchases. 7. The new market risk capital rule requires banking organizations with significant trading activities to adjust their capital requirements to better account for the market risks of those activities. For more information on this change, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2012), “Federal Reserve Board Approves Final Rule to Implement Changes to Market Risk Capital Rule,” press release, June 7, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/bcreg/ 20120607b.htm. 40. Provisions and charge-offs, 2005–13 Provisions for loan and lease losses (right scale) Net charge-offs (right scale) ALLL (left scale) NOTE: ALLL is the allowance for loan and lease losses. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Board, Reporting Form FR Y-9C, “Consolidated 41. Change in total bank credit, 1990–2013 NOTE: The data extend through 2013:Q2. The data are seasonally adjusted. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Board, Statistical Release H.8, “Assets and As highlighted in previous Monetary Policy Reports, the Federal Reserve has devoted increased resources to monitoring potential risks to financial stability . In addition to new regulations to strengthen the financial system, comprehensive monitoring is necessary because the system will evolve in response to new regulations, and because market participants’ risk tolerance and perceptions tend to vary with economic and financial conditions . The Federal Reserve’s increased monitoring efforts focus on identifying financial vulnerabilities—features of the financial system that can transmit and amplify the effects of unforeseen adverse events . For example, vulnerabilities can arise through excess leverage, through excess maturity transformation—that is, financing long-term assets with short-term debts— and through the complexity and interconnectedness of financial institutions . In recent years, a stronger regulatory framework and an enhanced focus by the private sector on potential risks have contributed to significant reductions in vulnerabilities and a more resilient U .S . financial system . However, important challenges remain, and the Federal Reserve will monitor developments regarding ongoing and emerging financial vulnerabilities . continued to improve last year . Bank holding companies (BHCs) increased the proportion of common equity in their funding base, continuing a trend of recent years . For example, the ratio of tier 1 common equity to risk-weighted assets among the firms participating in the recent Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review and the stress tests mandated by the Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 (Dodd–Frank Act) has more than doubled since the first similar stress test in 2009 and totaled 11 .3 percent at the beginning of this year .1 These stress tests are regulatory tools that the Federal Reserve uses to help ensure that financial institutions have robust capital-planning processes and are able to maintain adequate capital even following an extended period of adverse economic conditions . Indeed, capital ratios maintained under the hypothetical “severely adverse” macroeconomic scenario specified in the most recent stress tests suggest that BHCs have become more resilient to possible adverse macroeconomic shocks . large BHCs’ holdings of cash and high-quality liquid securities have risen from less than 16 percent of total assets in 2007 to 24 percent in the first quarter of 2013 . Further, firms have sharply reduced their dependence on wholesale short-term funding, which proved highly unreliable during the crisis . In addition, the credit risk of banks’ assets has generally declined as banks have tightened lending standards and as some borrowers—both households and nonfinancial firms—have strengthened their financial positions by refinancing their debt at lower interest rates . This improvement has also been aided by the rise in house prices and equity values amid the recovery in economic activity . Consistent with all of these improvements, premiums on BHC credit default swaps (CDS) have fallen by nearly one-half from their 2009 levels . Similarly, systemic risk measures for these firms—which assess the amount of financial stress that would be realized in the event of a sizable financial shock based on CDS premiums, stock prices, and correlations—have declined substantially . The significant amount of funding channeled through the “shadow banking” sector contributed to the financial system’s fragility before the financial crisis, largely because of that sector’s reliance on wholesale short-term funds to finance longer-term assets . Activity in this sector contracted significantly in the wake of the crisis and has expanded only moderately since the post-crisis trough . The risks inherent in some forms of shadow banking have been addressed through tighter banking regulations that require more recognition of exposures to off-balance-sheet vehicles, such as asset-backed commercial paper conduits . nonetheless, significant vulnerabilities associated with wholesale short-term funding remain . While the extended period of low interest rates has contributed to improved economic conditions and increased resiliency in the financial sector, it could also lead investors to “reach for yield” through excessive leverage, duration risk, credit risk, or other forms of risk-taking . There are signs that the low level of interest rates, as well as improved investor sentiment, has contributed to a modest pickup in leverage and maturity transformation in some markets . However, the recent rise in interest rates and volatility may have led some investors to reevaluate their risk-taking behavior . Securitization markets grew rapidly over the past The banking system has also improved its liquidity Capital Analysis and Review is available on the Federal Reserve Board’s website at www .federalreserve .gov/ bankinforeg/stress-tests-capital-planning .htm . year and a half, as investors reportedly increased their exposure to structured finance products in order to boost returns . new U .S . securitization issuance excluding agency residential mortgage-backed securities (MBS) was roughly $500 billion (at an annual rate) in the first quarter, up sharply from the level a year ago but still well below the peak of over $2 trillion reached before the crisis . Collateralized loan obligations and commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) accounted for a substantial part of the increase . Dealer responses in the June Senior Credit Officer Opinion Survey on Dealer Financing Terms indicate that demand for funding of securitized products, such as non-agency residential MBS and CMBS, had increased, suggesting some investments were being funded with short-term debt .2 In addition, low Treasury yields likely boosted the pace of investment in corporate bond and loan funds and contributed to sizable issuance of high- yield bonds and syndicated leveraged loans this year . However, spreads of yields on corporate bonds relative to those on comparable-maturity Treasury securities were not unusually narrow by historical standards, and purchases generally do not appear to have been financed with leverage or short-term funding, which should limit the risk of a disorderly unwind . As Treasury yields have risen since the beginning of May, corporate bond funds have experienced substantial outflows and bond yields have risen, although spreads over Treasury securities have posted small mixed changes . For syndicated leveraged loans, underwriting standards, such as the number of covenants and required debt-to-earnings multiples, have been easing, and continued flows to loan funds suggest pressures in underwriting may continue . Banking supervisors are currently working on implementing new supervisory guidance on leveraged lending practices, which should help mitigate the potential for a buildup of vulnerabilities .3 Agency mortgage real estate investment trusts (agency REITs) are another area where investors have displayed a willingness to take on risk to achieve higher returns . Agency REITs purchase agency MBS, funded largely by relatively short-term repurchase agreements, and thus combine high leverage with extensive maturity transformation, creating the potential to disrupt MBS markets if, for instance, rates were to rise sharply . Amid the recent increase in interest rates and widening of MBS spreads, stock prices of agency REITs have fallen about 20 percent, and some of these firms have reportedly sold assets to offset the resulting increase in their leverage . To 2 . The survey is available on the Federal Reserve Board’s website at www .federalreserve .gov/econresdata/releases/ scoos .htm . date, sales by these agency REITs and other funds with similar positions reportedly have amplified the initial rise in rates and spreads, but market functioning has not been impaired . At commercial banking firms, the low interest rate environment in recent years has been pressuring net interest margins, and some firms appear to have extended the duration of their securities holdings to boost profits . Supervisors have been working with banks on interest rate risk-management practices to ensure that the banks’ practices comply with the interagency advisory that was issued in 2010 .4 Improved practices should make the banks more resilient to unexpected interest rate shocks . The low interest rates also appear to be pressuring profits among life insurance companies, and some insurers have added marginally more credit and liquidity risk to their asset portfolios . The Federal Reserve has continued to make progress on financial reform . The Federal Reserve recently finalized its proposal to implement the Basel III capital requirements . The final rule promotes a stronger banking system by increasing the quantity and quality of required regulatory capital, which is accomplished by setting a new tier 1 common equity capital ratio of 4 .5 percent of risk-weighted assets (RWA), a capital conservation buffer of 2 .5 percent of RWA, and strict eligibility criteria for regulatory capital instruments . In addition, the rule contains a supplementary minimum leverage ratio and a countercyclical capital buffer for large and internationally active banking organizations . Furthermore, the Federal Reserve is working this year toward finalization of additional rules that would implement sections 165 and 166 of the Dodd–Frank Act, a broad set of enhanced prudential standards for BHCs with total assets of $50 billion or more and systemically important nonbank financial companies designated by the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) . The rules relating to resolution planning and stress testing are already completed, and the Federal Reserve is working to finalize rules for capital requirements, liquidity requirements, single-counterparty credit limits, an early remediation regime, and risk-management requirements . The FSOC recently designated two nonbank financial firms, and it has proposed the designation of a third firm, which has requested a hearing before the council . 42. 10-year nominal benchmark yields, 2012–13 43. Equity indexes for selected foreign economies, 2012–13 Emerging markets Foreign bond yields have risen and asset prices have declined, on net, especially in emerging market economies Foreign benchmark sovereign yields have moved somewhat higher, on net, since the beginning of the year (figure 42). Rates moved lower in March and April, in part reflecting weak incoming data on activity; anticipation of the Bank of Japan’s (BOJ) asset purchase program may have also contributed to declining Japanese government bond (JGB) yields early in the year. Since early May, however, as with U.S. Treasury securities, sovereign yields have risen worldwide, as investors responded to better-than-expected U.S. economic data and to Federal Reserve communications about monetary policy. Sovereign yields are up, on net, in Europe, Japan, and Canada and have increased substantially in Korea, Mexico, and other emerging market economies (EMEs). Equity indexes in the major advanced foreign economies (AFEs) rose earlier in the year (figure 43), especially in Japan, where stock prices continued to soar as Prime Minister Abe’s ambitious stimulus program began to take shape. However, since mid-May, equity prices have declined on net. Corporate bond issuance eased somewhat in June as rates climbed higher, but year-to-date issuance totals are still strong relative to recent years. Since the start of the year, sovereign and corporate credit spreads have narrowed slightly. Financial stresses in Europe have remained well below their highs last year despite banking problems in Cyprus and political tensions in several other European countries. The significantly higher interest rates in EMEs have been accompanied by sharp moves in other EME financial markets. Since mid-May, stock prices have declined and credit spreads have widened markedly. EME bond and equity funds have also experienced sizable outflows, as investors reassessed the economic outlook in these economies as well as the returns on EME assets relative to those in advanced economies. The improved sentiment toward the U.S. economic outlook and anticipation of less- accommodative monetary policy have pushed the U.S. dollar higher against a broad set of currencies since the end of 2012 (figure 44). In particular, the dollar has appreciated sharply against the Japanese yen, on net, as the BOJ adopted a more accommodative monetary policy stance. Activity in the advanced foreign economies remained subdued despite a pickup . . . Activity in the AFEs improved to a still- muted pace in the first half of 2013 (figure 45), supported in part by stronger exports and the easing in financial stresses in Europe. The euro-area economy shrank further in the first quarter, but the pace of contraction moderated as consumption stabilized. In the United Kingdom, real GDP resumed growing, at a 1¼ percent pace, in the first quarter; retail sales and the purchasing managers index (PMI) suggest that growth firmed in the second quarter. First-quarter activity accelerated in Japan, reflecting a strong rebound of exports and a pickup in consumption. Canadian growth also firmed in the first quarter, and the labor market notched solid employment gains through the second quarter. With activity weak and inflationary pressures low, several foreign central banks took additional steps to support their economies. (See the box “The Expansion of Central Bank Balance Sheets” for a broader overview of central bank actions.) The European Central Bank (ECB) and the Reserve Bank of Australia lowered their main policy rates, and the ECB stated after its July meeting that it will keep key policy rates low “for an extended period.” The Bank of England extended its Funding for Lending Scheme until January 2015 and increased banks’ incentives to lend to small and 44. U.S. dollar exchange rate against broad index and selected major currencies, 2012–13 NOTE: The data are in foreign currency units per dollar. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Board, Statistical Release H.10, “Foreign 45. Real gross domestic product growth in selected advanced foreign economies, 2010–13 The severity of the recession associated with the global financial crisis led central banks in some of the advanced economies to take policy measures that drove short-term market interest rates nearly to zero . As the recession dragged on, however, several major central banks—including the Federal Reserve, the Bank of England (BOE), the Bank of Japan (BOJ), and the European Central Bank (ECB)—sought to provide further economic stimulus through the adoption of unconventional policies that aimed to reduce longer- term interest rates and ease financial conditions more generally . These policies, which included purchases of longer-term assets and repurchase operations with extended terms to maturity, left the central banks with balance sheets of unprecedented size . Total assets of the Federal Reserve rose from about 6 percent of gross domestic product (GDP) (around $870 billion) in the summer of 2007 to 22 percent of GDP ($3 .5 trillion) as of June 2013 . As shown in figure A, the assets of the BOE, BOJ, and ECB also increased markedly relative to the sizes of their economies . This box offers some detail on the circumstances and policies that led to the balance sheet expansions for these central banks . paper and corporate bonds making up the residual . The BOE resumed purchases in October 2011 as the economy continued to struggle amid spillovers from the euro-area financial crisis . Total securities holdings are currently near £375 billion, or almost 25 percent of GDP, and account for nearly all of the BOE’s balance sheet . A. Central bank assets in selected advanced like the Federal Reserve, the BOE began its asset purchases relatively soon after the advent of the global financial crisis . Also like the Federal Reserve, the goals of the BOE’s purchases were to help lower longer- term interest rates and to ease financial conditions more broadly, thereby providing further support for economic growth . During its initial program, between March 2009 and January 2010, the BOE bought £200 billion (14 percent of GDP) of longer-term assets, mostly U .K . government bonds, with commercial NOTE: For the United Kingdom, the series starts in 2006:Q2. For the euro area, 2013:Q2 assets are as of the end of May. For each economy, 2013:Q2 assets are divided by 2013:Q1 GDP. Compared with the Federal Reserve or the BOE, initially the BOJ did not expand its balance sheet as much during the crisis, but more recently it has laid out plans for substantial asset purchases . By late 2010, with entrenched deflation and GDP still well below its pre-crisis peak, the BOJ announced its Asset Purchase Program of about ¥35 trillion (about 7 percent of GDP) and later expanded the size of the program to ¥101 trillion by the end of 2012 . But in January of this year, the BOJ announced plans to begin a series of open-ended asset purchases in pursuit of its now-higher 2 percent inflation target . And, finally, in April the BOJ announced that it would enter a new phase of monetary easing, accelerating asset purchases to double the monetary base within two years in pursuit of its inflation target . The BOJ also substantially extended the maturity of its Japanese government bond (JGB) purchases . All maturities, including 40-year bonds, are eligible, and the average maturity of JGB purchases has risen from slightly less than 3 years to about 7 years . To date, asset purchases have increased the size of the BOJ’s balance sheet to almost 40 percent of GDP . The BOJ expects its balance sheet to reach approximately 60 percent of 2012 GDP by the end of 2014 . In contrast to the other central banks, the ECB has taken a different approach to balance sheet expansion but, nonetheless, one that has offered support to economic activity . The ECB has conducted very few outright purchase operations . The main exception was the Securities Markets Programme, terminated in late 2012, under which the ECB holdings reached almost €220 billion in peripheral sovereign debt in January 2012 (about 2 .5 percent of euro- area GDP) . Instead, its substantial balance sheet expansion has been driven primarily by loans to banks and, in particular, longer-term refinancing operations (lTROs), which have maturities of one month or longer . In the fall of 2008, departing from its past practice of offering banks a fixed amount of loans at interest rates determined by auction, the ECB announced it would provide unlimited collateralized loans to banks at a fixed rate . The size of the ECB’s balance sheet increased about €0 .5 trillion (almost 6 percent of the GDP of the euro area) to about €2 trillion (around 22 percent of euro-area GDP) in 2008 and remained near that level until mid-2011 . Severely deteriorating financial conditions in Europe led the ECB in December 2011 to announce lTROs with maturities of three years . Banks drew a bit more than €1 trillion under these lTROs, pushing the ECB’s balance sheet to over 30 percent of GDP . The stated aim of the lTROs was to provide liquidity to the financial system rather than to ease monetary policy . However, insofar as the lTROs helped pushed down bank funding costs and sovereign yields in vulnerable European countries and alleviated financial stresses more generally, they likely provided some support to economic activity as well . By the same token, the ECB’s latest program, Outright Monetary Transactions (OMT), is focused on reducing the currency risk premium embedded in European sovereign bonds, which has the benefit of easing financial conditions generally but especially in countries with high sovereign spreads . To this point, no purchases have been made under the OMT program . Even so, its availability as a backstop appears to have helped ease financial stresses in Europe, which, in turn, has likely reduced the downward pressure on the economy . medium-sized businesses. In April, the BOJ announced a sharp rise in its purchases of JGBs and other assets, as well as an extension of the maturity of the JGBs that it purchases. Authorities in some AFEs also eased fiscal policy in response to still-subdued activity. The Japanese parliament approved a fiscal stimulus package worth about 2 percent of GDP, with the bulk of the spending directed to infrastructure projects. European authorities postponed deadlines for several euro-area countries, including France and Spain, to reduce fiscal deficits below 3 percent of GDP. . . . while growth slowed in the emerging market economies Aggregate real GDP growth in the EMEs picked up in the fourth quarter of 2012 despite the weakness in Europe and the United States, led by a strong performance of the Chinese economy. However, EME growth slowed considerably in the first quarter, in part as a step-down in Chinese growth weighed on activity in the rest of emerging Asia and on the commodity-dependent economies of South America. Recent indicators of exports, industrial production, and PMIs suggest that EME activity remained subdued in the second quarter. Amid concerns about economic growth and lack of inflationary pressures, the central banks of several countries in Asia and Latin America further eased monetary policy over the first half of the year. However, more recently, concerns about reversal of capital inflows and currency depreciation pressures are giving EME central banks pause about further rate cuts, and a few have begun to raise rates. In China, macroeconomic data for the second quarter indicate that growth continued to be modest by the standards of recent years. Although retail sales rose slightly faster in April and May than in the subdued first quarter, fixed investment increased at roughly its first-quarter pace. Activity also cooled across Latin America. In Mexico, growth had already slowed in the second half of last year, weighed down by weaker U.S. manufacturing activity. Growth slowed further in the first quarter, as exports declined and domestic demand weakened. In response, the Bank of Mexico reduced its policy rate for the first time since mid-2009. Mexican activity appears to have remained subdued in the second quarter. Brazilian real GDP growth stepped down a little in the first quarter, extending the lackluster performance of the past two years. Indicators of economic activity for the second quarter, including industrial production and exports, have been mixed. Unlike many of its EME counterparts, Brazil’s central bank raised its policy rate to combat rising inflation. With unemployment still well above normal levels and inflation below its longer-run objective, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has continued its highly accommodative monetary policy this year by maintaining its forward guidance with regard to the target for the federal funds rate and continuing its program of large-scale asset purchases. To foster the attainment of maximum employment and price stability, the FOMC kept in place its forward guidance on the path of the federal funds rate . . . With unemployment still elevated and declining only gradually, and inflation having moved further below the Committee’s 2 percent longer- run objective, the FOMC has maintained its highly accommodative monetary policy stance this year. Because the target range for the federal funds rate remains at its effective lower bound, the Committee has been relying mainly on its forward guidance about the future path of the federal funds rate and on its program of large-scale asset purchases to make progress toward its mandated objectives. With regard to the federal funds rate, the Committee has continued to indicate its expectation that the current exceptionally low target range of 0 to ¼ percent will be appropriate at least as long as the unemployment rate remains above 6½ percent, inflation between one and two years ahead is projected to be no more than a half percentage point above the Committee’s 2 percent longer- run goal, and longer-term inflation expectations continue to be well anchored (figure 46). In determining how long to maintain its target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee has stated that it would also consider other information, including additional measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial developments. The FOMC also has reiterated that a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy would remain appropriate for a considerable time after the asset purchase program ends and the economic recovery strengthens. Moreover, the Committee has indicated that when it decides to begin 46. Selected interest rates, 2008–13 NOTE: The 2-year and 10-year Treasury rates are the constant-maturity yields based on the most actively traded securities. The dates on the horizontal axis are those of regularly scheduled Federal Open Market Committee meetings. to remove policy accommodation, it would take a balanced approach consistent with its longer-run goals of maximum employment and inflation of 2 percent. . . . and maintained its policy of large- scale asset purchases . . . To sustain downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, support mortgage markets, and help make broader financial conditions more accommodative, the FOMC has continued its large-scale asset purchases; the Committee also has maintained its practices of reinvesting principal payments it receives on agency debt and agency-guaranteed mortgage-backed securities (MBS) in new agency MBS and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction. Over the first half of this year, purchases of longer-term securities totaled $510 billion, with the Committee purchasing additional agency MBS at a pace of $40 billion per month and longer-term Treasury securities at a pace of $45 billion per month. The Committee reconfirmed at each meeting during the first half of 2013 that it would continue purchasing Treasury and agency MBS until the outlook for the labor market has improved substantially in a context of price stability. In determining the size, pace, and composition of its asset purchases, the Committee has taken account of the likely efficacy and costs of such purchases. As noted in the minutes of the March FOMC meeting, most participants saw asset purchases as having a meaningful effect in easing financial conditions—for example, keeping longer-term interest rates, including mortgage rates, lower than they would be otherwise—and so supporting economic growth.8 FOMC participants generally judged that these benefits outweighed the likely costs and risks of additional purchases. However, the Committee has continued to monitor those 8. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2013), “Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, March 19–20, 2013,” press release, April 10, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/ monetary/20130410a.htm. costs and risks, including possible effects on financial stability, security market functioning, the smooth withdrawal of monetary accommodation when it eventually becomes appropriate, and the Federal Reserve’s net income.9 . . . while providing additional information about potential adjustments to its asset purchases During the first half of 2013, the FOMC took various steps to provide greater clarity regarding its thinking about possible adjustments in the pace of asset purchases and the eventual cessation of those purchases. In its statement after the March meeting, the Committee added that the size, pace, and composition of its asset purchases would reflect the extent of progress toward its economic objectives, in addition to the likely efficacy and costs of such purchases.10 And in May, to highlight its willingness to adjust the flow of purchases in light of incoming information, the Committee noted that it was prepared to increase or reduce the pace of its purchases to maintain appropriate policy accommodation as the outlook for the labor market or inflation changed.11 At the June FOMC meeting, Committee participants generally thought it would be helpful to provide greater clarity about the Committee’s approach to decisions about its asset purchase program and thereby reduce investors’ uncertainty about how it might 9. For further discussion of these issues, see the box “Efficacy and Costs of Large-Scale Asset Purchases” in Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2013), Monetary Policy Report (Washington: Board of Governors, February), www.federalreserve.gov/ monetarypolicy/mpr_20130226_part2.htm. 10. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 11. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve react to future economic developments. In choosing to provide this clarification, the Committee made no changes to its approach to monetary policy. Against this backdrop, Chairman Bernanke, at his postmeeting press conference, described a possible path for asset purchases that the Committee would anticipate implementing if economic conditions evolved in a manner broadly consistent with the outcomes the Committee saw as most likely.12 The Chairman noted that such economic outcomes involved continued gains in labor markets, supported by moderate growth that picks up over the next several quarters, and inflation moving back toward its 2 percent objective over time. If the economy were to evolve broadly in line with the Committee’s expectations, the FOMC would moderate the pace of purchases later this year and continue to reduce the pace of purchases in measured steps until purchases ended around the middle of next year, at which time the unemployment rate would likely be in the vicinity of 7 percent, with solid economic growth supporting further job gains and inflation moving back toward the FOMC’s 2 percent target. In emphasizing that the Committee’s policy was in no way predetermined, the Chairman noted that if economic conditions improved faster than expected, the pace of asset purchases could be reduced somewhat more quickly. Conversely, if the outlook for the economy or the labor market became less favorable, inflation did not move over time toward the Committee’s 2 percent longer-term objective, or financial conditions were judged to be inconsistent with further progress in the labor markets, reductions in the pace of purchases could be delayed or the pace increased for a time. The Chairman also drew a strong distinction between the asset purchase program and the forward guidance regarding the target for the federal funds rate, noting that the Committee anticipates that there 12. See Ben S. Bernanke (2013), “Transcript will be a considerable period between the end of asset purchases and the time when it becomes appropriate to increase the target for the federal funds rate. The Committee’s large-scale asset purchases led to a significant increase in the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet As a result of the Committee’s large-scale asset purchase program, Federal Reserve assets have increased significantly since the end of last year (figure 47). The par value of the System Open Market Account’s (SOMA) holdings of U.S. Treasury securities increased about $300 billion to $2 trillion, and the par value of its holdings of agency debt and MBS increased about $270 billion, on net, to $1.3 trillion.13 These asset purchases accounted for nearly all of the increase in total assets of the Federal Reserve and were accompanied by a significant rise in reserve balances over the period. As of July 10, the SOMA’s holdings of Treasury and agency securities constituted 56 percent and 36 percent, respectively, of the $3.5 trillion in total Federal Reserve assets. By contrast, balances of facilities established during the financial crisis declined further from already low levels.14 13. The difference between changes in the par value of SOMA holdings and the amount of purchases of securities since the end of 2012 reflects, in part, lags in settlements. 14. The outstanding amount of dollars provided through the temporary U.S. dollar liquidity swap arrangements with foreign central banks decreased $7 billion to about $1 billion because of the improvement in offshore U.S. dollar funding markets. During the financial crisis, the Federal Reserve created several special lending facilities to support financial institutions and markets and strengthen economic activity. These facilities were closed by 2010; however, some loans made under the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility, which is closed to new lending, remain outstanding and will mature over the next two years. Other programs supported certain specific institutions in order to avert disorderly failures that could have resulted in severe dislocations and strains for the financial system as a whole and harmed the U.S. economy. While the loans made by the Federal Reserve under these programs have been repaid, the Federal Reserve will continue to receive cash flows generated from assets remaining in the 47. Federal Reserve assets and liabilities, 2008–13 Treasury securities held outright NOTE: The data extend through July 10, 2013. Credit and liquidity facilities consists of primary, secondary, and seasonal credit; term auction credit; central bank liquidity swaps; support for Maiden Lane, Bear Stearns, and AIG; and other credit facilities, including the Primary Dealer Credit Facility, the Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility, the Commercial Paper Funding Facility, and the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility. Other assets includes unamortized premiums and discounts on securities held outright. Other liabilities includes reverse repurchase agreements, the U.S. Treasury General Account, and the U.S. Treasury Supplementary Financing Account. The dates on the horizontal axis are those of regularly scheduled Federal Open Market Committee meetings. Interest income on the SOMA portfolio continued to support a substantial sum of remittances to the Treasury Department. In the first quarter, the Federal Reserve provided more than $15 billion of such distributions to the Treasury.15 The Federal Reserve has also released detailed transactions data on open market operations and discount window operations with a two-year lag in compliance with the Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010. The Committee also reviewed the principles for policy normalization During its May and June meetings, the FOMC reviewed the Federal Reserve’s principles for the eventual normalization of the stance of monetary policy, which initially were published in the minutes of the Committee’s June 2011 meeting.16 The Committee’s discussion included various aspects of those principles—the size and composition of the SOMA portfolio in the longer run, the use of a range of reserve- draining tools, the approach to sales of securities, the eventual framework for policy implementation, and the relationship between the principles and the economic thresholds in the Committee’s forward guidance on the federal funds rate. Meeting participants, in general, continued to view the broad principles set out in 2011 as still applicable. Nonetheless, they agreed that many of the details of the eventual normalization process would likely differ from those specified two years ago, that the appropriate details would depend in part on economic and financial developments between now and the time when it becomes appropriate to begin normalizing monetary policy, and that the Committee would need to provide additional information about its intentions as that time approaches. Participants continued portfolios established in connection with such support, principally the portfolio of Maiden Lane LLC. 15. The Quarterly Report on Federal Reserve Balance 16. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Sheet Developments for the first quarter is available on the Federal Reserve Board’s website at www. federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/quarterly-balance- sheet-developments-report.htm. to think that the Federal Reserve should, in the long run, hold predominantly Treasury securities. Most, however, now anticipated that the Committee would not sell agency MBS as part of the normalization process, although some indicated that limited sales might be warranted in the longer run to reduce or eliminate residual holdings. The Federal Reserve continued to test tools that could potentially be used to manage reserves As part of the Federal Reserve’s ongoing program to ensure the readiness of tools to manage reserves, the Federal Reserve conducted a series of small-scale transactions with eligible counterparties. During the first half of 2013, the Federal Reserve conducted four repurchase agreement (repo) operations and three reverse repurchase agreement (reverse repo) operations. Operation sizes ranged between $0.2 and $2.8 billion using all eligible collateral types. While the repo transactions were conducted only with primary dealers, two of the reverse repo operations were open to the expanded set of eligible counterparties, which include not only primary dealers, but also banks, government-sponsored enterprises, and money market funds.17 In addition, the Federal Reserve Board conducted three operations for 28-day term deposits under the Term Deposit Facility (TDF). These operations included two competitive single-price TDF auctions totaling $3 billion in deposits and an offering with a fixed-rate, full-allotment format, which totaled $10 billion in deposits. 17. To prepare for the potential need to conduct large-scale reverse repo transactions, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York is developing arrangements with an expanded set of counterparties with which it can conduct these transactions. These counterparties are in addition to the existing set of primary dealer counterparties with which the Federal Reserve can already conduct reverse repos. The list of the expanded set of counterparties is available on the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s website at www.newyorkfed.org/markets/ expanded_counterparties.html. The following material appeared as an addendum to the minutes of the June 18–19, 2013, meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee. In conjunction with the June 18–19, 2013, Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting, meeting participants—the 7 members of the Board of Governors and the 12 presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks, all of whom participate in the deliberations of the FOMC—submitted their assessments of real output growth, the unemployment rate, inflation, and the target federal funds rate for each year from 2013 through 2015 and over the longer run.18 Each participant’s assessment was based on information available at the time of the meeting plus his or her judgment of appropriate monetary policy and assumptions about the factors likely to affect economic outcomes. The longer-run projections represent each participant’s judgment of the value to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. “Appropriate monetary policy” is defined as the future path of policy that each participant deems most likely to foster outcomes for economic activity and inflation that best satisfy his or her individual interpretation of the Federal Reserve’s objectives of maximum employment and stable prices. Overall, FOMC participants projected that, under appropriate monetary policy, the pace of economic recovery would gradually pick up over the 2013–15 period, and inflation would move up from recent very low readings but remain subdued (table 1 and figure 1). Almost all of the participants projected that inflation, as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), would be running at or a little below the Committee’s 2 percent objective in 2015. 18. Although President Pianalto was unable to attend the June 18–19, 2013, FOMC meeting, she submitted economic projections. As shown in figure 2, most participants judged that highly accommodative monetary policy was likely to be warranted over the next few Longer run Longer run Note: Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP) and projections for both measures of inflation are from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quar- ter of the year indicated. PCE inflation and core PCE inflation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) and the price index for PCE excluding food and energy. Projections for the unemployment rate are for the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. Each participant’s projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy. Longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. The March projections were made in conjunction with the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on March 19–20, 2013. 1. The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each year. 2. The range for a variable in a given year includes all participants’ projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year. 3. Longer-run projections for core PCE inflation are not collected. Figure 1. Central tendencies and ranges of economic projections, 2013–15 and over the longer run Note: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. The data for the actual values of the variables are annual. Longer run Longer run Longer run Longer run Longer run Note: In the upper panel, the height of each bar denotes the number of FOMC participants who judge that, under appropriate monetary policy, the first increase in the target federal funds rate from its current range of 0 to ¼ percent will occur in the specified calendar year. In March 2013, the numbers of FOMC participants who judged that the first increase in the target federal funds rate would occur in 2013, 2014, 2015, and 2016 were, respectively, 1, 4, 13, and 1. In the lower panel, each shaded circle indicates the value (rounded to the nearest ¼ percentage point) of an individual participant’s judgement of the appropriate level of the target federal funds rate at the end of the specified calendar year or over the longer run. years to support continued progress toward maximum employment and a gradual return toward 2 percent inflation. Moreover, all participants but one judged that it would be appropriate to continue purchasing both agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) and longer-term Treasury securities at least until later this year. A majority of participants saw the uncertainty associated with their outlook for economic growth and the unemployment rate as similar to that of the past 20 years. An equal number of participants also indicated that the risks to the outlook for real gross domestic product (GDP) growth and the unemployment rate were broadly balanced. Some participants, however, continued to see downside risks to growth and upside risks to unemployment. A majority of participants indicated that the uncertainty surrounding their projections for PCE inflation was similar to historical norms, and nearly all considered the risks to inflation to be either broadly balanced or weighted to the downside. Participants projected that, conditional on their individual assumptions about appropriate monetary policy, the economy would grow at a faster pace in 2013 than it had in 2012. They also generally judged that growth would strengthen further in 2014 and 2015, in most cases to a rate above their estimates of the longer-run rate of output growth. Most participants noted that the high degree of monetary policy accommodation assumed in their projections, continued improvement in the housing sector and the accompanying rise in household net worth, and the absence of further fiscal tightening should result in a pickup in growth; however, they pointed to the foreign economic outlook as an ongoing downside risk. The central tendency of participants’ projections for real GDP growth was 2.3 to 2.6 percent for 2013, 3.0 to 3.5 percent for 2014, and 2.9 to 3.6 percent for 2015. Most participants noted that their projections were little changed since March, with the downward revisions to growth in 2013 reflecting the somewhat slower-than-anticipated growth in the first half. The central tendency for the longer-run rate of growth of real GDP was 2.3 to 2.5 percent, unchanged from March. Participants anticipated a gradual decline in the unemployment rate over the forecast period; a large majority projected that the unemployment rate would not reach their estimates of its longer-run level before 2016. The central tendencies of participants’ forecasts for the unemployment rate were 7.2 to 7.3 percent at the end of 2013, 6.5 to 6.8 percent at the end of 2014, and 5.8 to 6.2 percent at the end of 2015. These projections were slightly lower than in March, with participants reacting to recent data indicating that the unemployment rate had declined by a little more than they had previously expected. The central tendency of participants’ estimates of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment that would prevail under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy was 5.2 to 6.0 percent, the same as in March. Most participants projected that the unemployment rate would converge to their estimates of its longer-run normal rate in five or six years, while some judged that less time would be needed. As shown in figures 3.A and 3.B, the distributions of participants’ views regarding the likely outcomes for real GDP growth and the unemployment rate were relatively narrow for 2013. Their projections for economic activity were more diverse for 2014 and 2015, reflecting their individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy and its economic effects, the likely rate of improvement in the housing sector and households’ balance sheets, the domestic implications of foreign economic developments, the prospective path for U.S. fiscal policy, the extent of structural dislocations to the labor market, and a number of other factors. The dispersion of participants’ projections for 2015 and for the longer run was little changed relative to March; there was some reduction in the upper ends of the distributions in 2013 and 2014 for both real GDP growth and the unemployment rate. All participants marked down their projections for both PCE and core PCE inflation in 2013, reflecting the low readings on inflation so far this year. Participants generally judged that the recent slowing in inflation partly reflected transitory factors, and their projections for inflation under appropriate monetary policy over the period 2014–15 were only a little lower than in March. Participants projected that both headline and core inflation would move up but remain subdued, with nearly all projecting that inflation would be equal to, or somewhat below, the FOMC’s longer-run objective of 2 percent in each year. Specifically, the central tendency of participants’ projections for overall inflation, as measured by the growth in the PCE price index, moved down to 0.8 to 1.2 percent in 2013 and was 1.4 to 2.0 percent in 2014 and 1.6 to 2.0 percent in 2015. The central tendency of the forecasts for core inflation shifted down slightly in 2013 and 2014, to 1.2 to 1.3 percent and 1.5 to 1.8 percent, respectively; the central tendency in 2015 was little changed and broadly similar to that of headline inflation. In discussing factors likely to return inflation to near the Committee’s inflation objective of 2 percent, several participants noted that the reversal of transitory factors currently holding down inflation would cause inflation to move up a little in the near term. In addition, many participants viewed the combination of stable inflation expectations and diminishing resource slack as likely to lead to a gradual pickup in inflation toward the Committee’s longer-run objective. the outlook for inflation. The range of participants’ projections for overall and core inflation in 2013 shifted down, while those ranges narrowed in 2014–15. The distributions for core and overall inflation in 2015 remained concentrated near the Committee’s longer-run objective, and all participants continued to project that overall inflation would converge to the FOMC’s 2 percent goal over the longer run. As indicated in figure 2, most participants judged that exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate would remain appropriate for a couple of years. In particular, 14 participants thought that the first increase in the target federal funds rate would not be warranted until sometime in 2015, and one judged that policy firming would likely not be appropriate until 2016. Four participants judged that an increase in the federal funds rate in 2013 or 2014 would be appropriate. All of the participants who judged that raising the federal funds rate target would become appropriate in 2015 also projected that the unemployment rate would decline below 6½ percent during that year and that inflation would remain near or below 2 percent. In addition, most of those participants also projected that a sizable gap between the unemployment rate and the longer-run normal level of the unemployment rate would persist until 2015 or later. Three of the four participants who judged that policy firming should begin in 2013 or 2014 indicated that, in their judgment, the Committee would need to act relatively soon in order to keep inflation near the FOMC’s longer-run objective of 2 percent and to keep longer-run inflation expectations well anchored. Figure 3.E provides the distribution of participants’ judgments regarding the appropriate level of the target federal funds rate at the end of each calendar year from 2013 to 2015 and over the longer run. As Figure 3.A. Distribution of participants’ projections for the change in real GDP, 2013–15 and over the longer run 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 2.6 2.7 2.8 2.9 Percent range 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.5 3.6 3.7 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 2.6 2.7 2.8 2.9 Percent range 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.5 3.6 3.7 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 2.6 2.7 2.8 2.9 Percent range 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.5 3.6 3.7 Longer run 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 2.6 2.7 2.8 2.9 Percent range 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.5 3.6 3.7 Note: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 3.8 3.9 3.8 3.9 3.8 3.9 3.8 3.9 Figure 3.B. Distribution of participants’ projections for the unemployment rate, 2013–15 and over the longer run 5.0 5.1 5.2 5.3 5.4 5.5 5.6 5.7 5.8 5.9 6.0 6.1 6.4 6.5 Percent range 6.2 6.3 6.6 6.7 6.8 6.9 7.0 7.1 7.2 7.3 7.4 7.5 7.6 7.7 5.0 5.1 5.2 5.3 5.4 5.5 5.6 5.7 5.8 5.9 6.0 6.1 6.4 6.5 Percent range 6.2 6.3 6.6 6.7 6.8 6.9 7.0 7.1 7.2 7.3 7.4 7.5 7.6 7.7 5.0 5.1 5.2 5.3 5.4 5.5 5.6 5.7 5.8 5.9 6.0 6.1 6.4 6.5 Percent range 6.2 6.3 6.6 6.7 6.8 6.9 7.0 7.1 7.2 7.3 7.4 7.5 7.6 7.7 Longer run 5.0 5.1 5.2 5.3 5.4 5.5 5.6 5.7 5.8 5.9 6.0 6.1 6.4 6.5 Percent range 6.2 6.3 6.6 6.7 6.8 6.9 7.0 7.1 7.2 7.3 7.4 7.5 7.6 7.7 Note: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. Figure 3.C. Distribution of participants’ projections for PCE inflation, 2013–15 and over the longer run 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 Percent range 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 Percent range 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 Percent range 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 Longer run 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 Percent range 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 Note: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 2.3 2.4 2.3 2.4 2.3 2.4 2.3 2.4 2.5 2.6 2.5 2.6 2.5 2.6 2.5 2.6 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 Note: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 2.6 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 2.6 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 2.6 Figure 3.E. Distribution of participants’ projections for the target federal funds rate, 2013–15 and over the longer run 0.00 0.37 0.38 0.62 0.63 0.87 0.88 1.12 1.13 1.37 1.38 1.62 1.63 1.87 1.88 2.12 2.38 2.62 Percent range 2.13 2.37 2.63 2.87 2.88 3.12 3.13 3.37 3.38 3.62 3.63 3.87 3.88 4.12 4.13 4.37 4.38 4.62 0.00 0.37 0.38 0.62 0.63 0.87 0.88 1.12 1.13 1.37 1.38 1.62 1.63 1.87 1.88 2.12 2.38 2.62 Percent range 2.13 2.37 2.63 2.87 2.88 3.12 3.13 3.37 3.38 3.62 3.63 3.87 3.88 4.12 4.13 4.37 4.38 4.62 0.00 0.37 0.38 0.62 0.63 0.87 0.88 1.12 1.13 1.37 1.38 1.62 1.63 1.87 1.88 2.12 2.38 2.62 Percent range 2.13 2.37 2.63 2.87 2.88 3.12 3.13 3.37 3.38 3.62 3.63 3.87 3.88 4.12 4.13 4.37 4.38 4.62 Longer run 0.00 0.37 0.38 0.62 0.63 0.87 0.88 1.12 1.13 1.37 1.38 1.62 1.63 1.87 1.88 2.12 2.38 2.62 Percent range 2.13 2.37 2.63 2.87 2.88 3.12 3.13 3.37 3.38 3.62 3.63 3.87 3.88 4.12 4.13 4.37 4.38 4.62 Note: The target federal funds rate is measured as the level of the target rate at the end of the calendar year or in the longer run. previously noted, most participants judged that economic conditions would warrant maintaining the current low level of the federal funds rate at least until 2015. Among the four participants who saw the federal funds rate leaving the effective lower bound earlier, their projections for the federal funds rate at the end of 2014 ranged from 1 to 1½ percent; however, the median for all participants remained at the effective lower bound. Views on the appropriate level of the federal funds rate at the end of 2015 varied, with the range of participants’ projections a bit narrower than in the March Summary of Economic Projections and the median value unchanged at 1 percent. All participants saw the appropriate target for the federal funds rate at the end of 2015 as still well below their assessments of its expected longer-run value. Estimates of the longer- run target federal funds rate ranged from 3¼ to 4½ percent, reflecting the Committee’s inflation objective of 2 percent and participants’ individual judgments about the appropriate longer-run level of the real federal funds rate in the absence of further shocks to the economy. Participants also described their views regarding the appropriate path of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. Given their respective economic outlooks, all participants but one judged that it would be appropriate to continue purchasing both agency MBS and longer-term Treasury securities. About half of these participants indicated that it likely would be appropriate to end asset purchases late this year. Many other participants anticipated that it likely would be appropriate to continue purchases into 2014. Several participants emphasized that the asset purchase program was effective in supporting the economic expansion, that the benefits continued to exceed the costs, or that continuing purchases would be necessary to achieve a substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market. A few participants, however, indicated that the Committee could best foster its dual objectives and limit the potential costs of the program by slowing, or stopping, its purchases at the June meeting. Key factors informing participants’ views of the appropriate path for monetary policy included their judgments regarding the values of the unemployment rate and other labor market indicators that would be consistent with maximum employment; the extent to which the economy fell short of maximum employment and the extent to which inflation was running below the Committee’s longer-term objective of 2 percent; and the implications of alternative policy paths for the likely extent of progress, over the medium term, in returning employment and inflation to mandate-consistent levels. A couple of participants noted that persistent headwinds and somewhat slower productivity growth since the end of the recession made their assessments of the longer-run normal level of the federal funds rate, and thus of the appropriate path for the federal funds rate, lower than would otherwise be the case. A majority of participants reported that they saw the levels of uncertainty about their projections for real GDP growth and unemployment as broadly similar to the norm during the previous 20 years, with the remainder generally indicating that they saw higher uncertainty about these economic outcomes (figure 4).19 In March, a similar number of participants had seen the level of uncertainty about real GDP growth and the unemployment rate as above average. A majority of participants continued to judge that the risks to their forecasts of real GDP 19. Table 2 provides estimates of the forecast uncertainty for the change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, and total consumer price inflation over the period from 1993 through 2012. At the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty” discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty in the economic forecasts and explains the approach used to assess the uncertainty and risks attending the participants’ projections. Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Risks to core PCE inflation Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Note: For definitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. growth and unemployment were broadly balanced, with the remainder generally indicating that they saw the risks to their forecasts for real GDP growth as weighted to the downside and for unemployment as weighted to the upside. The main factors cited as contributing to the uncertainty and balance of risks about economic outcomes were the limits on the ability of monetary policy to offset the effects of adverse shocks when short- term interest rates are near their effective lower bound, as well as challenges with forecasting the path of fiscal policy and economic and financial developments abroad. Participants reported little change in their assessments of the level of uncertainty and the balance of risks around their forecasts for overall PCE inflation and core inflation. Fourteen participants judged the levels of uncertainty associated with their forecasts for those inflation measures to be broadly similar to, or lower than, historical norms; the same number saw the risks to those projections as broadly balanced. A few participants highlighted the likely role played by the Committee’s adoption of a 2 percent inflation goal or its commitment to maintaining accommodative monetary policy as contributing to the recent stability of longer-term inflation expectations and, hence, Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges Percentage points note: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root mean squared error of projections for 1993 through 2012 that were released in the summer by various private and government forecasters. As described in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain assumptions, there is about a 70 percent probability that actual outcomes for real GDP, unemployment, and consumer prices will be in ranges implied by the average size of projection errors made in the past. Further information is in David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip (2007), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook from Historical Forecasting Errors,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2007-60 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November). 1. Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure that has been most widely used in government and private economic forecasts. Projection is percent change, fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. the relatively low level of uncertainty. Four participants saw the risks to their inflation forecasts as tilted to the downside, reflecting, for example, risks of disinflation that could arise from adverse shocks to the economy that policy would have limited scope to offset in the current environment. Conversely, one participant saw the risks to inflation as weighted to the upside, citing the present highly accommodative stance of monetary policy and concerns about the Committee’s ability to shift to a less accommodative policy stance when it becomes appropriate to do so. The economic projections provided by the members of the Board of Governors and the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks inform discussions of monetary policy among policymakers and can aid public understanding of the basis for policy actions . Considerable uncertainty attends these projections, however . The economic and statistical models and relationships used to help produce economic forecasts are necessarily imperfect descriptions of the real world, and the future path of the economy can be affected by myriad unforeseen developments and events . Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, participants consider not only what appears to be the most likely economic outcome as embodied in their projections, but also the range of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of their occurring, and the potential costs to the economy should they occur . Table 2 summarizes the average historical accuracy of a range of forecasts, including those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports and those prepared by the Federal Reserve Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee . The projection error ranges shown in the table illustrate the considerable uncertainty associated with economic forecasts . For example, suppose a participant projects that real gross domestic product (GDP) and total consumer prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, 3 percent and 2 percent . If the uncertainty attending those projections is similar to that experienced in the past and the risks around the projections are broadly balanced, the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a probability of about 70 percent that actual GDP would expand within a range of 2 .0 to 4 .0 percent in the current year, 1 .4 to 4 .6 percent in the second year, and 1 .2 to 4 .8 percent in the third year . The corresponding 70 percent confidence intervals for overall inflation would be 1 .2 to 2 .8 percent in the current year and 1 .0 to 3 .0 percent in the second and third years . Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over history, participants provide judgments as to whether the uncertainty attached to their projections of each variable is greater than, smaller than, or broadly similar to typical levels of forecast uncertainty in the past, as shown in table 2 . Participants also provide judgments as to whether the risks to their projections are weighted to the upside, are weighted to the downside, or are broadly balanced . That is, participants judge whether each variable is more likely to be above or below their projections of the most likely outcome . These judgments about the uncertainty and the risks attending each participant’s projections are distinct from the diversity of participants’ views about the most likely outcomes . Forecast uncertainty is concerned with the risks associated with a particular projection rather than with divergences across a number of different projections . As with real activity and inflation, the outlook for the future path of the federal funds rate is subject to considerable uncertainty . This uncertainty arises primarily because each participant’s assessment of the appropriate stance of monetary policy depends importantly on the evolution of real activity and inflation over time . If economic conditions evolve in an unexpected manner, then assessments of the appropriate setting of the federal funds rate would change from that point forward . bank holding company emerging market economy purchasing managers index The Board of Governors is pleased to submit its Monetary Policy Report pursuant to section 2B of the Federal Reserve Act. Statement on Longer-run goaLS and monetary PoLicy Strategy Adopted effective January 24, 2012; as amended effective January 27, 2015 The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) is firmly committed to fulfilling its statutory mandate from the Congress of promoting maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates. The Committee seeks to explain its monetary policy decisions to the public as clearly as possible. Such clarity facilitates well-informed decisionmaking by households and businesses, reduces economic and financial uncertainty, increases the effectiveness of monetary policy, and enhances transparency and accountability, which are essential in a democratic society. Inflation, employment, and long-term interest rates fluctuate over time in response to economic and financial disturbances. Moreover, monetary policy actions tend to influence economic activity and prices with a lag. Therefore, the Committee’s policy decisions reflect its longer-run goals, its medium- term outlook, and its assessments of the balance of risks, including risks to the financial system that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. The inflation rate over the longer run is primarily determined by monetary policy, and hence the Committee has the ability to specify a longer-run goal for inflation. The Committee reaffirms its judgment that inflation at the rate of 2 percent, as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, is most consistent over the longer run with the Federal Reserve’s statutory mandate. Communicating this inflation goal clearly to the public helps keep longer-term inflation expectations firmly anchored, thereby fostering price stability and moderate long-term interest rates and enhancing the Committee’s ability to promote maximum employment in the face of significant economic disturbances. The maximum level of employment is largely determined by nonmonetary factors that affect the structure and dynamics of the labor market. These factors may change over time and may not be directly measurable. Consequently, it would not be appropriate to specify a fixed goal for employment; rather, the Committee’s policy decisions must be informed by assessments of the maximum level of employment, recognizing that such assessments are necessarily uncertain and subject to revision. The Committee considers a wide range of indicators in making these assessments. Information about Committee participants’ estimates of the longer-run normal rates of output growth and unemployment is published four times per year in the FOMC’s Summary of Economic Projections. For example, in the most recent projections, FOMC participants’ estimates of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment had a central tendency of 5.2 percent to 5.5 percent. In setting monetary policy, the Committee seeks to mitigate deviations of inflation from its longer-run goal and deviations of employment from the Committee’s assessments of its maximum level. These objectives are generally complementary. However, under circumstances in which the Committee judges that the objectives are not complementary, it follows a balanced approach in promoting them, taking into account the magnitude of the deviations and the potentially different time horizons over which employment and inflation are projected to return to levels judged consistent with its mandate. The Committee intends to reaffirm these principles and to make adjustments as appropriate at its annual organizational meeting each January. The Effect of the Recent Decline in Oil Prices on Economic Activity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 Challenges in Interpreting Measures of Longer-Term Inflation Expectations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 Developments Related to Financial Stability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24 Policy Normalization Principles and Plans . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35 Additional Testing of Monetary Policy Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36 Forecast Uncertainty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52 Note: Unless otherwise noted, the time series in the figures extend through, for daily data, February 19, 2015; for monthly data, January 2015; and, for quarterly data, 2014:Q4. In bar charts, except as noted, the change for a given period is measured to its final quarter from the final quarter of the preceding period. summary The labor market improved further during the second half of last year and into early 2015, and labor market conditions moved closer to those the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) judges consistent with its maximum employment mandate. Since the middle of last year, monthly payrolls have expanded by about 280,000, on average, and the unemployment rate has declined nearly ½ percentage point on net. Nevertheless, a range of labor market indicators suggest that there is still room for improvement. In particular, at 5.7 percent, the unemployment rate is still above most FOMC participants’ estimates of its longer-run normal level, the labor force participation rate remains below most assessments of its trend, an unusually large number of people continue to work part time when they would prefer full-time employment, and wage growth has continued to be slow. A steep drop in crude oil prices since the middle of last year has put downward pressure on overall inflation. As of December 2014, the price index for personal consumption expenditures was only ¾ percent higher than a year earlier, a rate of increase that is well below the FOMC’s longer-run goal of 2 percent. Even apart from the energy sector, price increases have been subdued. Indeed, the prices of items other than food and energy products rose at an annual rate of only about 1 percent over the last six months of 2014, noticeably less than in the first half of the year. The slow pace of price increases during the second half was likely associated, in part, with falling import prices and perhaps also with some pass-through of lower oil prices. Survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable; however market-based measures of inflation compensation have declined since last summer. Economic activity expanded at a strong pace in the second half of last year. Notably reflecting solid gains in consumer spending, real gross domestic product (GDP) is estimated to have increased at an annual rate of 3¾ percent after a reported increase of just 1¼ percent in the first half of the year. The growth in GDP was supported by accommodative monetary policy, a reduction in the degree of restraint imparted by fiscal policy, and the increase in households’ purchasing power arising from the drop in oil prices. The gains in GDP have occurred despite continued sluggish growth abroad and a sizable appreciation of the U.S. dollar, both of which have weighed on net exports. Financial conditions in the United States have generally remained supportive of economic growth. Longer-term interest rates in the United States and other advanced economies have continued to move down, on net, since the middle of 2014 amid disappointing economic growth and low inflation abroad as well as the associated anticipated and actual monetary policy actions by foreign central banks. Broad indexes of U.S. equity prices have risen moderately, on net, since the end of June. Credit flows to nonfinancial businesses largely remained solid in the second half of last year. Overall borrowing conditions for households eased further, but mortgage lending standards are still tight for many potential borrowers. The vulnerability of the U.S. financial system to financial instability has remained moderate, primarily reflecting low-to-moderate levels of leverage and maturity transformation. Asset valuation pressures have eased a little, on balance, but continue to be notable in some sectors. The capital and liquidity positions of the banking sector have improved further. Over the second half of 2014, the Federal Reserve and other agencies finalized or proposed several more rules related to the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010, which were designed to further strengthen the resilience of the financial system. At the time of the FOMC meeting in late January of this year, the Committee saw the outlook as broadly similar to that at the time of its December meeting, when the most recent Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) was compiled. (The December SEP is included as Part 3 of this report.) The FOMC expects that, with appropriate monetary policy accommodation, economic activity will expand at a moderate pace, and that labor market indicators will continue to move toward levels the Committee judges consistent with its dual mandate of maximum employment and price stability. In addition, the Committee continues to see the risks to the outlook for economic activity and the labor market as nearly balanced. Inflation is anticipated to decline further in the near term, mainly reflecting the pass-through of lower oil prices to consumer energy prices. However, the Committee expects inflation to rise gradually toward its 2 percent longer-run objective over the medium term as the labor market improves further and the transitory effects of lower energy prices and other factors dissipate. At the end of October, and after having made further measured reductions in the pace of its asset purchases at its July and September meetings, the FOMC concluded the asset purchase program that began in September 2012. The decision to end the purchase program reflected the substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market since the program’s inception—the stated aim of the asset purchases—and a judgment that the underlying strength of the broader economy was sufficient to support ongoing progress toward the Committee’s policy objectives. Nonetheless, the Committee continued to judge that a high degree of policy accommodation remained appropriate. As a result, the FOMC has maintained the exceptionally low target range of 0 to ¼ percent for the federal funds rate and kept the Federal Reserve’s holdings of longer-term securities at sizable levels. The Committee has also continued to provide forward guidance bearing on the anticipated path of the federal funds rate. In particular, the FOMC has stressed that in deciding how long to maintain the current target range, it will consider a broad set of indicators to assess realized and expected progress toward its objectives. On the basis of its assessment, the Committee indicated in its two most recent postmeeting statements that it can be patient in beginning to normalize the stance of monetary policy. To further emphasize the data-dependent nature of its policy stance, the FOMC has stated that if incoming information indicates faster progress toward its policy objectives than the Committee currently expects, increases in the target range for the federal funds rate will likely occur sooner than the Committee anticipates. The FOMC has also indicated that in the case of slower-than-expected progress, increases in the target range will likely occur later than currently anticipated. Moreover, the Committee continues to expect that, even after employment and inflation are near mandate- consistent levels, economic conditions may, for some time, warrant keeping the target federal funds rate below levels the Committee views as normal in the longer run. As part of prudent planning, the Federal Reserve has continued to prepare for the eventual normalization of the stance and conduct of monetary policy. The FOMC announced updated principles and plans for the normalization process following its September meeting and has continued to test the operational readiness of its monetary policy tools. The Committee remains confident that it has the tools it needs to raise short- term interest rates when doing so becomes appropriate, despite the very large size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. The labor market continued to improve in the second half of last year and early this year. Job gains have averaged close to 280,000 per month since June, and the unemployment rate fell from 6.1 percent in June to 5.7 percent in January. Even so, the labor market likely has not yet fully recovered, and wage growth has remained slow. Since June, a steep drop in crude oil prices has exerted downward pressure on overall inflation, and non-energy price increases have been subdued as well. The price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) increased only ¾ percent during the 12 months ending in December, a rate that is well below the Federal Open Market Committee’s (FOMC) longer-run objective of 2 percent; the index excluding food and energy prices was up 1¼ percent over this period. Survey measures of longer-run inflation expectations have been stable, but measures of inflation compensation derived from financial market quotes have moved down. Meanwhile, real gross domestic product (GDP) increased at an estimated annual rate of 3¾ percent in the second half of the year, up from a reported rate of just 1¼ percent in the first half. The growth in GDP has been supported by accommodative monetary policy and generally favorable financial conditions, the boost to households’ purchasing power from lower oil prices, and improving consumer and business confidence. However, housing market activity has been advancing only slowly, and sluggish growth abroad and the higher foreign exchange value of the dollar have weighed on net exports. Longer-term interest rates in the United States and other advanced economies declined, on net, amid disappointing growth and low inflation abroad and the associated actual and anticipated accommodative monetary policy actions by foreign central banks. The labor market has strengthened further . . . Employment rose appreciably and the unemployment rate fell in the second half of 2014 and early this year. Payroll employment has increased by an average of about 280,000 per month since June, almost 40,000 faster than in the first half of last year (figure 1). The gain in payroll employment for 2014 as a whole was the largest for any year since 1999. In addition, the unemployment rate continued to move down, declining from 6.1 percent in June to 5.7 percent in January of this year, a rate more than 4 percentage points below its peak in 2009. Furthermore, a substantial portion of the decline in unemployment over the past year came from a decrease in the number of individuals reporting unemployment spells longer than six months. declined not only during the recession, but also during much of the recovery period when most other indicators of labor market health were improving (figure 2). While much of that decline likely reflected ongoing demographic trends—such as the aging of members of the baby-boom generation into their retirement years—some of the decline likely 1. Net change in payroll employment The labor force participation rate has been roughly flat since late 2013 after having 2. Labor force participation rate and employment-to-population ratio reflected workers’ perceptions of poor job opportunities. Judged against the backdrop of a declining trend, the recent stability of the participation rate likely represents some cyclical improvement. Nevertheless, the participation rate remains lower than would be expected given the unemployment rate, and thus it continues to suggest more cyclical weakness than is indicated by the unemployment rate. NOTE: Both series are a percent of the population aged 16 and over. SOURCE: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. Another sign that the labor market remains weaker than indicated by the unemployment rate alone is the still-elevated share of workers who are employed part time but would like to work full time. This share of involuntary part-time employees has generally shown less improvement than the unemployment rate over the past few years; in part for this reason, the more comprehensive U-6 measure of labor underutilization remains quite elevated (figure 3). Nevertheless, most broad measures of labor market health have improved. With employment rising and the participation 3. Measures of labor underutilization NOTE: U-4 measures total unemployed plus discouraged workers, as a percent of the labor force plus discouraged workers. Discouraged workers are a subset of marginally attached workers who are not currently looking for work because they believe no jobs are available for them. U-5 measures total unemployed plus all marginally attached to the labor force, as a percent of the labor force plus persons marginally attached to the labor force. Marginally attached workers are not in the labor force, want and are available for work, and have looked for a job in the past 12 months. U-6 measures total unemployed plus all marginally attached workers plus total employed part time for economic reasons, as a percent of the labor force plus all marginally attached workers. The shaded bar indicates a period of business recession as defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research. rate holding steady, the employment-to- population ratio climbed noticeably higher in 2014 and early 2015 after having moved more or less sideways for much of the recovery. The quit rate, which is often perceived as a measure of worker confidence in labor market opportunities, has largely recovered to its pre- recession level. Moreover, an index constructed by Federal Reserve Board staff that aims to summarize movements in a wide array of labor market indicators also suggests that labor market conditions strengthened further in 2014, and that the gains have been quite strong in recent months (figure 4).1 . . . while gains in compensation have been modest . . . Even as the labor market has been improving, most measures of labor compensation have continued to show only modest gains. The employment cost index (ECI) for private industry workers, which measures both wages and the cost of employer-provided benefits, rose 2¼ percent over the 12 months ending in December, only slightly faster than the gains of about 2 percent that had prevailed for several years. Two other prominent measures of compensation—average hourly earnings and business-sector compensation per hour— increased slightly less than the ECI over the past year and have shown fewer signs of acceleration (figure 5). Over the past five years, the gains in all three of these measures of nominal compensation have fallen well short of their pre-recession averages and have only slightly outpaced inflation. That said, the drop in energy prices has pushed up real wages in recent months. 1. For details on the construction of the labor market 4. Change in labor market conditions index NOTE: The index has a mean of zero and a standard deviation of 100; an increase indicates an improvement in labor market conditions. Quarterly figures are averages of monthly changes. 5. Measures of change in hourly compensation NOTE: The average hourly earnings data series begins in March 2007 and extends through January 2015. The compensation per hour and employment cost index data extend through 2014:Q4. For business-sector compensation, change is over four quarters; for the employment cost index, change is over the 12 months ending in the last month of each quarter; for average hourly earnings, change is from 12 months earlier. 6. Change in total business sector output per hour NOTE: Changes are measured from Q4 of the year immediately preceding . . . and productivity growth has been lackluster Over time, increases in productivity are the central determinant of improvements in living standards. Labor productivity in the private business sector has increased at an average annual pace of 1¼ percent since the recession began in late 2007. This pace is close to the average that prevailed between the mid- 1970s and the mid-1990s, but it is well below the pace of the earlier post–World War II period and the period from the mid-1990s to the eve of the financial crisis (figure 6). In recent years, productivity growth has been held down by, among other factors, the sharp drop in businesses’ capital expenditures over the recession and the moderate recovery in expenditures since then. Productivity gains may be better supported in the future as investment continues to strengthen. A plunge in crude oil prices has held down consumer prices . . . As discussed in the box “The Effect of the Recent Decline in Oil Prices on Economic Activity,” crude oil prices have plummeted since June 2014. This sharp drop has caused overall consumer price inflation to slow, mainly due to falling gasoline prices: The national average of retail gasoline prices moved down from about $3.75 per gallon in June to about $2.20 per gallon in January. Crude oil prices have turned slightly higher in recent weeks, and futures markets suggest that prices are expected to edge up further in coming years; nevertheless, oil prices are still expected to remain well below the levels that had prevailed through last June. Over the past six months, increases in food prices have moderated. Consumer food price increases had been somewhat elevated in early 2014 as a result of rising food commodity prices, but those commodity prices have since eased, and increases at the retail level have slowed accordingly. . . . but even outside of the energy and food categories, inflation has remained subdued Inflation for items other than food and energy (so-called core inflation) remains modest. Core PCE prices rose at an annual rate of only about 1 percent over the last six months of 2014 after having risen at a 1¾ percent rate in the first half of the year; for 2014 as a whole, core PCE prices were up a little more than 1¼ percent (figure 7). The trimmed mean PCE price index, an alternative indi cator of underlying inflation constructed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, also increased more slowly in the second half of last year. Falling import prices likely held down core inflation in the second half of the year; lower oil prices, and easing prices for commodities more generally, may have played a role as well. In addition, ongoing resource slack has reinforced the low-inflation environment, though with the improving economy, downward pressure from this factor is likely waning. Looking at the overall basket of items that people consume, price increases remain muted and below the FOMC’s longer-run objective of 2 percent. In December, the PCE price index was only ¾ percent above its level from a year earlier. With retail surveys showing a further sharp decline in gasoline prices in January, overall consumer prices likely moved lower early this year. Survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable, while market-based measures of inflation compensation have declined The Federal Reserve tracks indicators of inflation expectations because such expectations likely factor into wage- and price-setting decisions and so influence actual inflation. Survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations, including surveys of both households and professional 7. Change in the chain-type price index for personal consumption expenditures Excluding food and energy NOTE: The data extend through December 2014; changes are from one year Since June, the price of crude oil has fallen sharply, on net, with the spot price of Brent (the blue line in figure A) dropping about 50 percent and the price of the December 2017 futures contract (the black line in figure A) declining about 25 percent. Although weaker-than-expected global oil demand has contributed to the fall in prices, much of the decline is likely due to favorable supply factors, including the rapid growth of U.S. oil production, the surprising strength of oil exports from Libya and Iraq, and OPEC’s decision to maintain production levels despite declining prices. The drop in oil prices has a number of economic implications, including a sizable but temporary reduction in consumer price inflation. This discussion reviews some of the channels through which the recent fall in oil prices is anticipated to affect economic activity in the United States and globally. countries—and thus the prime beneficiaries of lower oil prices—are the emerging Asian economies, Japan, the euro area, and, despite recent sharp increases in oil production, the United States.1 Losses are concentrated in the oil-producing countries, including those of the Middle East, Russia, venezuela, and, to a lesser extent, Canada and Mexico. (Lower oil prices have also destabilized financial markets in Russia and venezuela.) Globally, the wealth transfer nets to zero, but the overall 1. Although many of the largest oil importers also are oil producers, and thus have some domestic losses as well as gains, net exports of oil by country provides a useful proxy for the global distribution of gains and losses following a price change. One important channel through which a decline in oil prices affects the global economy is the transfer of wealth from oil producers to oil consumers. As shown in the table, the largest net oil-importing note: The data are for 2013. Share of GDP is an approximation based on net export volumes valued at the Brent price on June 17, 2014 ($113.30). GDP is gross domestic product. effect on global economic activity is likely to be stimulative in the near term; oil consumers tend to spend a substantial portion of the windfall, while oil producers generally absorb at least some of the initial effect through reduced saving or higher borrowing. In the United States, the wealth transfer just discussed is likely to be most apparent in supporting consumer spending, as lower gasoline prices boost the real disposable income of consumers. Indeed, the recent rise in consumer sentiment and improvements in survey measures of expected income growth suggest that households are reacting quite positively to lower gasoline prices. The stimulus from higher U.S. consumption is likely to be somewhat offset by reduced investment in the oil sector. Already there has been a sharp decline in the number of oil drilling rigs in operation (figure B), and a number of oil companies have cut their capital expenditure plans. Nonetheless, the direct effect on U.S. gross domestic product (GDP) B. Domestic oil drilling rigs in operation NOTE: The data, which are seasonally adjusted by Board staff, extend through of such a decline will be small because investment in the oil sector—though rising in recent years— accounts for only about 1 percent of GDP. Lower oil-sector investment is likely to weigh on U.S. oil production, which has grown at a torrid pace in recent years (figure C). So far, however, U.S. oil production has yet to decline. The continued strength of production despite falling investment reflects both a propensity to cut investment in the least productive projects first and a large stock of partially completed wells that are likely to still come on line. While there is a general consensus that lower oil prices should boost U.S. and global economic activity, considerable uncertainty exists regarding the ultimate size of the effect. All in all, however, for the United States as a whole, it is likely that the additional disposable income resulting from lower gasoline prices will provide a significant boost to consumer spending that will far exceed the drag from lower investment in the oil sector. NOTE: The data, which are seasonally adjusted by Board staff, extend through February 13, 2015. Bbl is barrels of oil. 8. Median inflation expectations NOTE: The Michigan survey data are monthly and extend through February 2015. The SPF data for inflation expectations for personal consumption expenditures are quarterly and extend from 2007:Q1 through 2015:Q1. 9. Change in real gross domestic product, gross domestic income, and private domestic final purchases Gross domestic income is not yet available for 2014:H2. SOURCE: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis. forecasters, have been quite stable over the past 15 years; in particular, they have changed little, on net, over the past few years (figure 8). In contrast, measures of longer-term inflation compensation derived from financial market instruments have fallen noticeably during the past several months. As is discussed in more detail in the box “Challenges in Interpreting Measures of Longer-Term Inflation Expectations,” deducing the sources of changes in inflation compensation is difficult because such movements may be caused by factors other than shifts in market participants’ inflation expectations. Economic activity expanded at a strong pace in the second half of 2014 Real GDP is estimated to have increased at an annual rate of 3¾ percent in the second half of last year after a reported increase of just 1¼ percent in the first half, when output was likely restrained by severe weather and other transitory factors (figure 9). Private domestic final purchases—a measure of household and business spending that tends to exhibit less quarterly variation than GDP—also advanced at a substantial pace in the second half of last year. The second-half gains in GDP reflected solid advances in consumer spending and in business investment spending on equipment and intangibles (E&I) as well as subdued gains for both residential investment and nonresidential structures. More generally, the growth in GDP has been supported by accommodative financial conditions, including declines in the cost of borrowing for many households and businesses; by a reduction in the restraint from fiscal policy relative to 2013; and by increases in spending spurred by continuing job gains and, more recently, by falling oil prices. The gains in GDP have occurred despite an appreciating U.S. dollar and concerns about global economic growth, which remain an important source of uncertainty for the economic outlook. Consumer spending was supported by continuing improvement in the labor market and falling oil prices, . . . Real PCE rose at an annual rate of 3¾ percent in the second half of 2014—a noticeable step-up from the sluggish rate of only about 2 percent in the first half (figure 10). The increases in spending have been supported by the improving labor market. In addition, the fall in gasoline and other energy prices has boosted purchasing power for consumers, especially those in lower- and middle-income brackets who spend a sizable share of their income on gasoline. Real disposable personal income—that is, income after taxes and adjusted for price changes—rose 3 percent at an annual rate in the second half of last year, roughly double the average rate recorded over the preceding five years. Consumer spending growth was also likely supported by further increases in household net worth, as the stock market continued to rise and house prices moved up in the second half of last year. The value of corporate equities rose about 10 percent in 2014, on top of the 30 percent gain seen in 2013. Although the gains in house prices slowed last year—for example, the CoreLogic national index increased only 5 percent after having risen more substantially in 2012 and 2013— these gains affected a larger share of the population than did the gains in equities, as more individuals own homes than own stocks (figure 11). Reflecting increases in home and equity prices, aggregate household net wealth has risen appreciably from its levels during the recession and its aftermath to more than 10. Change in real personal consumption expenditures and disposable personal income Personal consumption expenditures Disposable personal income 11. Prices of existing single-family houses NOTE: The data for the Zillow and S&P/Case-Shiller indexes extend through November 2014. The data for the CoreLogic index extend through December 2014. Each index has been normalized so that its peak is 100. The CoreLogic price index includes purchase transactions only and is adjusted by Federal Reserve Board staff. The S&P/Case-Shiller index reflects all arm’s-length sales transactions nationwide. SOURCE: The S&P/Case-Shiller U.S. National Home Price Index (“Index”) is a product of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates and has been licensed for use by the Board. Copyright © 2015 S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC, a subsidiary of the McGraw Hill Financial Inc., and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Redistribution, reproduction and/or photocopying in whole or in part are prohibited without written permission of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC. For more information on any of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC’s indices please visit www.spdji.com. S&P® is a registered trademark of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones® is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. Neither S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC, Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC, their affiliates nor their third party licensors make any representation or warranty, express or implied, as to the ability of any index to accurately represent the asset class or market sector that it purports to represent and neither S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC, Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC, their affiliates nor their third party licensors shall have any liability for any errors, omissions, or interruptions of any index or the data included therein. are an important determinant of the behavior of actual inflation. For this reason, measures of inflation expectations are widely followed. Although none of the available measures is perfect, surveys of individuals, economists, and professional forecasters all shed some light on the inflation expectations of different groups. For the most part, these survey-based measures have been quite stable in recent years in the United States. Many analysts credit that stability with helping to keep the variation in actual inflation fairly limited despite pressures (such as the deep recession and sharp changes in energy prices) that might have had the potential to induce more substantial and long-lasting changes in inflation. Measures of expected inflation can also be derived from financial instruments whose payouts are linked to inflation. For example, inflation compensation implied by Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS), known as the TIPS breakeven inflation rate, is defined as the difference, at comparable maturities, between yields on nominal Treasury securities and yields on TIPS, which are indexed to headline consumer price index (CPI) inflation. Inflation swaps—contracts in which one party makes payments of certain fixed nominal amounts in exchange for cash flows that are indexed to cumulative CPI inflation over some horizon—provide alternative measures of inflation compensation. These measures of inflation compensation provide information about market participants’ expectations of inflation, but that information is generally obscured by other sources of variation. The Federal Open Market Committee’s (FOMC) 2 percent inflation objective is stated in terms of the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), and PCE price inflation tends to run a few tenths of a percentage point lower, on average, than the CPI inflation used in pricing TIPS and inflation swaps. Thus, if these recent readings on inflation compensation could be interpreted as direct measures of expected CPI inflation, then they would probably correspond to expectations for PCE inflation that are lower than the Committee’s objective. Recent FOMC statements have noted that the Committee will monitor both survey measures and these market-based inflation compensation measures closely. 1. In support of the latter explanation, market participants also noted the decline of inflation compensation abroad, in particular in the euro area. One possible reason for the effects of oil prices and realized inflation on longer-term inflation compensation is that, in response to changes in the intermediate-term inflation outlook, investors are reportedly more likely to adjust their positions in the more recently issued, and thus more liquid, longer-term TIPS rather than the older-vintage TIPS with shorter remaining maturities. Both of those market-based measures of inflation compensation have declined noticeably since early August (figure A). Focusing on inflation compensation 5 to 10 years ahead is useful, particularly for monetary policy, because it gives a sense of where market participants expect inflation to settle in the long term after developments influencing inflation in the short term have run their course. The 5-to-10-year-forward inflation compensation measure computed from TIPS fell from an annual rate of around 2½ percent in early August to below 2 percent in January; over the same period, the swaps-based measure fell from around 2¾ percent to a little more than 2 percent. Market participants have offered several potential explanations for these declines, including the effects of the plunge in NOTE: TIPS is Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Bank of New York; Barclays; Federal Reserve Inflation compensation is distinct from inflation expectations, however, as both TIPS- and swaps- based measures of inflation compensation reflect not only expected inflation, but also an inflation risk premium—the compensation that holders of nominal securities demand for bearing inflation risk—as well as other premiums driven by liquidity differences and shifts in the relative supply and demand of nominal versus inflation-indexed securities. Federal Reserve System staff maintain several term structure models aimed at disentangling the various components of inflation compensation and providing estimates of inflation expectations and risk premiums.2 Most staff models suggest that 5-to-10-year inflation expectations have remained relatively stable since last summer. Instead, the models tend to attribute at least part of the decline in inflation compensation to some reduction in inflation risk premiums and the effects of the other factors included in the models. However, these models cannot fully explain the recent decline in inflation compensation. Distributions of future inflation derived from surveys and inflation options also display an interesting divergence. Distributions of inflation 5 to 10 years ahead that are derived from surveys of primary dealers 2. For further details, see Michael Abrahams, Tobias Adrian, Richard Crump, and Emanuel Moench (2012), “Decomposing Real and Nominal y﻿ield Curves,” Federal Reserve Bank of New y﻿ork Staff Reports, no. 570 (New y﻿ork: FRB New y﻿ork, September, revised October 2013), www.newyorkfed.org/ research/staff_reports/sr570.html; Jens H.E. Christensen, Jose A. Lopez, and Glenn D. Rudebusch (2010), “Inflation Expectations and Risk Premiums in Arbitrage-Free Model of Nominal and Real Bond y﻿ields,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 42 (September, issue supplement s1), pp. 143–78; Stefania D’Amico, Don H. Kim, and Min Wei (2014), “Tips from TIPS: The Informational Content of Treasury Inflation-Protected Security Prices,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2014-24 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January), www.federalreserve. gov/pubs/feds/2014/201424/201424pap.pdf; Andrea Ajello, Luca Benzoni, and Olena Chyruk (2012), “Core and ‘Crust’: Consumer Prices and the Term Structure of Interest Rates,” available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1851906 or http:// dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1851906; and Joseph G. Haubrich, George G. Pennacchi, and Peter Ritchken (2012), “Inflation Expectations, Real Rates, and Risk Premia: Evidence from Inflation Swaps,” Review of Financial Studies, vol. 25 (5), pp. 1588–629. have remained stable since last summer—consistent with the stability of the other survey measures cited earlier. In contrast, information gleaned from 10- year inflation options (that is, caps and floors, which pay the holder when inflation is higher or lower than specified levels) suggests that investors may have recently become more concerned about lower inflation outcomes and less concerned about higher inflation outcomes. This shift could reflect an increase in the investors’ perceived likelihood of low inflation outcomes, but it could also reflect an increased willingness to pay higher premiums for insurance against such outcomes as well as other possible factors depressing long-horizon inflation compensation. Thus, the results from the Federal Reserve’s staff models are consistent with readings from surveys of primary dealers, economists, professional forecasters, and consumers, all of which indicate that longer-run inflation expectations have remained generally stable (figure B). However, given the uncertainties in inferring inflation expectations from the market measures of inflation compensation, one cannot rule out a decline in inflation expectations among market participants. NOTE: The Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF) series starts on March 2007 and extends through March 2015. The Blue Chip consensus series starts on June 2007 and extends through December 2014. The Survey of Primary Dealers series starts on January 2011 and extends through January 2015. CPI is consumer price index. 12. Wealth-to-income ratio NOTE: The data extend through 2014:Q3. The series is the ratio of 13. Household debt service NOTE: The data extend through 2014:Q3. Debt service payments consist of estimated required payments on outstanding mortgage and consumer debt. 14. Changes in household debt NOTE: Changes are calculated from year-end to year-end, except 2014 changes, which are calculated from Q3 to Q3. Coupled with low interest rates, the rise in incomes has lowered debt payment burdens for many households. The household debt service ratio—that is, the ratio of required principal and interest payments on outstanding household debt to disposable personal income—has remained at a very low level by historical standards (figure 13). . . . and increased credit availability for consumers Consumer credit continued to expand through late 2014, as auto and student loans have remained available even to borrowers with lower credit scores (figure 14). In addition, credit cards have become somewhat more accessible to individuals on the lower end of the credit spectrum, and overall credit card debt increased moderately last year. Consumer confidence has moved up Consistent with the improvement in the labor market and the fall in energy prices, indicators of consumer sentiment moved up noticeably in the second half of last year. The University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers’ index of consumer sentiment—which incorporates households’ views about their own financial situations as well as broader economic conditions—has moved up strongly, on net, in recent months and is now close to its long-run average (figure 15). The Michigan survey’s measure of households’ expectations of real income changes in the year ahead has also continued to trend up over the past several months, perhaps reflecting the fall in gasoline prices. However, this measure remains substantially below its historical average and suggests a more guarded outlook than the headline sentiment index. However, the pace of homebuilding has improved only slowly After advancing reasonably well in 2012 and early 2013, the recovery in residential construction activity has slowed markedly. Single-family housing starts only edged up in 2014, and multifamily construction activity was also little changed (figure 16). And sales of both new and existing homes were flat, on net, last year (figure 17). In all, real residential investment rose only 2½ percent in 2014, and it remains well below its pre-recession peak. The weak recovery in construction likely relates to the rate of household formation, which, notwithstanding tentative signs of a recent pickup, has generally stayed very low despite the improvement in the labor market. Lending policies for home purchases remained tight overall, although there are some indications that mortgage credit has started to become more widely accessible. Over the course of 2014, the fraction of home-purchase mortgages issued to borrowers with credit scores on the lower end of the spectrum edged up. Additionally, in the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS), several large banks reported having eased lending standards on prime home-purchase loans in the third and fourth quarters of last year.2 In January, the Federal Housing Administration reduced its mortgage insurance premiums by about one-third of the level that had prevailed during the past four years—a step that may lower the cost of credit for households with small down payments and low credit scores. Even so, mortgages have remained difficult to obtain for many households. Meanwhile, for borrowers who can qualify for a mortgage, the cost of credit is low. After rising appreciably around mid-2013, mortgage interest rates have since retraced much of those increases. The 30-year fixed mortgage rate declined roughly 60 basis points in 2014, and it has edged down further, on net, this year to a level not far from its all-time low 2. The SLOOS is available on the Board’s website at NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through February 2015. Consumer sentiment is indexed to 100 in 1966. Real income expectations are calculated as the net percent of survey respondents expecting family income to go up more than prices during the next year or two. 16. Private housing starts and permits 17. New and existing home sales Existing home sales NOTE: The data extend through December 2014. “Existing home sales” includes single-family, condo, townhome, and co-op sales. SOURCE: For new single-family home sales, Census Bureau; for existing 18. Mortgage interest rate and mortgage refinance index NOTE: The interest rate data are for 30-year fixed-rate mortgages and are weekly through February 18, 2015. The refinance index data are a seasonally adjusted 4-week moving average through February 13, 2015. 19. Change in real business fixed investment 20. Selected components of net financing for nonfinancial businesses in 2012 (figure 18). Likely related to the most recent decline in mortgage rates, refinancing activity rose modestly in January. Overall business investment has moved up, but investment in the energy sector is starting to be affected by the drop in oil prices Business fixed investment rose at an annual rate of 5¼ percent in the second half of 2014, close to the rate of increase seen in the first half. Spending on E&I capital rose at an annual rate of about 6 percent, while spending on nonresidential structures moved up about 4 percent (figure 19). Business investment has been supported by strengthening final demand as well as by low interest rates and generally accommodative financial conditions. Regarding nonresidential structures, vacancy rates for existing properties have been declining, and financing conditions for new construction have eased further—both factors that bode well for future construction. More recently, however, the steep decline in the number of drilling rigs in operation suggests that a sharp falloff in the drilling and mining component of investment in nonresidential structures may be under way. Corporate financing conditions were generally favorable The financial condition of large nonfinancial firms generally remained solid in the second half of last year; profitability stayed high, and default rates on nonfinancial corporate bonds were generally very low. Nonfinancial firms have continued to raise funds through capital markets at a robust pace, given sturdy corporate credit quality, historically low interest rates on corporate bonds, and highly accommodative lending conditions for most firms (figures 20 and 21). Bond issuance by investment-grade nonfinancial firms, and syndicated lending to those firms, have both been particularly strong. However, speculative-grade issuance in those markets, which had remained elevated for most of 2014, diminished late in the year, because volatility increased and spreads widened and perhaps also because of greater scrutiny by regulators of syndicated leveraged loans with weaker credit quality and lower repayment capacity. Credit also was readily available to most bank-dependent businesses. According to the October 2014 and January 2015 SLOOS reports, banks generally continued to ease price and nonprice terms on commercial and industrial (C&I) loans to firms of all sizes in the second half of 2014. That said, in the fourth quarter, several banks reported having tightened lending policies for oil and gas firms or, more broadly, in response to legislative, supervisory, or accounting changes. In addition, although overall C&I loans on banks’ books registered substantial increases in the second half of 2014, loans to businesses in amounts of $1 million or less—a proxy for lending to small businesses—increased only modestly. The weak growth in these small loans appears largely due to sluggish demand; however, bank lending standards to small businesses are still reportedly somewhat tighter than the midpoint of their range over the past decade despite considerable loosening over the past few years. Net exports held down second-half real GDP growth slightly Exports increased at a modest pace in the second half of 2014, held back by lackluster growth abroad as well as the appreciation of the dollar. Import growth was also relatively subdued, despite the impetus from the stronger dollar, and was well below the pace observed in the first half (figure 22). All told, real net trade was a slight drag on real GDP growth in the second half of 2014. The current account deficit was little changed in the third quarter of 2014 and, at 2¼ percent of nominal GDP, was near its narrowest reading since the late 1990s (figure 23). The current account deficit in the first three quarters of 2014 was financed mainly by purchases of Treasury and corporate securities 21. Corporate bond yields, by securities rating NOTE: The yields shown are yields on 10-year bonds. SOURCE: BofA Merrill Lynch Global Research, used with permission. 22. Change in real imports and exports of goods and services 23. U.S. trade and current account balances NOTE: The data for the current account extend through 2014:Q3. GDP is 24. U.S. net financial inflows U.S. private (including banking) Foreign private (including banking) U.S. official Foreign official NOTE: Negative numbers indicate a balance of payments outflow, generated when U.S. residents, on net, purchase foreign assets or when foreign residents, on net, sell U.S. assets. A negative number for “U.S. private” or “U.S. official” indicates an increase in U.S. residents’ holdings of foreign assets. U.S. official flows include the foreign currency acquired when foreign central banks draw on their swap lines with the Federal Reserve. SOURCE: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis. 25. Change in real government expenditures on consumption and investment by foreign private investors (figure 24). In contrast, the pace of foreign official purchases in the first three quarters of the year was the slowest in more than a decade, reflecting a significant slowdown in reserve accumulation by emerging market economies (EMEs). Federal fiscal policy was less of a drag on GDP . . . Fiscal policy at the federal level had been a factor restraining GDP growth for several years, especially in 2013. In 2014, however, the contractionary effects of tax and spending changes eased appreciably as the restraining effects of the 2013 tax increases abated and there was a slowing in the declines in federal purchases due to sequestration and the Budget Control Act of 2011 (figure 25). Moreover, some of the overall drag on demand was offset in 2014 by an increase in transfers resulting from the Affordable Care Act. The federal unified deficit narrowed further last year, reflecting both the previous years’ spending cuts and an increase in tax receipts resulting from the ongoing economic expansion (figure 26). The budget deficit was 2¾ percent of GDP for fiscal year 2014, and the Congressional Budget Office projects that it will be about 2½ percent in 2015. As a result, overall federal debt held by the public stabilized as a share of GDP in 2014, albeit at a relatively high level (figure 27). . . . and state and local government expenditures are also turning up The expansion of economic activity has also led to continued slow improvements in the fiscal position of most state and local governments. Consistent with improving finances, states and localities expanded employment rolls in 2014 (figure 28). Furthermore, state and local expenditures on construction projects rose a touch last year following several years of declines. The expected path for the federal funds rate flattened Market participants seemed to judge the incoming domestic economic data since the middle of last year, especially the employment reports, as supporting expectations for continued economic expansion in the United States; however, concerns about the foreign economic outlook weighed on investor sentiment. On balance, market-based measures of the expected (or mean) path of the federal funds rate through late 2017 have flattened, but the expected timing of the initial increase in the federal funds rate from its current target range was about unchanged. In addition, according to the results of the most recent Survey of Primary Dealers and the Survey of Market Participants, both conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York just prior to the January FOMC meeting, respondents judged that the initial increase in the target federal funds rate was most likely to occur around mid-2015, little changed from the results of those surveys from last June.3 Meanwhile, in part because the passage of time brought the anticipated date of the initial increase in the federal funds rate closer, measures of policy rate uncertainty based on interest rate derivatives edged higher, on net, from their mid-2014 levels. Longer-term Treasury yields and other sovereign benchmark yields declined Yields on longer-term Treasury securities have continued to move down since the middle of last year on net (figure 29). In particular, the yields on 10- and 30-year nominal Treasury securities declined about 40 basis points and 60 basis points, respectively, from their levels at the end of June 2014. The decreases in 3. The results of the Survey of Primary Dealers and of the Survey of Market Participants are available on the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s website at www.newyorkfed.org/markets/primarydealer_survey_ questions.html and www.newyorkfed.org/markets/ survey_market_participants.html, respectively. 26. Federal receipts and expenditures NOTE: The receipts and expenditures data are on a unified-budget basis and are for fiscal years (October through September); gross domestic product (GDP) data are for the four quarters ending in Q3. SOURCE: Office of Management and Budget. 27. Federal government debt held by the public NOTE: The data extend through 2014:Q3. The data for gross domestic product (GDP) are at an annual rate. Debt held by the public is debt held at the end of the period. 28. State and local government employment change 29. Yields on nominal Treasury securities NOTE: The Treasury ceased publication of the 30-year constant maturity series on February 18, 2002, and resumed that series on February 9, 2006. longer-term yields were driven especially by reductions in longer-horizon forward rates. For example, the 5-year forward rate 5 years ahead dropped about 80 basis points over the same period. Long-term benchmark sovereign yields in advanced foreign economies (AFEs) have also moved down significantly in response to disappointing growth and very low and declining rates of inflation in a number of foreign countries as well as the associated actual and anticipated changes in monetary policy abroad. The declines in longer-term Treasury yields and long-horizon forward rates seem to largely reflect reductions in term premiums—the extra return investors expect to obtain from holding longer-term securities as opposed to holding and rolling over a sequence of short- term securities for the same period. Market participants pointed to several factors that may help to explain the reduction in term premiums. First, very low and declining AFE yields and safe-haven flows associated with the deterioration in the foreign economic outlook likely have increased demand for Treasury securities. Second, the weaker foreign economic outlook coupled with the steep decline in oil prices may have led investors to put higher odds on scenarios in which U.S. inflation remains quite low for an extended period. Investors may see nominal long-term Treasury securities as an especially good hedge against such risks. Finally, market participants may have increased the probability they attach to outcomes in which U.S. economic growth is persistently subdued. Indeed, the 5-year forward real yield 5 years ahead, obtained from yields on Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities, has declined further, on net, since the middle of last year and stands well below levels commonly cited as estimates of the longer-run real short rate. Consistent with moves in the yields on longer- term Treasury securities, yields on 30-year agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS)—an important determinant of mortgage interest rates—decreased about 30 basis points, on balance, over the second half of 2014 and early 2015 (figure 30). Liquidity conditions in Treasury and agency MBS markets were generally stable . . . On balance, indicators of Treasury market functioning remained stable over the second half of 2014 even as the Federal Reserve trimmed the pace of its asset purchases and ultimately brought the purchase program to a close at the end of October. The Treasury market experienced a sharp drop in yields and significantly elevated volatility on October 15, as technical factors reportedly amplified price movements following the release of the somewhat weaker-than-expected September U.S. retail sales data. However, market conditions recovered quickly and liquidity measures, such as bid-asked spreads, have been generally stable since then. Moreover, Treasury auctions generally continued to be well received by investors. As in the Treasury market, liquidity conditions in the agency MBS market were generally stable, with the exception of mid-October. Dollar-roll-implied financing rates for production coupon MBS—an indicator of the scarcity of agency MBS for settlement— suggested limited settlement pressures in these markets over the second half of 2014 and early 2015 (figure 31). . . . and short-term funding markets also continued to function well as rates moved slightly higher overall Conditions in short-term dollar funding markets also remained stable during the second half of 2014 and early 2015. Both unsecured and secured money market rates moved modestly higher late in 2014 but remained close to their averages since the federal funds rate reached its effective lower bound. Unsecured offshore dollar funding markets generally did not exhibit signs of 30. Yield and spread on agency mortgage-backed securities NOTE: The data are daily. Yield shown is for the Fannie Mae 30-year current coupon, the coupon rate at which new mortgage-backed securities would be priced at par, or face, value. Spread shown is to the average of the 5- and 10-year nominal Treasury yields. 31. Dollar-roll-implied financing rates (front month), Fannie Mae 30-year current coupon Fails charge announced Fails charge implemented 32. Equity prices SOURCE: Dow Jones bank index and Standard & Poor’s 500 index via stress, and the repurchase agreement, or repo, market functioned smoothly with modest year- end pressures. Money market participants continued to focus on the ongoing testing of the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy tools. The offering rate in the overnight reverse repurchase agreement (ON RRP) exercise has continued to provide a soft floor for other rates on secured borrowing, and the term RRP testing operations that were conducted in December and matured in early January seemed to help alleviate year-end pressures in money markets. For a detailed discussion of the testing of monetary policy tools, see the box “Additional Testing of Monetary Policy Tools” in Part 2. Broad equity price indexes rose despite higher volatility, while risk spreads on corporate debt widened Over the second half of 2014 and early 2015, broad measures of U.S. equity prices increased further, on balance, but stock prices for the energy sector declined substantially, reflecting the sharp drops in oil prices (figure 32). Although increased concerns about the foreign economic outlook seemed to weigh on risk sentiment, the generally positive tone of U.S. economic data releases as well as declining longer-term interest rates appeared to provide support for equity prices. Overall equity valuations by some conventional measures are somewhat higher than their historical average levels, and valuation metrics in some sectors continue to appear stretched relative to historical norms. Implied volatility for the S&P 500 index, as calculated from options prices, increased moderately, on net, from low levels over the summer. Corporate credit spreads, particularly those for speculative-grade bonds, widened from the fairly low levels of last summer, in part because of the underperformance of energy firms. Overall, corporate bond spreads across the credit spectrum have been near their historical median levels recently. For further discussion of asset prices and other financial stability issues, see the box “Developments Related to Financial Stability.” Bank credit and the M2 measure of the money stock continued to expand Aggregate credit provided by commercial banks increased at a solid pace in the second half of 2014 (figure 33). The expansion in bank credit was mainly driven by moderate loan growth coupled with continued robust expansion of banks’ holdings of U.S. Treasury securities, which was reportedly influenced by efforts of large banks to meet the new Basel III Liquidity Coverage Ratio requirements. The growth of loans on banks’ books was generally consistent with the SLOOS reports of increased loan demand and further easing of lending standards for many loan categories over the second half of 2014. Meanwhile, delinquency and charge-off rates fell across most major loan types. Measures of bank profitability were little changed in the second half of 2014, on net, and remained below their historical averages (figure 34). Equity prices of large domestic bank holding companies (BHCs) have increased moderately, on net, since the middle of last year (figure 32). Credit default swap (CDS) spreads for large BHCs were about unchanged. The M2 measure of the money stock has increased at an average annualized rate of about 5½ percent since last June, below the pace registered in the first half of 2014 and about in line with the pace of nominal GDP. The deceleration was driven by a moderation in the growth rate of liquid deposits in the banking sector relative to the first half of 2014. Although demand for currency weakened in the third quarter of 2014 relative to the first half of the year, currency growth has been strong since November. 33. Ratio of total commercial bank credit to nominal gross domestic product 34. Profitability of bank holding companies NOTE: The data, which are seasonally adjusted, are quarterly. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Board, FR Y-9C, Consolidated Financial system overall have remained moderate since the previous Monetary Policy Report. In the past few years, capital and liquidity positions in the banking sector have continued to improve, net wholesale short- term funding in the financial sector has decreased substantially, and aggregate leverage of the private nonfinancial sector has not picked up. However, valuation pressures are notable in some asset markets, although they have eased a little on balance. Leverage at lower-rated nonfinancial firms has become more pronounced. Recent developments in Greece have rekindled concerns about the country defaulting and exiting the euro system. and price-to-sales ratios are somewhat elevated, suggesting some valuation pressures. However, estimates of the equity premium remain relatively wide, as the long-run expected return on equity exceeds the low real Treasury yield by a notable margin, suggesting that investors still expect somewhat higher-than-average compensation relative to historical standards for bearing the additional risk associated with holding equities. Risk spreads for corporate bonds have widened over recent months, especially for speculative-grade firms, in part because of concerns about the credit quality of energy-related firms, though yields remain near historical lows, reflecting low term premiums. Residential real estate valuations appear within historical norms, with recent data pointing to some cooling of house price gains in regions that recently experienced rapid price appreciation. However, valuation pressures in the commercial real estate market may have increased in recent quarters as prices have risen relative to rents, and underwriting standards in securitizations have weakened somewhat, though debt growth remains moderate. leveraged loans in recent years. The underwriting quality of leveraged loans arranged or held by banking institutions in 2014:Q4 appears to have improved slightly, perhaps in response to the stepped- up enforcement of the leveraged lending guidance. However, new deals continue to show signs of weak underwriting terms and heightened leverage that are close to levels preceding the financial crisis. As a result of steady improvements in capital and liquidity positions since the financial crisis, U.S. banking firms, in aggregate, appear to be better positioned to absorb potential shocks—such as those related to litigation, falling oil prices, and financial contagion originating abroad—and to meet strengthening credit demand. The sharp decline in oil prices, if sustained, may lead to credit strains for some banks with concentrated exposures to the energy sector, but at banks that are more diversified, potential losses are likely to be offset by the positive effects of lower oil prices on the broader economy. Thirty-one large bank holding companies (BHCs) are currently undergoing their annual stress tests, the results of which are scheduled to be released in March. Leverage in the nonbank financial sector appears, on balance, to be at moderate levels. New securitizations, which contribute to financial sector leverage, have been boosted by issuance of commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) and collateralized loan obligations (CLOs), which remained robust amid continued reports of relatively accommodative underwriting standards for the underlying assets. That said, the risk retention rules finalized in October, which require issuers to retain at least 5 percent of any securitizations issued, have the potential to affect market activity, especially in the private-label residential mortgage-backed securities, non-agency CMBS, and CLO sectors. has declined to roughly its level in the mid-2000s. At lower-rated and unrated nonfinancial businesses, however, leverage has continued to increase with the rapid growth in high-yield bond issuance and nonbank financial institutions has declined significantly in recent years and is low by historical standards. However, prime money market funds with a fixed net asset value remain vulnerable to investor runs if there is a fall in the market value of their assets. Furthermore, the growth of bond mutual funds and exchange-traded funds (ETFs) in recent years means that these funds now hold a much higher fraction of the available stock of relatively less liquid assets—such as high- yield corporate debt, bank loans, and international debt—than they did before the financial crisis. As mutual funds and ETFs may appear to offer greater liquidity than the markets in which they transact, their growth heightens the potential for a forced sale in the underlying markets if some event were to trigger large volumes of redemptions. Since the previous Monetary Policy Report, the Federal Reserve has taken further steps to improve the resiliency of the financial system. First, the Federal Reserve Board and other federal banking agencies finalized several rules to enhance the capital and liquidity positions of large banking organizations. In particular, a final rule on a liquidity coverage ratio was issued, requiring large and internationally active banking organizations to hold a certain minimum amount of high-quality liquid assets, such as central bank reserves and government and corporate debt that can be converted easily and quickly into cash. Another final rule was adopted to modify the definition of the supplementary leverage ratio in a manner consistent with the recent changes agreed to by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. The technical modifications adjust the amount of certain off-balance- sheet items included in the ratio, such as credit derivatives, repurchase agreement–style transactions, and lines of credit. The changes strengthen the ratio by more appropriately capturing a banking organization’s on- and off-balance-sheet exposures and, based on estimates, would increase capital requirements, on balance, across banking firms. In addition, the Federal Reserve issued several rules to conform to Dodd-Frank Act mandates. A final rule was issued to implement section 622 of the act, which generally prohibits a financial company (defined generally as an insured depository institution or depository institution holding company) from combining with another company if the resulting company’s liabilities would exceed 10 percent of the aggregate consolidated liabilities of all such financial companies. Another final rule, issued jointly by several federal agencies, requires the sponsors of asset-backed securities (ABS) to retain not less than 5 percent of the credit risk of the assets collateralizing the ABS issuance unless certain underwriting criteria on the securitized assets are met. The rule also generally prohibits the sponsor from transferring or hedging that credit risk. Moreover, several federal agencies jointly issued a proposed rule establishing minimum margin requirements for certain swap contracts that are not cleared through central counterparties. In addition, the Federal Reserve proposed a rule to further strengthen the capital positions of the most systemically important U.S. bank holding companies (BHCs). The proposal establishes a methodology to identify whether a U.S. BHC is a global systemically important banking organization (GSIB) and so would be subject to a risk-based capital surcharge calibrated based on its systemic profile. A GSIB would be required to calculate its capital surcharge under two methods and would be subject to the higher of the two surcharges. The first method is consistent with the Basel frame work, which results in capital surcharges ranging from 1.0 to 2.5 percent. The second method, which takes into account a measure of the firm’s’ reliance on short-term wholesale funding, results in capital surcharges ranging from 1.0 to 4.5 percent. Failure to maintain the capital surcharge would subject the GSIB to restrictions on capital distributions and discretionary bonus payments. Finally, the Federal Reserve invited public comment on enhanced prudential standards for the regulation and supervision of General Electric Capital Corporation (GECC), a nonbank financial company that the Financial Stability Oversight Council has designated for supervision by the Federal Reserve Board. In light of the substantial similarity of GECC’s activities and risk profile to those of a similarly sized BHC, the Federal Reserve is proposing to apply enhanced prudential standards to GECC similar to those applied to large BHCs. 35. 10-year nominal benchmark yields in advanced foreign economies Municipal bond markets functioned smoothly, but some issuers remained strained Credit conditions in municipal bond markets have generally remained stable since the middle of last year. Over that period, the MCDX—an index of CDS spreads for a broad portfolio of municipal bonds—and ratios of yields on 20-year general obligation municipal bonds to those on longer-term Treasury securities increased slightly. Nevertheless, significant financial strains were still evident for some issuers. Puerto Rico, with speculative-grade-rated general obligation bonds, continued to face challenges from subdued economic performance, severe indebtedness, and other fiscal pressures. Meanwhile, the City of Detroit emerged from bankruptcy late in 2014 after its debt restructuring plan was approved by a federal judge. Bond yields in the advanced foreign economies continued to decline . . . As noted previously, long-term sovereign yields in the AFEs moved down further during the second half of 2014 and into early 2015 on continued low inflation readings abroad and heightened concerns over the strength of foreign economic growth as well as amid substantial monetary policy accommodation (figure 35). German yields fell to record lows, as the European Central Bank (ECB) implemented new liquidity facilities, purchased covered bonds and asset-backed securities, and announced it would begin buying euro-area sovereign bonds. Specifically, the ECB said that it would purchase €60 billion per month of euro-area public and private bonds through at least September 2016. Japanese yields also declined, reflecting the expansion by the Bank of Japan (BOJ) of its asset purchase program. In the United Kingdom, yields fell as data showed declining inflation and some moderation in economic growth, although they have retraced a little of that move in recent weeks, in part as market sentiment toward the U.K. outlook appears to have improved somewhat. In emerging markets, yields were mixed—falling, for the most part, in Asia and generally rising modestly in Latin America—as CDS spreads widened amid growing credit concerns, particularly in some oil-exporting countries. . . . while the dollar has strengthened markedly The broad nominal value of the dollar has increased markedly since the middle of 2014, with the U.S. dollar appreciating against almost all currencies (figure 36). The increase in the value of the dollar was largely driven by additional monetary easing abroad and rising concerns about foreign growth—forces similar to those that drove benchmark yields lower—in the face of expectations of solid U.S. growth and the anticipated start of monetary tightening in the United States later this year. Both the euro and the yen have depreciated about 20 percent against the dollar since mid- 2014. Notwithstanding the sharp nominal appreciation of the dollar since mid-2014, the real value of the dollar, measured against a broad basket of currencies, is currently somewhat below its historical average since 1973 and well below the peak it reached in early 1985 (figure 37). Foreign equity indexes were mixed over the period (figure 38). Japanese equities outperformed other AFE indexes, helped by the BOJ’s asset purchase expansion. Euro-area equities are up modestly from their mid-2014 levels, boosted recently by monetary easing. However, euro-area bank shares substantially underperformed broader indexes, partly reflecting low profitability, weak operating environments, and lingering vulnerabilities to economic and financial shocks. EME equities indexes were mixed, with most emerging Asian indexes rising and some of the major Latin American indexes moving down. 36. U.S. dollar exchange rate against broad index and selected major currencies NOTE: The data are in foreign currency units per dollar. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Board, Statistical Release H.10, “Foreign 37. Broad real value of the dollar NOTE: The data are in foreign currency units per dollar. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Board, Statistical Release H.10, “Foreign 38. Equity indexes for selected foreign economies Emerging markets 39. Real gross domestic product growth in selected advanced foreign economies NOTE: The data for Canada extend through 2014:Q3. The data for the United Kingdom, the euro area, and Japan extend through 2014:Q4. Economic growth in the advanced foreign economies, while still generally weak, firmed toward the end of the year Economic growth in the AFEs, which was weak in the first half of 2014, firmed toward the end of the second half of the year, supported in part by lower oil prices and more accommodative monetary policies (figure 39). The euro-area economy barely grew in the third quarter and unemployment remained near record highs, but the pace of economic activity moved up in the fourth quarter. Notwithstanding more supportive monetary policy and the recent pickup in euro-area growth, negotiations over additional financial assistance for Greece have the potential to trigger adverse market reactions and resurrect financial stresses that might impair growth in the broader euro-area economy. Japanese real GDP contracted again in the third quarter, following a tax hike–induced plunge in the second quarter, but it rebounded toward the end of the year as exports and household spending increased. In contrast, economic activity in the United Kingdom and Canada was robust in the third quarter but moderated in the fourth quarter. The fall in oil prices and other commodity prices pushed down headline inflation across the major AFEs. Most notably, 12-month euro-area inflation continued to trend down, falling to negative 0.6 percent in January. Declines in inflation and in market-based measures of inflation expectations since mid-2014 prompted the ECB to increase its monetary stimulus. Similar considerations led the BOJ to step up its pace of asset purchases in October. The Bank of Canada lowered its target for the overnight rate in January in light of the depressing effect of lower oil prices on Canadian inflation and economic activity, as oil exports are nearly 20 percent of total goods exports. Several other foreign central banks lowered their policy rates, either reaching or pushing further into negative territory, including in Denmark, Sweden, and Switzerland—the last of which did so in the context of removing its floor on the euro-Swiss franc exchange rate. Growth in the emerging market economies improved but remained subdued Following weak growth earlier last year, overall economic activity in the EMEs improved a bit in the second half of 2014, but performance varied across economies. Growth in Asia was generally solid, supported by external demand, particularly from the United States, and improved terms of trade due to the sharp decline in commodity prices. In contrast, the decline in commodity prices, along with macroeconomic policy challenges, weighed on economic activity in several South American countries. In China, exports expanded rapidly in the second half of last year, but fixed investment softened, as real estate investment slowed amid a weakening property market. Responding to increased concerns over the strength of growth, the authorities announced additional targeted stimulus measures in an effort to prevent the economy from slowing abruptly. In much of the rest of emerging Asia, exports, particularly to the United States, supported a step-up in growth from the first half of the year. The Mexican economy continued to grow at a moderate pace in the second half of 2014, with solid exports to the United States but lingering softness in household demand. In Brazil, economic activity remained lackluster amid falling commodity prices, diminished business confidence, and tighter macroeconomic policy. Declining oil prices were especially disruptive for several economies with heavy dependence on oil exports, including Russia and Venezuela. Inflation continued to be subdued in most EMEs. The fall in the price of oil contributed to a moderation of headline inflation in several EMEs, including China. However, this contribution was limited in many EMEs due to the prevalence of administered energy prices, which lower the pass-through of changes in oil prices to consumer prices. In several countries, including Indonesia and Malaysia, the fall in energy prices prompted governments to cut fuel subsidies, leading to a rise in domestic prices of fuel and in inflation late in 2014. With inflation low or declining, some central banks, including those of China, Korea, and Chile, loosened monetary policy to support growth. In other EMEs, including Brazil and Malaysia, inflationary pressures stemming from depreciating currencies or from reductions in fuel subsidies prompted central banks to raise policy rates. The central bank of Russia sharply tightened monetary policy to combat inflationary pressures and stabilize its financial markets, which came under considerable pressure in late 2014. The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) concluded its asset purchase program at the end of October in light of the substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market since the inception of the program. To support further progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the FOMC has kept the target federal funds rate at its effective lower bound and maintained the Federal Reserve’s holdings of longer-term securities at sizable levels. To give greater clarity to the public about its policy outlook, the Committee has also continued to provide qualitative guidance regarding the future path of the federal funds rate. In particular, the Committee indicated at its two most recent meetings that it can be patient in beginning to normalize the stance of monetary policy and continued to emphasize the data-dependent nature of its policy stance. Following its September meeting, and as part of prudent planning, the Committee announced updated principles and plans for the eventual normalization of monetary policy. The FOMC concluded its asset purchases at the end of October in light of substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market At the end of October, the FOMC ended the asset purchase program that began in September 2012 after having made further measured reductions in the pace of its asset purchases at the prior meetings in July and September.4 The decision to end the purchase program reflected the substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market since the program’s inception—which had been the goal of the asset purchases—and the Committee’s judgment that the overall recovery was sufficiently strong to support ongoing progress toward the Committee’s policy objectives. However, the Committee judged that a high degree of policy accommodation still remained appropriate and maintained its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage- backed securities (MBS) in agency MBS and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction. By keeping the Federal Reserve’s holdings of longer-term securities at sizable levels, this policy is expected to help maintain accommodative financial conditions by putting 4. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2014), “Federal Reserve Issues FOMC State- ment,” press release, October 29, www.federalreserve.gov/ newsevents/press/monetary/20141029a.htm. downward pressure on longer-term interest rates and supporting mortgage markets. In turn, those effects are expected to contribute to progress toward both the maximum employment and price stability objectives of the FOMC. To support further progress toward its objectives, the Committee has kept the target federal funds rate at its lower bound and updated its forward rate guidance The Committee has maintained the exceptionally low target range of 0 to ¼ percent for the federal funds rate to support further progress toward its objectives of maximum employment and price stability (figure 40). In addition, the FOMC has provided guidance about the likely future path of the federal funds rate in an effort to give greater clarity to the public about its policy outlook. In particular, the Committee has reiterated that, in determining how long to maintain this target range, it will assess realized and expected progress toward its objectives. This assessment will continue to take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. Based on its assessment of these factors, before updating its guidance in December, the Committee had been indicating that it likely would be appropriate to maintain 40. Selected interest rates NOTE: The 2-year and 10-year Treasury rates are the constant-maturity yields based on the most actively traded securities. The dates on the horizontal axis are those of regularly scheduled Federal Open Market Committee meetings. the current target range for the federal funds rate for a considerable time following the end of the asset purchase program, especially if projected inflation continued to run below the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal and provided that longer-term inflation expectations remained well anchored. In light of the conclusion of the asset purchase program at the end of October and the further progress that the economy had made toward the Committee’s objectives, the FOMC updated its forward guidance at its December meeting. In particular, the Committee stated that it can be patient in beginning to normalize the stance of monetary policy, but it also emphasized that the Committee saw the revised language as consistent with the guidance in its previous statement.5 The Committee restated the updated forward guidance following its January meeting based on its assessment of the economic information available at that time.6 In her December press conference, Chair Yellen emphasized that the update to the forward guidance did not signify a change in the Committee’s policy intentions, but rather was a better reflection of the Committee’s focus on the economic conditions that would make an increase in the federal funds rate appropriate.7 Chair Yellen additionally indicated that, consistent with the new language, the Committee was unlikely to begin the normalization process for at least the following two meetings. There are a range of views within the Committee regarding the appropriate timing of the first increase in the federal funds rate, in part reflecting differences in participants’ expectations for how the economy would evolve. By the time of liftoff, the Committee expects some further decline in the unemployment rate and additional improvement in labor market conditions. In addition, the Committee anticipates that, on the basis of incoming data, it will be reasonably confident that inflation will move back over the medium term to its 2 percent objective. 5. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2014), “Federal Reserve Issues FOMC State- ment,” press release, December 17, www.federalreserve. gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20141217a.htm. 6. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2015), “Federal Reserve Issues FOMC State- ment,” press release, January 28, www.federalreserve.gov/ newsevents/press/monetary/20150128a.htm. 7. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2014), “Transcript of Chair Yellen’s FOMC Press Conference,” December 17, www.federalreserve. gov/mediacenter/files/FOMCpresconf20141217.pdf. The Committee has reiterated that, when it decides to begin to remove policy accommodation, it will take a balanced approach consistent with its longer-run goals of maximum employment and inflation of 2 percent. In addition, the Committee continues to anticipate that, even after employment and inflation are near mandate-consistent levels, economic conditions may, for some time, warrant keeping the target federal funds rate below levels the Committee views as normal in the longer run. As emphasized by Chair Yellen in her recent press conferences, FOMC participants provide a number of explanations for this view, with many citing the residual effects of the financial crisis. These effects are expected to ease gradually, but they are seen as likely to continue to constrain household spending for some time. increases in the target range will likely occur later than anticipated. The size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet stabilized with the conclusion of the asset purchase program After the conclusion of the large-scale asset purchase program at the end of October, the Federal Reserve’s total assets stabilized at around $4.5 trillion (figure 41). As a result of the asset purchases over the second half of 2014, before the completion of the program, holdings of U.S. Treasury securities in the System Open Market Account (SOMA) increased $56 billion to $2.5 trillion, and holdings of agency debt and agency MBS increased $78 billion to $1.8 trillion on net. On the liability side of the balance sheet, the increase in the Federal Reserve’s assets was largely matched by increases in currency in circulation and reverse repurchase agreements. The FOMC has stressed the data-dependent nature of its policy stance and indicated that if incoming information signals faster progress than the Committee expects, increases in the target range for the federal funds rate will likely occur sooner than the Committee anticipates. The FOMC also stated that in the case of slower-than-expected progress, Given the Federal Reserve’s large securities holdings, interest income on the SOMA portfolio continued to support substantial remittances to the U.S. Treasury Department. Preliminary estimates suggest that the Federal 41. Federal Reserve assets and liabilities Treasury securities held outright NOTE: “Credit and liquidity facilities” consists of primary, secondary, and seasonal credit; term auction credit; central bank liquidity swaps; support for Maiden Lane, Bear Stearns, and AIG; and other credit facilities, including the Primary Dealer Credit Facility, the Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility, the Commercial Paper Funding Facility, and the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility. “Other assets” includes unamortized premiums and discounts on securities held outright. “Capital and other liabilities” includes reverse repurchase agreements, the U.S. Treasury General Account, and the U.S. Treasury Supplementary Financing Account. Data extend through February 18, 2015. Reserve provided more than $98 billion of such distributions to the Treasury in 2014 and about $500 billion on a cumulative basis since 2008.8 The FOMC continued to plan for the eventual normalization of monetary policy . . . FOMC meeting participants have had ongoing discussions of issues associated with the eventual normalization of the stance and conduct of monetary policy as part of prudent planning.9 The discussions involved various tools that could be used to control the level of short-term interest rates, even while the balance sheet of the Federal Reserve remains very large, as well as approaches to normalizing the size and composition of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. To inform the public about its approach to normalization and to convey the Committee’s confidence in its plans, the FOMC issued a statement regarding its intentions for the eventual normalization of policy following its September meeting. (That statement is reproduced in the box “Policy Normalization Principles and Plans.”) As was the case before the crisis, the Committee intends to adjust the 8. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 9. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2014), “Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, July 29–30, 2014,” press release, August 20, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/ monetary/20140820a.htm. stance of monetary policy during normalization primarily through actions that influence the level of the federal funds rate and other short- term interest rates. Regarding the balance sheet, the Committee intends to reduce securities holdings in a gradual and predictable manner primarily by ceasing to reinvest repayments of principal on securities held in the SOMA. The Committee noted that economic and financial conditions could change, and that it was prepared to make adjustments to its normalization plans if warranted. . . . including by testing the policy tools to be used The Federal Reserve has continued to test the operational readiness of its policy tools, conducting daily overnight reverse repurchase agreement (ON RRP) operations, a series of term RRP operations, and several tests of the Term Deposit Facility. To date, testing has progressed smoothly, and short-term market rates have generally traded above the ON RRP rate, which suggests that the facility will be a useful supplementary tool for the FOMC to use in addition to the interest rate it pays on excess reserves (the IOER rate) to control the federal funds rate during the normalization process. Overall, testing operations reinforced the Federal Reserve’s confidence in its view that it has the tools necessary to tighten policy at the appropriate time. (For more discussion of the Federal Reserve’s preparations for the eventual normalization of monetary policy, see the box “Additional Testing of Monetary Policy Tools.”) Committee (FOMC) discussed ways to normalize the stance of monetary policy and the Federal Reserve’s securities holdings. The discussions were part of prudent planning and do not imply that normalization will necessarily begin soon. The Committee continues to judge that many of the normalization principles that it adopted in June 2011 remain applicable. However, in light of the changes in the System Open Market Account (SOMA) portfolio since 2011 and enhancements in the tools the Committee will have available to implement policy during normalization, the Committee has concluded that some aspects of the eventual normalization process will likely differ from those specified earlier. The Committee also has agreed that it is appropriate at this time to provide additional information regarding its normalization plans. All FOMC participants but one agreed on the following key elements of the approach they intend to implement when it becomes appropriate to begin normalizing the stance of monetary policy: The Committee will determine the timing and pace of policy normalization—meaning steps to raise the federal funds rate and other short-term interest rates to more normal levels and to reduce the Federal Reserve’s securities holdings—so as to promote its statutory mandate of maximum employment and price stability. {{ When economic conditions and the economic outlook warrant a less accommodative monetary policy, the Committee will raise its target range for the federal funds rate. {{ During normalization, the Federal Reserve intends to move the federal funds rate into the target range set by the FOMC primarily by adjusting the interest rate it pays on excess reserve balances. supplementary tools as needed to help control the federal funds rate. The Committee will use an overnight reverse repurchase agreement facility only to the extent necessary and will phase it out when it is no longer needed to help control the federal funds rate. The Committee intends to reduce the Federal Reserve’s securities holdings in a gradual and predictable manner primarily by ceasing to reinvest repayments of principal on securities held in the SOMA. commence phasing out reinvestments after it begins increasing the target range for the federal funds rate; the timing will depend on how economic and financial conditions and the economic outlook evolve. {{ The Committee currently does not anticipate selling agency mortgage-backed securities as part of the normalization process, although limited sales might be warranted in the longer run to reduce or eliminate residual holdings. The timing and pace of any sales would be communicated to the public in advance. The Committee intends that the Federal Reserve will, in the longer run, hold no more securities than necessary to implement monetary policy efficiently and effectively, and that it will hold primarily Treasury securities, thereby minimizing the effect of Federal Reserve holdings on the allocation of credit across sectors of the economy. The Committee is prepared to adjust the details of its approach to policy normalization in light of economic and financial developments. intends to use an overnight reverse repurchase agreement facility and other The size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet stands at about $4.5 trillion, and reserve balances in the banking system are close to $2.5 trillion, an extraordinarily elevated level relative to the average level of reserve balances prior to the onset of the financial crisis—about $25 billion. As a result, when the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) eventually chooses to begin removing policy accommodation, it will do so with a level of reserves in the banking system far in excess of that during any prior period of policy tightening. As noted in the previous Monetary Policy Report, the Federal Reserve’s elevated balance sheet implies that the traditional mechanism for tightening policy will not be feasible.1 and Plans, the Federal Reserve intends to move the federal funds rate into the target range set by the FOMC primarily by adjusting the interest rate it pays on excess reserve balances (the IOER rate). During policy normalization, the Federal Reserve also intends to use an overnight reverse repurchase agreement (ON RRP) facility and other supplementary tools—including term reverse repurchase agreements (term RRPs) and term deposits offered through the Term Deposit Facility (TDF)—as needed to help control the federal funds rate. As part of prudent planning, the Federal Reserve continued to test the operational readiness of these tools over the past several months, with testing evolving in terms of the offering formats, tenors and rates offered, maximum awards or allotment amounts, and eligible counterparties.2 has continued to conduct daily overnight operations and began to conduct term operations. The testing of different formats for the ON RRP operations aimed to enhance the FOMC’s understanding of how an ON RRP facility might be structured to best balance the objective of supporting monetary control with those of limiting the Federal Reserve’s role in financial intermediation and mitigating potential financial stability risks the facility might pose during periods of stress.3 In addition, the spread between the ON RRP rate and the IOER rate was varied to provide the FOMC with information about the effect of that spread on money markets and the demand for ON RRPs. With these considerations in mind, at its September meeting, the FOMC approved changes in the ON RRP exercise that included raising the counterparty-specific limit from $10 billion to $30 billion, limiting the overall size of each operation to $300 billion, and introducing an auction process that would be used to determine the interest rate and allocate take-up if the sum of bids exceeded the overall limit. In addition, during the fourth quarter of 2014, the FOMC approved further changes in the exercise under which the offering rate at the ON RRP operations was varied between 3 and 10 basis points. Participation in and usage of ON RRPs fluctuated from day to day, reflecting changes in the spread between market rates and the ON RRP rate as well as quarter-end and year-end dynamics (figure A). The limit on the overall size of the operation did not bind except at the end of the third quarter.4 Increases in ON RRP offered rates appeared to put some upward pressure on unsecured money market rates, as anticipated, and the offered rate continued to provide a soft floor for secured rates. Changes in the ON RRP offered rate induced changes in the spread between the IOER rate of 25 basis points and the ON RRP offered rate for those days. Those changes did not appear to affect the volume of activity in the federal funds market. 1. For further discussion of how the alternative policy tools affect a range of short-term interest rates, see the box “Planning for Monetary Policy Implementation during Normalization” in Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2014), Monetary Policy Report (Washington: Board of Governors, July), www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/ mpr_20140715_part2.htm. 2. The types of counterparties that are currently eligible to participate in the Federal Reserve’s ON RRP operations include depository institutions, money market funds, government-sponsored enterprises, and primary dealers, while only depository institutions may participate in TDF operations. At its December 2014 meeting, the FOMC reauthorized the ON RRP test operations through January 29, 2016. On January 16, 2015, the Federal Reserve Bank of New y﻿ork announced the addition of 25 RRP counterparties, bringing the total number of counterparties to 164. These newly added counterparties are currently in the process of finalizing the operational details. Results of RRP operations can be found on the Federal Reserve Bank of New y﻿ork’s website at www. newyorkfed.org/markets/omo/dmm/temp.cfm, and results of the TDF operations can be found on the Federal Reserve Board’s website at www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/ tdf.htm. The term RRP operations approved for the end of 2014 were aimed at providing the FOMC with information about the potential effectiveness of this supplementary policy tool in helping to control 3. For a discussion of issues related to the use of ON RRPs as a supplementary tool during normalization, see Josh Frost, Lorie Logan, Antoine Martin, Patrick McCabe, Fabio Natalucci and Julie Remache (2015), “Overnight RRP Operations as a Monetary Policy Tool: Some Design Considerations,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-010 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February), www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/feds/2015/ files/2015010pap.pdf. 4. As term RRP operations crossing year-end were conducted in addition to ON RRP operations, the limit on the overall size of the ON RRP operations did not bind at year- end. the federal funds rate, particularly when there are significant and transitory shifts in money market activity, such as over quarter- and year-ends. To this end, the Federal Reserve conducted term RRP operations on December 8, 15, 22, and 29, with offering amounts of $50 billion for each of the first two operations and $100 billion for each of the latter two operations.5 Although the first two term auctions were oversubscribed, the third and fourth term operations were undersubscribed. Overall, the ON RRP and term RRP operations appeared to ease downside rate pressures in money markets over year-end, and the unwinding of all four term operations on January 5, 2015, was orderly. The Federal Reserve will conduct a further test of term RRPs over quarter-ends with a series of term RRP operations spanning the March 2015 quarter-end. Also, to help advance its understanding of how term RRPs could help to control the federal funds rate, the Federal Reserve has begun a series of four term RRP test operations that do not span a quarter-end date. The first two of these operations were conducted on February 12 and on February 19. Both operations were oversubscribed, and the awarded interest rate on these two term RRPs was in line with the awarded rate on concurrent ON RRP operations. The Federal Reserve’s testing of the TDF also continued to evolve in the second half of 2014 and 5. For details on the format of these operations, see the NOTE: ON RRP is overnight reverse repurchase agreement. On September 30, 2014, ON RRP bids were $407 billion and allotments were $300 billion. early 2015, with the aim of increasing participation by depository institutions as well as improving operational readiness. Since the previous Monetary Policy Report, the Federal Reserve conducted two series of TDF test operations. In the second half of 2014, a series of eight TDF test operations included an early withdrawal feature that allowed depository institutions to withdraw funds held in term deposits on payment of an early withdrawal penalty.6 The maximum award amount per institution and the interest rate paid on term deposits offered through the facility were raised gradually over the course of the series in a manner broadly similar to the series of test operations conducted earlier in the year that did not include an early withdrawal feature. The level of activity increased considerably relative to the earlier test operations, with take-up reaching just over $400 billion at the final operation and nearly 100 depository institutions participating (figure B). In the second series of test operations, held in February 2015, the Federal Reserve conducted a series of weekly TDF operations offering 21-day term deposits that settled on the same day the operation was executed, eliminating the 3-day lag between the execution of an operation and settlement in previous tests. On net, the series results provide additional evidence that significant take-up can occur at a few basis points over the IOER rate even for longer terms. 6. The early withdrawal option makes such deposits eligible to meet requirements under the Basel III Liquidity Coverage Ratio. Deposits awarded (left scale) Participants (right scale) Early withdrawal feature introduced The following material appeared as an addendum to the minutes of the December 16–17, 2014, meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee. In conjunction with the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting held on December 16–17, 2014, meeting participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real output growth, the unemployment rate, inflation, and the federal funds rate for each year from 2014 to 2017 and over the longer run.10 Each participant’s projection was based on information available at the time of the meeting plus his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy and assumptions about the factors likely to affect economic outcomes. The longer- run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the value to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. “Appropriate monetary policy” is defined as the future path of policy that each participant deems most likely to foster outcomes for economic activity and inflation that best satisfy his or her individual interpretation of the Federal Reserve’s objectives of maximum employment and stable prices. 10. As discussed in its Policy Normalization Principles and Plans, released on September 17, 2014, the Committee intends to target a range for the federal funds rate during normalization. Participants were asked to provide, in their contributions to the Summary of Economic Projections, either the midpoint of the target range for the federal funds rate for any period when a range was anticipated or the target level for the federal funds rate, as appropriate. In the lower panel of figure 2, these values have been rounded to the nearest 1/8 percentage point. Overall, FOMC participants expected that, after a slowdown in the first half of 2014, economic growth under appropriate policy would be faster in the second half of 2014 and over 2015 and 2016 than their estimates of the U.S. economy’s longer-run normal growth rate. On balance, participants then saw economic growth moving back toward their assessments of its longer-run pace in 2017 (table 1 and figure 1). Most participants projected that the Longer run Longer run Note: Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP) and projections for both measures of inflation are percent changes from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. PCE inflation and core PCE inflation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) and the price index for PCE excluding food and energy. Projections for the unemployment rate are for the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. Each participant’s projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy. Longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. The September projections were made in conjunction with the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on September 16–17, 2014. 1. The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each year. 2. The range for a variable in a given year includes all participants’ projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year. 3. Longer-run projections for core PCE inflation are not collected. Figure 1. Central tendencies and ranges of economic projections, 2014–17 and over the longer run NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. The data for the actual values of the variables are annual. Longer run Longer run Longer run Longer run unemployment rate will continue to decline in 2015 and 2016, and all participants projected that the unemployment rate will be at or below their individual judgments of its longer-run normal level by the end of 2016. All participants projected that inflation, as measured by the four-quarter change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), would rise gradually, on balance, over the next few years. Most participants saw inflation approaching the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run objective in 2016 and 2017. While a few participants projected that inflation would rise temporarily above 2 percent during the forecast period, many others expected inflation to remain low through 2017. Participants judged that it would be appropriate to begin raising the target range for the federal funds rate over the projection period as labor market indicators and inflation move back toward values the Committee judges consistent with the attainment of its mandated objectives of maximum employment and stable prices. As shown in figure 2, all but a couple of participants anticipated that it would be appropriate to begin raising the target range for the federal funds rate in 2015, with most projecting that it will be appropriate to raise the target federal funds rate fairly gradually. Most participants viewed the uncertainty associated with their outlooks for economic growth and the unemployment rate as broadly similar to the average level of the past 20 years. Most participants also judged the level of uncertainty about inflation to be broadly similar to the average level of the past 20 years, although a few participants viewed it as higher. In addition, most participants continued to see the risks to the outlook for economic growth and for the unemployment rate as broadly balanced. A majority saw the risks to inflation as broadly balanced; however, a number of participants saw the risks to inflation as weighted to the downside, while one judged these risks as tilted to the upside. Participants projected that, conditional on their individual assumptions about appropriate monetary policy, growth in real gross domestic product (GDP) would pick up from its low level in the first half of 2014 and run above their estimates of its longer-run normal rate in the second half of 2014 and over 2015 and 2016. Participants pointed to a number of factors that they expected would contribute to stronger real output growth, including improving labor market conditions, lower energy prices, rising household net worth, diminishing restraint from fiscal policy, and highly accommodative monetary policy. On balance, participants saw real GDP growth moving back toward, but remaining at or somewhat above, its longer-run rate in 2017 as monetary policy adjusts appropriately. In general, participants’ revisions to their forecasts for real GDP growth relative to their projections for the September meeting were modest. However, all participants revised up their projections of real GDP growth somewhat for 2014, with a number of them noting that recent data releases regarding real economic activity had been stronger than anticipated. The central tendencies of participants’ current projections for real GDP growth were 2.3 to 2.4 percent in 2014, 2.6 to 3.0 percent in 2015, 2.5 to 3.0 percent in 2016, and 2.3 to 2.5 percent in 2017. The central tendency of the projections of real GDP growth over the longer run was 2.0 to 2.3 percent, unchanged from September. All participants projected that the unemployment rate will decline, on balance, through 2016, and all participants projected that, by the end of that year, the unemployment rate will be at or below their individual judgments of its longer-run normal level. The central tendencies of participants’ forecasts for the unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of each year were 5.8 percent in 2014, 5.2 to 5.3 percent in 2015, 5.0 to 5.2 percent in 2016, and 4.9 to 5.3 percent Longer run NOTE: In the upper panel, the height of each bar denotes the number of FOMC participants who judge that, under appropriate monetary policy, the first increase in the target range for the federal funds rate from its current range of 0 to ¼ percent will occur in the specified calendar year. In September 2014, the numbers of FOMC participants who judged that the first increase in the target federal funds rate would occur in 2014, 2015, and 2016 were, respectively, 1, 14, and 2. In the lower panel, each shaded circle indicates the value (rounded to the nearest ⅛ percentage point) of an individual participant’s judgment of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the appropriate target level for the federal funds rate at the end of the specified calendar year or over the longer run. in 2017. Almost all participants’ projected paths for the unemployment rate shifted down slightly through 2015 compared with their projections in September; many participants noted that recent data pointing to improving labor market conditions were an important factor underlying the downward revisions in their unemployment rate forecasts. The central tendency of participants’ estimates of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment that would prevail under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy was unchanged at 5.2 to 5.5 percent; the range of these estimates was 5.0 to 5.8 percent, down slightly from 5.0 to 6.0 percent in September. Figures 3.A and 3.B show that participants held a range of views regarding the likely outcomes for real GDP growth and the unemployment rate through 2017. Some of the diversity of views reflected their individual assessments of the effects of lower oil prices on consumer spending and business investment, of the rate at which the forces that have been restraining the pace of the economic recovery would continue to abate, of the trajectory for growth in consumption as labor market slack diminishes, and of the appropriate path of monetary policy. Relative to September, the dispersion of participants’ projections for real GDP growth was little changed from 2015 to 2017, while for the unemployment rate, the dispersion was a bit narrower. Compared with September, the central tendencies of participants’ projections for PCE inflation under the assumption of appropriate monetary policy moved down for 2014 and 2015 but were largely unchanged for 2016 and 2017. In commenting on the changes to their projections, many participants indicated that the significant decline in energy prices and the appreciation of the dollar since the Committee’s September meeting likely will put temporary downward pressure on inflation. The central tendencies of participants’ projections for core PCE inflation moved down somewhat for 2015 but were mostly unchanged in other years. Almost all participants projected that PCE inflation would rise gradually, on balance, over the period from 2015 to 2017, reaching a level at or near the Committee’s 2 percent objective. A few participants expected PCE inflation to rise slightly above 2 percent at some point during the forecast period, while many others expected inflation to remain below 2 percent for the entire period. The central tendencies for PCE inflation were 1.2 to 1.3 percent in 2014, 1.0 to 1.6 percent in 2015, 1.7 to 2.0 percent in 2016, and 1.8 to 2.0 percent in 2017. The central tendencies of the forecasts for core inflation were higher than those for the headline measure in 2014 and 2015, reflecting the effects of lower oil prices. The central tendencies of the two measures were equal in 2016 and in 2017. Factors cited by participants as likely to contribute to a gradual rise of inflation toward the Committee’s longer- run objective of 2 percent included stable longer-term inflation expectations, steadily diminishing resource slack, a pickup in wage growth, waning effects of declines in oil prices, and still-accommodative monetary policy. Figures 3.C and 3.D provide information on the diversity of participants’ views about the outlook for inflation. In addition to moving lower, the range of participants’ projections for PCE inflation in 2015 widened somewhat relative to September, likely reflecting in part differences in participants’ assessments of the effects of the recent decline in energy prices on the outlook for inflation. The ranges for core inflation narrowed in 2014 and 2015. In other years of the projection, the ranges of the inflation projections were relatively little changed. The range for both measures in 2017 continued to show a very substantial concentration near the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run objective by that time. Figure 3.A. Distribution of participants’ projections for the change in real GDP, 2014–17 and over the longer run 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 2.6 2.7 2.8 2.9 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 2.6 2.7 2.8 2.9 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 2.6 2.7 2.8 2.9 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 2.6 2.7 2.8 2.9 Longer run 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 2.6 2.7 2.8 2.9 NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 3.0 3.1 3.0 3.1 3.0 3.1 3.0 3.1 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.2 3.3 3.2 3.3 3.2 3.3 3.2 3.3 Figure 3.B. Distribution of participants’ projections for the unemployment rate, 2014–17 and over the longer run 4.6 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.0 5.1 5.2 5.3 5.4 5.5 5.6 5.7 5.8 5.9 6.0 6.1 4.6 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.0 5.1 5.2 5.3 5.4 5.5 5.6 5.7 5.8 5.9 6.0 6.1 4.6 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.0 5.1 5.2 5.3 5.4 5.5 5.6 5.7 5.8 5.9 6.0 6.1 4.6 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.0 5.1 5.2 5.3 5.4 5.5 5.6 5.7 5.8 5.9 6.0 6.1 Longer run 4.6 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.0 5.1 5.2 5.3 5.4 5.5 5.6 5.7 5.8 5.9 6.0 6.1 NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. Figure 3.C. Distribution of participants’ projections for PCE inflation, 2014–17 and over the longer run 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 Longer run 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 2.1 2.2 2.1 2.2 2.1 2.2 2.1 2.2 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.3 2.4 2.3 2.4 2.3 2.4 2.3 2.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 Percent range 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 Percent range 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 Percent range 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 Percent range NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 Participants judged that it would be appropriate to begin raising the target range for the federal funds rate over the projection period as labor market indicators and inflation move back toward values the Committee judges consistent with the attainment of its mandated objectives of maximum employment and price stability. As shown in figure 2, all but two participants anticipated that it would be appropriate to begin raising the target range for the federal funds rate during 2015. However, most projected that the appropriate level of the federal funds rate would remain considerably below its longer-run normal level through 2016. Most participants expected the appropriate level of the federal funds rate would be near, or already would have reached, their individual view of its longer-run normal level by the end of 2017. All participants projected that the unemployment rate would be at or below 5.5 percent at the end of the year in which they judged the initial increase in the target range for the federal funds rate would be warranted, and all but one anticipated that inflation would be at or below the Committee’s 2 percent goal at the end of that year. Most participants projected that the unemployment rate would be at or somewhat above their estimates of its longer-run normal level at that time. Figure 3.E provides the distribution of participants’ judgments regarding the appropriate level of the target federal funds rate, conditional on their assessments of the economic outlook, at the end of each calendar year from 2014 to 2017 and over the longer run. All participants judged that economic conditions would warrant maintaining the current exceptionally low level of the federal funds rate into 2015. The median values of the federal funds rate at the end of 2015 and 2016 fell 25 basis points and 38 basis points relative to September, to 1.13 percent and 2.50 percent, respectively, while the mean values fell 15 basis points for both years, to 1.13 percent in 2015 and 2.54 percent in 2016. The dispersion of the projections for the appropriate level of the federal funds rate was narrower in 2014 and 2015 and was little changed in 2016 and 2017. Most participants judged that it would be appropriate to set the federal funds rate at or near its longer-run normal level in 2017, although a number of them projected that the federal funds rate would still need to be set appreciably below its longer-run normal level at that time and one anticipated that it would be appropriate to target a level noticeably above its longer-run normal level. Participants provided a number of reasons why they thought it would be appropriate for the federal funds rate to remain below its longer-run normal level for some time after inflation and the unemployment rate were near mandate- consistent levels. These reasons included an assessment that the headwinds that have been holding back the recovery will continue to exert some restraint on economic activity at that time, that residual slack in the labor market will still be evident in other measures of labor utilization, and that the risks to the economic outlook are asymmetric as a result of the constraints on monetary policy associated with the effective lower bound on the federal funds rate. As in September, estimates of the longer-run level of the federal funds rate ranged from 3.25 to 4.25 percent. All participants judged that inflation over the longer run would be equal to the Committee’s inflation objective of 2 percent, implying that their individual judgments regarding the appropriate longer- run level of the real federal funds rate in the absence of further shocks to the economy ranged from 1.25 to 2.25 percent. Participants’ views of the appropriate path for monetary policy were informed by their judgments about the state of the economy, including the values of the unemployment rate and other labor market indicators that would be consistent with maximum employment, the extent to which the economy was currently falling short of maximum employment, Figure 3.E. Distribution of participants’ projections for the target federal funds rate, 2014–17 and over the longer run 0.00 0.37 0.38 0.62 0.63 0.87 0.88 1.12 1.13 1.37 1.38 1.62 1.63 1.87 1.88 2.12 2.38 2.62 Percent range 2.13 2.37 2.63 2.87 2.88 3.12 3.13 3.37 3.38 3.62 3.63 3.87 3.88 4.12 4.13 4.37 4.38 4.62 0.00 0.37 0.38 0.62 0.63 0.87 0.88 1.12 1.13 1.37 1.38 1.62 1.63 1.87 1.88 2.12 2.38 2.62 Percent range 2.13 2.37 2.63 2.87 2.88 3.12 3.13 3.37 3.38 3.62 3.63 3.87 3.88 4.12 4.13 4.37 4.38 4.62 0.00 0.37 0.38 0.62 0.63 0.87 0.88 1.12 1.13 1.37 1.38 1.62 1.63 1.87 1.88 2.12 2.38 2.62 Percent range 2.13 2.37 2.63 2.87 2.88 3.12 3.13 3.37 3.38 3.62 3.63 3.87 3.88 4.12 4.13 4.37 4.38 4.62 0.00 0.37 0.38 0.62 0.63 0.87 0.88 1.12 1.13 1.37 1.38 1.62 1.63 1.87 1.88 2.12 2.38 2.62 Percent range 2.13 2.37 2.63 2.87 2.88 3.12 3.13 3.37 3.38 3.62 3.63 3.87 3.88 4.12 4.13 4.37 4.38 4.62 Longer run 0.00 0.37 0.38 0.62 0.63 0.87 0.88 1.12 1.13 1.37 1.38 1.62 1.63 1.87 1.88 2.12 2.38 2.62 Percent range 2.13 2.37 2.63 2.87 2.88 3.12 3.13 3.37 3.38 3.62 3.63 3.87 3.88 4.12 4.13 4.37 4.38 4.62 NOTE: The target federal funds rate is measured as the level of the target rate at the end of the calendar year or in the longer run. the prospects for inflation to return to the Committee’s longer-term objective of 2 percent, the desire to minimize potential disruption in financial markets by avoiding unusually rapid increases in the federal funds rate, and the balance of risks around the outlook. Some participants also mentioned the prescriptions of various monetary policy rules as factors they considered in judging the appropriate path for the federal funds rate. Nearly all participants continued to judge the levels of uncertainty attending their projections for real GDP growth and the unemployment rate as broadly similar to the norms during the previous 20 years (figure 4).11 Most participants continued to see the risks to their outlooks for real GDP growth as broadly balanced. A few participants viewed the risks to real GDP growth as weighted to the downside; one viewed the risks as weighted to the upside. Those participants who viewed the risks as weighted to the downside cited, for example, concern about the limited ability of monetary policy at the effective lower bound to respond to further negative shocks to the economy or about the trajectory for economic growth abroad. As in September, nearly all participants judged the risks to the outlook for the unemployment rate to be broadly balanced. 11. Table 2 provides estimates of the forecast uncertainty for the change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, and total consumer price inflation over the period from 1994 through 2013. At the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty” discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty in the economic forecasts and explains the approach used to assess the uncertainty and risks attending the participants’ projections. Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges Percentage points note: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root mean squared error of projections for 1994 through 2013 that were released in the winter by various private and government forecasters. As described in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain assumptions, there is about a 70 percent probability that actual outcomes for real GDP, unemployment, and consumer prices will be in ranges implied by the average size of projection errors made in the past. For more information, see David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip (2007), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook from Historical Forecasting Errors,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2007-60 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November), available at www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds/2007/200760/200760abs. html; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Division of Research and Statistics (2014), “Updated Historical Forecast Errors,” memorandum, April 9, www.federalreserve.gov/foia/files/20140409- historical-forecast-errors.pdf. 1. Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure that has been most widely used in government and private economic forecasts. Projection is percent change, fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. As in September, participants generally agreed that the levels of uncertainty associated with their inflation forecasts were broadly similar to historical norms, and most saw the risks to those projections as broadly balanced. A number of participants, however, viewed the risks to their inflation forecasts as tilted to the downside; the reasons discussed included the possibility that the recent low levels of inflation could prove more persistent than anticipated; the possibility that the upward pull on prices from inflation expectations might be weaker than assumed; or the judgment that, in current circumstances, it would be difficult for the Committee to respond effectively to low-inflation outcomes. Conversely, one participant saw upside risks to inflation, citing uncertainty about the timing and efficacy of the Committee’s withdrawal of monetary policy accommodation. Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Risks to core PCE inflation Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside NOTE: For definitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. The economic projections provided by the members of the Board of Governors and the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks inform discussions of monetary policy among policymakers and can aid public understanding of the basis for policy actions. Considerable uncertainty attends these projections, however. The economic and statistical models and relationships used to help produce economic forecasts are necessarily imperfect descriptions of the real world, and the future path of the economy can be affected by myriad unforeseen developments and events. Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, participants consider not only what appears to be the most likely economic outcome as embodied in their projections, but also the range of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of their occurring, and the potential costs to the economy should they occur. Table 2 summarizes the average historical accuracy of a range of forecasts, including those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports and those prepared by the Federal Reserve Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee. The projection error ranges shown in the table illustrate the considerable uncertainty associated with economic forecasts. For example, suppose a participant projects that real gross domestic product (GDP) and total consumer prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty attending those projections is similar to that experienced in the past and the risks around the projections are broadly balanced, the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a probability of about 70 percent that actual GDP would expand within a range of 2.1 to 3.9 percent in the current year, 1.2 to 4.8 percent in the second year, and 0.9 to 5.1 percent in the third and fourth years. The corresponding 70 percent confidence intervals for overall inflation would be 1.8 to 2.2 percent in the current year, 1.1 to 2.9 percent in the second year, and 1.0 to 3.0 percent in the third and fourth years. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over history, participants provide judgments as to whether the uncertainty attached to their projections of each variable is greater than, smaller than, or broadly similar to typical levels of forecast uncertainty in the past, as shown in table 2. Participants also provide judgments as to whether the risks to their projections are weighted to the upside, are weighted to the downside, or are broadly balanced. That is, participants judge whether each variable is more likely to be above or below their projections of the most likely outcome. These judgments about the uncertainty and the risks attending each participant’s projections are distinct from the diversity of participants’ views about the most likely outcomes. Forecast uncertainty is concerned with the risks associated with a particular projection rather than with divergences across a number of different projections. As with real activity and inflation, the outlook for the future path of the federal funds rate is subject to considerable uncertainty. This uncertainty arises primarily because each participant’s assessment of the appropriate stance of monetary policy depends importantly on the evolution of real activity and inflation over time. If economic conditions evolve in an unexpected manner, then assessments of the appropriate setting of the federal funds rate would change from that point forward. bank holding company emerging market economy The Board of Governors is pleased to submit its Monetary Policy Report to the Congress pursuant to section 2B of the Federal Reserve Act. Economic activity continued to recover over the first half of 2011, but the pace of the expansion has been modest. The subdued rate of expansion reflects in part factors that are likely to be temporary, including the damping effect of higher food and energy prices on consumer spending as well as supply chain disruptions associated with the tragic earthquake in Japan. None- theless, even after setting aside temporary influences, the growth of economic activity appears to have slowed over the first half of this year. Conditions in the labor market remain weak. Although the average pace of job creation picked up during the early months of the year, employment growth softened in May and June and the unemployment rate edged up. Meanwhile, consumer price inflation increased noticeably in the first part of the year, reflecting in part higher prices for some commodities and imported goods as well as shortages of several popular models of automobiles. The recent rise in inflation is expected to subside as the effects of past increases in the prices of energy and other commodities dissipate in an environment of stable longer-term inflation expectations, and as supply chain disruptions in the automobile industry are remediated. On net, financial market conditions became some- what more supportive of economic growth in the first half of 2011, partly reflecting the continued monetary policy accommodation provided by the Federal Reserve. Yields on Treasury securities and corporate debt as well as rates on fixed-rate residential mortgages fell to very low levels, on balance, over the first half of the year, and equity prices rose. Borrowing conditions for households and businesses eased somewhat further, although credit conditions remained tight for some borrowers. After rising at an annual rate of 2¾ percent in the second half of 2010, real gross domestic product (GDP) increased at about a 2 percent rate in the first quarter of 2011. Available information suggests that the pace of economic growth remained soft in the sec- ond quarter. Real consumer spending, which had brightened near the end of 2010, rose at a noticeably slower rate over the first five months of 2011, as house- hold purchasing power was constrained by the weak pace of nominal income growth and by rising fuel and food prices, and as consumers remained downbeat. Meanwhile, the housing market continued to be weighed down by the large inventory of vacant houses for sale, the substantial volume of distressed sales, and by homebuyers’ concerns about the strength of the recovery and fears of future declines in house prices. In the government sector, state and local government budgets continued to be very tight, as a reduction in federal assistance to those governments was only par- tially offset by an increase in tax collections; in addi- tion, federal spending appears to have contracted. In contrast, exports—which have been a bright spot in the recovery—moved up briskly, and businesses continued to increase their outlays for equipment and software. In the labor market, private payroll employment gains picked up in the first four months of the year, averaging about 200,000 jobs per month, an improve- ment from the average of 125,000 jobs per month recorded in the second half of 2010. However, private employment gains slowed sharply in May and June, averaging only 65,000 per month, with the step-down widespread across industries. Furthermore, the unem- ployment rate, which leveled off at around 9 percent in the early months of the year, has edged up since then, reaching 9.2 percent in June. The share of the unem- ployed who have been jobless for six months or longer remained close to 45 percent, a post–World War II high. Consumer price inflation picked up noticeably in the first part of 2011. Prices for personal consumption expenditures rose at an annual rate of about 4 percent over the first five months of the year, compared with an annual rate of increase of a little less than 2 percent during the second half of 2010. A significant portion of the rise in inflation was associated with energy and food prices, reflecting the pass-through to retail prices of surges in the costs of crude oil and a wide range of agricultural commodities. Recently, however, these commodity prices have apparently stabilized, a devel- opment that should ease pressure on consumer energy and food prices in coming months. Another important source of upward pressure on inflation during the first half of the year was a sharp acceleration in the prices of other imported items. This factor contributed to a pickup in consumer inflation for items other than food and energy; over the first five months of this year, such inflation ran at an annual rate of more than 2 percent, up from an unusually low ½ percent annual rate of increase over the second half of 2010. Despite the increase in inflation, longer-term inflation expectations remained stable. In U.S. financial markets, strong corporate profits and investors’ perceptions that the economic recovery was firming supported a rise in equity prices and a nar- rowing of credit spreads in the early part of the year. By May, however, indications that the economic recov- ery in the United States was proceeding at a slower pace than previously anticipated—as well as a per- ceived moderation in global economic growth and heightened concerns about the persisting fiscal prob- lems in Europe—weighed on market sentiment, prompting a pullback from riskier financial assets. On net over the first half of the year, yields on longer-term Treasury securities declined. Yields on corporate debt and other fixed-income products as well as rates on fixed-rate residential mortgages fell from already low levels, and credit spreads were little changed. Broad equity price indexes rose significantly, on balance, over the first half of the year; however, stock prices of banks declined. By early July, investors had marked down their expectations for the path of the federal funds rate rela- tive to the trajectory anticipated at the start of the year in response to economic and financial developments and the reiteration by the Federal Open Market Com- mittee (FOMC) that it expected to maintain exception- ally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period. These same factors, as well as safe-haven demands stemming from investor concerns about global economic growth and about developments in Europe, contributed to the decline in nominal Treasury yields. Thus far, uncertainties surrounding the outcome of discussions to raise the U.S. government’s statutory debt limit do not appear to have left an appreciable imprint on Treasury prices, but investors have noted statements by major ratings agencies regarding the actions the agencies may take if the fiscal situation is not adequately addressed. Measures of inflation com- pensation derived from yields on nominal and inflation-indexed Treasury securities fluctuated over the first half of the year in response to changes in com- modity prices and the outlook for economic growth. On balance, medium-term inflation compensation edged higher over the first half of the year, but com- pensation further out was little changed. Large nonfinancial corporations with access to capi- tal markets took advantage of favorable financial mar- ket conditions to issue debt at a robust pace in the first half of the year, and issuance of corporate bonds and syndicated leveraged loans surged. The portfolios of commercial and industrial loans on banks’ books expanded as standards and terms for such loans eased further and demand increased. In contrast, despite some improvement over the first half of the year, credit conditions for small businesses appeared to remain tight and demand for credit by such firms was sub- dued. Financing conditions for commercial real estate assets eased somewhat, but the fundamentals in com- mercial real estate markets stayed extremely weak. Household debt continued to contract in the first half of 2011, driven primarily by the ongoing decline in mortgage debt. Even though mortgage rates remained near historically low levels, demand for new mortgage loans was weak, reflecting still-depressed conditions in housing markets and the uncertain out- look for the economic recovery and labor markets. Delinquency rates on most categories of mortgages edged lower but stayed near recent highs. The number of homes entering the foreclosure process declined in the first quarter of 2011, but the number of properties at some point in the foreclosure process remained elevated. Mortgage servicers continued to grapple with deficiencies in their foreclosure procedures; resolution of these issues could eventually be associated with an increase in the number of foreclosure starts as servicers work through the backlog of severely delinquent loans more quickly. Revolving consumer credit—mostly credit card borrowing—also continued to contract, on net, although at a slower pace than in 2010. In con- trast, nonrevolving consumer credit, consisting pre- dominantly of auto and student loans, rose apprecia- bly in 2011, as rates on most types of these loans remained near the bottom of their historical ranges and as banks eased standards and terms for such loans. Issuance of consumer asset-backed securities, particu- larly securities backed by auto loans, was strong. Conditions in short-term funding markets changed little over the first several months of 2011, although signs of stress for some European financial institutions started to emerge as market participants became more concerned about potential exposures to the debts of peripheral European countries. To continue to support liquidity conditions in global money markets and to help minimize the risk that strains abroad could spread to the United States, the FOMC in June approved an extension of the temporary U.S. dollar liquidity swap arrangements with a number of foreign central banks until August 1, 2012. (SCOOS) indicated that dealers continued to gradually ease price and nonprice terms applicable to major classes of counterparties over the six months ending in May, and that demand for funding for a variety of security types increased over the same period. Investor appetite for risky assets likely supported issuance of some debt instruments (including speculative-grade corporate bonds and syndicated leveraged loans) and contributed to a narrowing of risk spreads evident in the first several months of the year. In addition, infor- mation from a variety of sources, including special questions in the SCOOS, suggested that the use of dealer-intermediated leverage increased modestly among both levered investors and traditionally unlevered investors, although the overall use of lever- age appeared to be roughly midway between its pre- crisis peak and post-crisis trough. In recent weeks, however, anecdotal information has suggested that investors have pulled back somewhat from risk-taking and that their use of leverage has declined. With the unemployment rate still elevated and infla- tion expected to subside to levels at or below those consistent, over the longer run, with the FOMC’s dual mandate of maximum employment and price stability, the Committee maintained a target range for the fed- eral funds rate of 0 to ¼ percent throughout the first half of 2011. The Committee reiterated that economic conditions were likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate for an extended period. At the end of June, the Federal Reserve completed its program of purchasing $600 billion of longer-term Treasury securities that was announced in November. In addition, the Committee maintained its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) holdings in longer-term Treasury securities. The Federal Reserve continued to develop and test tools to eventually drain or immobilize large volumes of bank- ing system reserves in order to ensure that it will be able to smoothly and effectively exit from the current accommodative stance of policy at the appropriate time. The Committee will continue to monitor the eco- nomic outlook and financial developments, and it will act as needed to best foster maximum employment and price stability. The size and composition of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet continued to evolve over the first half of the year. As a result of the FOMC’s policies of rein- vesting principal payments from its securities holdings and purchasing additional longer-term Treasury secu- rities, holdings of Treasury securities rose more than $600 billion and holdings of agency debt and agency MBS declined about $115 billion. Emergency credit provided during the crisis continued to decline: The closing of a recapitalization plan for American Inter- national Group, Inc. (AIG), terminated the Federal Reserve’s direct assistance to AIG; the Federal Reserve Bank of New York sold some of the securities held in the portfolio of Maiden Lane II LLC, a special pur- pose vehicle that was established to acquire residential mortgage-backed securities from AIG; and loans out- standing under the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility continued to decline as improved conditions in securitization markets allowed borrowers to refinance and prepay loans made under the facility. On the liabil- ity side of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet, reserve balances held by depository institutions rose to $1.7 trillion, largely as a result of the Federal Reserve’s longer-term security purchase program. Federal Reserve notes in circulation also rose. The Treasury Department’s Supplementary Financing Account bal- ance at the Federal Reserve declined from $200 billion early in the year to $5 billion as part of the Treasury’s efforts to maximize flexibility in its debt management as the statutory debt limit approached. The economic projections prepared in conjunction with the June FOMC meeting are presented in Part 4 of this report.1 In broad terms, FOMC partici- pants (the members of the Board of Governors and the presidents of the 12 Federal Reserve Banks) marked down their forecasts for economic growth in 2011 relative to their forecasts in January and April, largely as a result of unexpected weakness in the first half of the year. Nonetheless, participants anticipated a modest acceleration in economic output in both 2012 and 2013 based on the effects of continued monetary policy accommodation, some further easing of credit conditions, a waning in the drag from elevated com- modity prices, and some pickup in spending from pent-up demand. Participants expected the unemploy- ment rate to trend down over the near term, though at a slower pace than they anticipated in January and April. They continued to anticipate that the unemploy- ment rate at the end of 2013 would remain well above their estimates of the longer-run rate that they see as consistent with the Committee’s dual mandate. Partici- pants’ forecasts indicated a pickup in inflation for 2011 relative to 2010 and their expectations earlier this year. However, most participants expected that the influence on inflation of higher commodity prices and supply disruptions from Japan would be temporary, and that inflation pressures would remain subdued against a backdrop of stable commodity prices, well-anchored 1. These projections were prepared in late June and thus did not inflation expectations, and large margins of slack in labor markets. As a result, they anticipated that overall inflation would step down in 2012 and remain at that lower level in 2013, moving back in line with core infla- tion at levels at or slightly below participants’ estimates of the longer-run, mandate-consistent rate of inflation. Participants generally reported that the levels of uncertainty attached to their projections for economic growth and inflation had risen since April and were above historical norms. Most participants judged that the balance of risks to economic growth was weighted to the downside, whereas in April, a majority had seen the risks to growth as balanced. Most participants saw the risks surrounding their inflation expectations as broadly balanced, while in April, a majority had judged those risks as skewed to the upside. Participants also reported their assessments of the rates to which macroeconomic variables would be expected to con- verge over the longer run under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. The central tendencies of these longer-run projections, which have not changed since April, were 2.5 to 2.8 percent for real GDP growth, 5.2 to 5.6 per- cent for the unemployment rate, and 1.7 to 2.0 percent for the inflation rate. Because inflation in the long run is largely determined by monetary policy, the longer- run projections for inflation can be viewed as the levels of inflation that FOMC participants consider to be most consistent with the Committee’s mandate to fos- ter maximum employment and price stability. After increasing at a solid pace in the fourth quarter of 2010, economic activity expanded more slowly over the first half of 2011. In the first quarter of this year, real gross domestic product (GDP) increased at an annual rate of 1.9 percent (figure 1); preliminary indicators suggest that the pace of the recovery remained soft in the second quarter. Activity in the second quarter was held down by factors that are likely to be temporary, including the damping effect of higher food and energy prices on consumer spending as well as the supply chain disruptions stemming from the earthquake in Japan. But even after setting aside those effects, the pace of economic expansion in the second quarter appears to have been subdued. In the labor market, employment gains picked up noticeably at the beginning of 2011 but slowed mark- edly in May and June. The unemployment rate, which fell in late 2010, held close to 9 percent during the early months of the year but then edged up, reaching 9.2 percent in June. Furthermore, long-duration job- lessness remained at near-record levels. Meanwhile, consumer price inflation moved up noticeably over the first half of the year, largely in response to rapid increases in the prices of some commodities and imported goods as well as the recent supply chain dis- ruptions (figure 2). However, longer-term inflation expectations remained stable. On balance, financial market conditions became somewhat more supportive of economic growth over the first half of 2011, reflecting in part continued mon- etary policy accommodation provided by the Federal Reserve. In the early part of the year, strong corporate profits and investors’ perceptions that the economic recovery was firming supported a rise in equity prices and a narrowing of credit spreads. Since May, however, indications that the U.S. economic recovery was pro- ceeding at a slower pace than previously anticipated, a perceived moderation in global growth, and heightened concerns about the persisting fiscal pressures in Europe weighed on investor sentiment and prompted a pull- back from riskier financial assets. On net over the first half of the year, yields on Treasury securities and cor- porate debt and rates on fixed-rate residential mort- gages declined, and equity prices rose significantly. Borrowing conditions for households and businesses eased somewhat further, although credit conditions continued to be tight for some borrowers. 1. Change in real gross domestic product, 2005–11 2. Change in the chain-type price index for personal consumption expenditures, 2005–11 Excluding food and energy NOTE: Here and in subsequent figures, except as noted, change for a given period is measured to its final quarter from the final quarter of the preceding period. NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through May 2011; changes are The housing market remained exceptionally weak in the first half of 2011. Housing demand continued to be restrained by households’ concerns about the strength of the recovery for incomes and jobs as well as the potential for further declines in house prices; still-tight credit conditions for potential mortgage borrowers with less-than-pristine credit also appear to be damp- ing demand. As a result, sales of single-family homes showed no signs of sustained recovery during the first half of the year. With demand weak, the overhang of vacant properties for sale substantial, distressed sales elevated, and construction financing tight, new units were started at an average annual rate of about 410,000 units between January and May—a bit below the level recorded in the fourth quarter of 2010 and just 50,000 units above the quarterly low reached in the first quar- ter of 2009 (figure 3). Activity in the multifamily sector has been a bit more buoyant, as the ongoing reluctance of potential homebuyers to purchase a home, compounded by tight mortgage credit standards, appears to have led to an increase in demand for rental housing. Indeed, vacancy rates for multifamily rental units have dropped notice- ably, and rents for apartments in multifamily buildings have moved up. However, construction financing remains difficult to obtain for many potential borrow- ers. Starts in the multifamily sector averaged 160,000 units at an annual rate in the first five months of 2011, noticeably above the 100,000 units started in the fourth 3. Private housing starts, 2001–11 NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through May 2011. SOURCE: Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. quarter of 2010 but still well below the 300,000-unit rate that had prevailed for much of the previous decade. House prices fell further over the first half of 2011. The latest readings from national indexes show price declines for existing homes over the past 12 months in the range of 5 to 8 percent (figure 4). One such meas- ure with wide geographic coverage—the CoreLogic repeat-sales index—fell 8 percent over the 12 months ending in May to a level that is about 4 percent below the previous trough in April of 2009. House prices are being held down by the same factors restraining hous- ing construction—the large inventory of unsold homes, the high number of distressed sales, and lack- luster household demand. The inventory of unsold homes will likely put downward pressure on house prices for some time, given the large number of seri- ously delinquent mortgages that could still enter the foreclosure inventory. As a result of the decline in house prices, the share of mortgages with negative equity has continued to rise: In March 2011, roughly one in four mortgage holders owed more on their mortgages than their homes were worth. Indicators of credit quality in the residential mort- gage sector continued to reflect strains on homeowners confronting depressed home values and high unem- ployment. Although delinquency rates on most catego- ries of mortgages edged modestly lower in the first part of 2011, they stayed at historically high levels (fig- ure 5). As of May, serious delinquency rates on loans 4. Prices of existing single-family houses, 2001–11 NOTE: The S&P/Case-Shiller and FHFA data are monthly and extend through April 2011. The CoreLogic data are monthly and extend through May 2011. Each index has been normalized so that its peak is 100. Both the CoreLogic price index and the FHFA index (formerly calculated by the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight) include purchase transactions only. The S&P/Case-Shiller index reflects all arm’s-length sales transactions in selected metropolitan areas. 5. Mortgage delinquency rates, 2000–11 Fixed rate Fixed rate NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through May 2011 for prime and near prime and April 2011 for subprime. Delinquency rate is the percent of loans 90 days or more past due or in foreclosure. to prime and near-prime borrowers stood at about 5 percent for fixed-rate loans and 14 percent for variable-rate loans.2 For subprime loans, as of April (the latest month for which data are available), serious delinquency rates remained near 20 percent for fixed- rate loans and 40 percent for variable-rate loans. The number of homes entering the foreclosure process declined in the first quarter of 2011, but the number of properties at some point in the foreclosure process remained elevated. Mortgage servicers continued to grapple with deficiencies in their foreclosure proce- dures; resolution of these issues could eventually be associated with an increase in the number of properties entering the foreclosure process as servicers work through the backlog of severely delinquent loans more quickly.3 2. A mortgage is defined as seriously delinquent if the borrower is 90 days or more behind in payments or the property is in foreclosure. 3. The Federal Reserve, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Office of Thrift Supervision, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation conducted an in-depth interagency review of practices at the largest mortgage servicing operations to examine foreclosure practices generally, but with an emphasis on the break- downs that led to inaccurate affidavits and other questionable legal documents being used in the foreclosure process. The review found, among other things, critical weaknesses in foreclosure-governance practices, foreclosure-documentation processes, and oversight and monitoring of third-party law firms and other vendors. Based on the findings from the review, the agencies issued enforcement actions by consent against 14 mortgage servicers in April 2011 to address the significant deficiencies in mortgage-servicing and foreclosure prac- Interest rates on fixed-rate mortgages fell, on net, during the first half of 2011, a move that largely paral- leled the decline in Treasury yields over the period (fig- ure 6). Even with mortgage rates near historically low levels, access to mortgage credit continued to be restrained by negative equity and tight lending stan- dards. For example, the April 2011 Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS) indicated that standards on prime and nontraditional residential mortgages and home equity loans were about unchanged or moderately tighter during the first quarter, and that demand for these loans continued to decline.4 The pace of mortgage applications for home purchases remained very sluggish in the first half of the year, probably reflecting the stringency of lending terms and the overall weakness of housing demand. Refinancing activity increased modestly in the second quarter in response to the downward drift in interest rates, but such activity remains subdued compared with that seen in 2010. Overall, mortgage debt out- standing continued to contract. guaranteed by government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs) expanded slightly in the first half of the year but remained relatively low, consistent with the slow pace of mortgage originations to finance home pur- chases. Net issuance of Ginnie Mae securities remained considerably more robust than net issuance of securities by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, reflect- ing the substantial share of mortgages insured by the Federal Housing Administration (FHA). The securiti- zation market for mortgage loans not guaranteed by a housing-related GSE or the FHA remained essentially closed. Yields on agency MBS fell roughly in line with those on Treasury securities. The Treasury Department announced on March 21 that it would begin to sell its $142 billion agency MBS portfolio at a pace of about $10 billion per month; the announcement appeared to have little lasting effect on spreads of yields on MBS over those on comparable-maturity Treasury securities. Through the end of June, the Treasury had sold MBS with a current face value of about $34 billion. 4. The SLOOS is available on the Federal Reserve Board’s website 6. Mortgage interest rates, 1995–2011 Fixed rate NOTE: The data, which are weekly and extend through July 6, 2011, are The rate of increase in consumer spending slowed appreciably during the first half of the year. After ris- ing at an annual rate of more than 3 percent in the sec- ond half of 2010, real personal consumption expendi- tures (PCE) stepped down to about a 2 percent rate of increase in the first quarter, and available information suggests that the rise in spending in the second quarter was quite modest as well (figure 7). Consumer outlays in the second quarter were held down in part by the reduced availability of motor vehicles, especially for those models affected by the supply chain disruptions that followed the earthquake in Japan; purchases of motor vehicles should rebound in coming months as dealer supplies are replenished. More fundamentally, 7. Real personal consumption expenditures, 2005–11 Billions of chained (2005) dollars NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through May 2011. SOURCE: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis. however, continued consumer pessimism and a slower pace of increase in real household income, only partly due to temporarily high energy and food prices, also appear to have weighed on consumption. The saving rate, although continuing to edge down, remains well above levels that prevailed prior to the recession (fig- ure 8). Despite a temporary reduction in payroll tax rates beginning in January, aggregate real disposable per- sonal income—personal income less personal taxes, adjusted for price changes—was unchanged, on net, over the first five months of the year after rising 2 per- cent in 2010 (figure 9). Before taxes, real wage and sal- ary income, which reflects both the number of hours worked and average hourly wages adjusted for infla- tion, was also flat from December to May after having risen 1¾ percent last year. Wage gains have been restrained by the weakness in the labor market. More- over, the purchasing power of wages and salaries has been drained by this year’s run-up in price inflation. One measure of real wages—average hourly earnings of all employees, adjusted for the rise in PCE prices— fell about 1½ percent at an annual rate over the first five months of 2011 after having increased ½ percent over the 12 months of 2010. lays are also acting as a restraint on spending. Although the wealth-to-income ratio has trended up since the beginning of 2009, it remains near the low end of the range that has prevailed since the mid-1990s (figure 10). In addition, consumer sentiment, which had moved up early in 2011, retreated again when gas prices spiked in the spring. More broadly, consumer sentiment seems to have improved little, if any, from 8. Personal saving rate, 1991–2011 NOTE: The data are quarterly and extend through 2011:Q2; the reading for 2011:Q2 is the average for April and May. 9. Change in real disposable personal income and in real NOTE: Through 2010, change is from December to December; for 2011, change is from December to May. the readings that were typical of 2009 and 2010 (fig- ure 11). Total household debt contracted at an annual rate of about 2 percent in the first quarter of the year, roughly the same pace seen in 2010, as the decline in mortgage debt noted earlier was only partially offset by a moder- ate increase in consumer credit. Tight credit conditions precluded some households from obtaining credit, and charge-offs remained elevated on many categories of loans. The ongoing reduction in overall household debt levels, combined with low interest rates and a slight increase in personal income, resulted in a further decline in the debt service ratio—the aggregate 10. Wealth-to-income ratio, 1991–2011 NOTE: The data are quarterly and extend through 2011:Q1. The wealth- to-income ratio is the ratio of household net worth to disposable personal income. 11. Consumer sentiment indexes, 2001–11 NOTE: The Conference Board data are monthly and extend through June 2011; the series is indexed to equal 100 in 1985. The Thomson Reuters/University of Michigan data are monthly and extend through June 2011; the series is indexed to equal 100 in 1966. required principal and interest payment on existing mortgages and consumer debt relative to income (fig- ure 12). Indeed, as of the first quarter of 2011, the debt service ratio was 11.5 percent, the lowest level seen since 1995. The modest expansion of consumer credit, which began in late 2010, reflects a mixed picture. Nonrevolv- ing consumer credit, which consists largely of auto and student loans and accounts for about two-thirds of total consumer credit, rose at an annual rate of almost 5 percent in the first five months of 2011. The increase is consistent with responses to the April 2011 SLOOS, 12. Household debt service, 1984–2011 NOTE: The data are quarterly and extend through 2011:Q1. Debt service payments consist of estimated required payments on outstanding mortgage and consumer debt. which indicated a sharp rise in banks’ willingness to make consumer installment loans and an ongoing eas- ing of terms and standards on them. However, revolv- ing consumer credit—mostly credit card borrowing— declined through April, albeit at a slower pace than in 2010; early estimates point to an increase in May. Although a net fraction of about 20 percent of banks responding to the April 2011 SLOOS reported an eas- ing of standards for approval of credit card applica- tions, access to credit card loans for borrowers with blemished credit histories remained limited. In addi- tion, the contraction in home equity loans, historically a source of funding for consumer durables and other large household expenditures, appears to have intensi- fied during the first half of 2011, in part owing to declines in home equity and still-stringent lending standards. Indicators of consumer credit quality generally improved. The delinquency rates on credit card loans, both at commercial banks and in securitized pools, retreated to less than 4 percent in the first quarter and May, respectively—at the low ends of their ranges over recent decades. Delinquencies on nonrevolving con- sumer loans at commercial banks also edged lower, while delinquencies on auto loans at captive finance companies were flat, on net, over the first four months of the year; both of these measures remained around their historical averages. Interest rates on consumer loans held fairly steady, on net, in the first half of 2011. Interest rates on new- auto loans continued to linger at historically low levels. Rates on credit card loans are around their historical averages, but the spread of these rates to the two-year Treasury yield is quite wide, in part because of pricing adjustments made in response to the Credit Card Accountability Responsibility and Disclosure Act, or Credit Card Act, of 2009.5 backed securities (ABS) remained at about the same pace as in 2010 but still well below average issuance rates prior to the financial crisis. Securities backed by auto loans made up a large share of the new supply. Issuance of credit card ABS, however, remained weak, as the sharp contraction in credit card lending limited the need for new funding and as last year’s accounting rule changes reportedly damped the attractiveness of securitizing these loans, particularly since banks 5. The Credit Card Act includes some provisions that place restrictions on issuers’ ability to impose certain fees and to engage in risk-based pricing. remained awash in other sources of cheap funding.6 Yields on ABS and the spreads of such yields over comparable-maturity interest rate swap rates were little changed, on net, over the first half of the year, stabiliz- ing at levels only slightly higher than those seen prior to the financial crisis (figure 13). Real business spending for equipment and software (E&S) rose at an annual rate of about 10 percent in the first quarter, roughly the same pace as in the second half of 2010 (figure 14). Business purchases of motor vehicles rose briskly, and outlays on information tech- nology (IT) capital and on equipment other than trans- portation and IT continued to rise at solid rates. More- recent data on orders and shipments for a broad range of equipment categories suggest that E&S spending will likely post another sizable gain in the second quar- ter. Spending is being boosted by the need to replace older, less-efficient equipment and, in some cases, to expand capacity. One soft spot in the second quarter will likely be in business purchases of motor vehicles, which, like consumer purchases, were held down by the shortages of Japanese nameplate cars in the wake of the earthquake in Japan, but this effect should be reversed during the second half of the year. By contrast, investment in nonresidential structures remains at a low level. After falling 17 percent in 2010, real business outlays on structures outside of the drill- ing and mining sector fell at an annual rate of 25 per- cent in the first quarter. Although the incoming data point to a small increase in outlays in the second quar- ter, high vacancy rates, continuing price declines in all but a few markets, and difficult financing conditions for builders suggest that spending will be weak for some time to come. However, spending on drilling and mining structures has continued to rise at a robust pace in response to elevated oil prices and advances in tech- nology for horizontal drilling and hydraulic fracturing. 6. Issued by the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB), Statements of Financial Accounting Standards Nos. 166 (Accounting for Transfers of Financial Assets, an Amendment of FASB Statement No. 140) and 167 (Amendments to FASB Interpretation No. 46(R)) became effective at the start of a company’s first fiscal year beginning after November 15, 2009, or, for companies reporting earnings on a calendar-year basis, after January 1, 2010. The amendments required many credit card issuers to bring securitizations onto their balance sheets and therefore to hold more capital against them. 13. Spreads of asset-backed securities yields over rates on comparable-maturity interest rate swaps, 2007–11 NOTE: The data are weekly and extend through July 7, 2011. The spreads shown are the yields on two-year fixed-rate asset-backed securities less rates on two-year interest rate swaps. 14. Change in real business fixed investment, 2005–11 Structures excluding mining and drilling Mining and drilling Real inventory investment stepped up in the first quar- ter, as stockbuilding outside of motor vehicles increased somewhat and motor vehicle inventories were about unchanged following a substantial fourth- quarter runoff (figure 15). Outside of the motor vehicle sector, the inventory-to-sales ratios for most industries covered by the Census Bureau’s book-value data remain near the levels observed before the recession, and surveys suggest that inventory positions for most businesses generally are not perceived as being exces- sive. In the motor vehicle sector, the effects of the earthquake in Japan and supply constraints on the pro- duction of some of the most fuel-efficient domestic nameplate cars led to a sharp drop in inventories in the second quarter, but some significant rebuilding of inventories is likely to occur this quarter. Operating earnings per share for S&P 500 firms contin- ued to rise in the first quarter of 2011, increasing at a quarterly rate of about 6 percent. With the latest rise, aggregate earnings per share advanced to their pre- crisis peak. During much of the first half of the year, analysts marked up their forecasts of year-ahead earn- ings by a modest amount; however, their forecasts were flat from May to June. The credit quality of nonfinancial corporations improved further in the first half of 2011 as firms con- tinued to strengthen their balance sheets. Liquid assets remained at record-high levels in the first quarter, and the aggregate ratio of debt to assets—a measure of 15. Change in real business inventories, 2005–11 Billions of chained (2005) dollars, annual rate corporate leverage—edged lower. Credit rating upgrades of corporate debt outpaced downgrades through June, and the six-month trailing bond default rate for nonfinancial firms remained close to zero. The delinquency rate on commercial and industrial (C&I) loans at commercial banks decreased in the first quar- ter to 2½ percent, about the middle of its range over the past two decades. Borrowing by nonfinancial corporations remained robust in the first half of the year, reflecting both strong corporate credit quality and favorable financing conditions in capital markets (figure 16). Gross issu- ance of nonfinancial corporate bonds rose to a monthly record high in May amid heavy issuance of both investment- and speculative-grade debt. Firms sought to refinance existing debt, lock in new funding at current low yields, and, to a lesser extent, finance merger and acquisition activity. The amount of unse- cured nonfinancial commercial paper outstanding also picked up a bit in the first half of the year. Issuance in the syndicated leveraged loan market reached pre-crisis levels, partly owing to heavy refinancing activity and in response to strong demand for floating-rate assets from institutional investors (figure 17). Likely reflecting in part an increased appetite for higher-yielding debt instruments, the market for collateralized loan obliga- tions (CLOs) showed signs of renewed activity, and issuance picked up. After declining sharply in 2009 and 2010, C&I loans on banks’ books rose at a vigorous pace in the first half of 2011. The SLOOSs of January 2011 and April 2011 showed that banks continued to ease standards and terms for C&I loans (figure 18). In April, more than half of the survey’s respondents reported having 16. Selected components of net financing for nonfinancial businesses, 2005–11 NOTE: The data for the components except bonds are seasonally adjusted. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Board, flow of funds data. trimmed spreads over their cost of funds on loans to firms of all sizes. Respondents also indicated that non- price loan terms have eased; these results were cor- roborated by the May 2011 Survey of Terms of Busi- ness Lending (STBL), which suggested that the average size of loan commitments at domestic banks and the average maturity of loans drawn on those commit- ments have trended up in recent quarters. Banks responding to the SLOOS also noted an ongoing firm- ing of demand for C&I loans, particularly by large and medium-sized firms. 18. Net percentage of domestic banks tightening standards and widening spreads over the banks’ cost of funds for large and medium-sized business borrowers, 1998–2011 NOTE: The data are drawn from a survey generally conducted four times per year; the last observation is from the April 2011 survey, which covers 2011:Q1. Net percentage is the percentage of banks reporting a tightening of standards or a widening of spreads less the percentage reporting an easing or a narrowing. The definition for firm size suggested for, and generally used by, survey respondents is that large and medium-sized firms have annual sales of $50 million or more. For small businesses, borrowing conditions remained tight. The May STBL revealed that the weighted- average spread on C&I loan commitments of less than $1 million stayed stubbornly high in recent quarters, in contrast to a modest decline in the spread on commit- ments of more than $1 million. However, some signs of improvement in credit availability for small businesses have emerged in recent months. In addition to the eas- ing of terms and standards for C&I loans reported in the April SLOOS, surveys conducted by the National Federation of Independent Business showed that the net fraction of small businesses reporting that credit had become more difficult to obtain than three months ago has declined to its lowest level since the financial crisis, although it remains well above its pre-crisis aver- age (figure 19). Moreover, the net percentage of respondents expecting credit conditions to become tighter over the next three months remained, on aver- age, lower than in 2010. Demand for credit by small businesses is still weak, with a historically small frac- tion of such businesses indicating that they have bor- rowing needs. In addition, the fraction of businesses that cited credit availability as the most important problem that they faced continued to be small; many firms pointed instead to weak demand from customers as their greatest concern. The fundamentals in commercial real estate (CRE) markets remained extremely weak in the first half of 2011, although financing conditions for certain CRE assets did see some modest improvement. Banks’ hold- ings of CRE loans continued to contract in the first 19. Net percentage of small businesses that reported more difficulty in obtaining credit, 1990–2011 NOTE: The data are drawn from a survey conducted monthly and are seasonally adjusted; the last observation is from the June 2011 survey, which covers May 2011. The data represent the proportion of borrowers who sought credit in the past three months that reported more difficulty in obtaining credit less the proportion that reported more ease in obtaining credit. half of the year, driven by reduced lending for con- struction and land development and sizable charge-offs on existing loans. Although delinquency rates for CRE loans at commercial banks receded slightly from recent peaks, they remained at historically high levels, while the delinquency rate for loans funded by commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) also continued to be elevated (figure 20). Responses to questions on CRE lending in the April 2011 SLOOS showed that most domestic banks reported no change in their lending standards for approving CRE loans, although a few large banks and foreign banks reported having eased such standards. On net, financing conditions for investment-quality properties—roughly, those with stable rent streams in large cities—improved in the first half of the year, although conditions worsened a bit in June with the more general pullback from risky assets. Secondary- market spreads for AAA-rated CMBS declined to mul- tiyear lows through May before retracing somewhat in June, and respondents to the Federal Reserve’s June 2011 Senior Credit Officer Opinion Survey on Dealer Financing Terms (SCOOS) indicated that funding for 20. Delinquency rates on commercial real estate loans, 1991–2011 NOTE: The data for commercial banks and life insurance companies are quarterly and extend through 2011:Q1. The data for commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) are monthly and extend through June 2011. The delinquency rates for commercial banks and CMBS are the percent of loans 30 days or more past due or not accruing interest. The delinquency rate for life insurance companies is the percent of loans 60 days or more past due or not accruing interest. less-liquid legacy CMBS had increased.7 New issuance of CMBS continued to pick up, with issuance in the first half of 2011 exceeding that in all of 2010. Renewed investor interest in high-quality properties has also been evident in investment flows into, and the share prices for, equity real estate investment trusts, or REITs. In the corporate equity market, combined gross issu- ance of seasoned and initial offerings continued in the first quarter of 2011 at the same solid pace seen throughout 2010 (figure 21). At the same time, how- ever, volumes of equity retirements from share repur- chases and cash-financed mergers and acquisitions remained high and continued to rise. The deficit in the federal unified budget remains elevated. The Congressional Budget Office (CBO) proj- ects that the deficit for fiscal year 2011 will be close to $1.4 trillion, or roughly 9 percent of GDP—a level comparable to deficits recorded in 2009 and 2010 but sharply higher than the deficits recorded prior to the onset of the recession and financial crisis. The budget deficit continues to be boosted by the effects of the stimulus policies enacted in recent years, including the provisions of the American Recovery and Reinvest- ment Act of 2009 (ARRA) and the Tax Relief, Unem- ployment Insurance Reauthorization, and Job Cre- ation Act of 2010. In addition, the weakness in the economy continues to damp revenues and boost pay- ments for income support. Federal receipts have risen rapidly lately—they are up about 10 percent in the first eight months of fiscal 2011 compared with the same period in fiscal 2010. Nonetheless, the level of receipts remains low; indeed, the ratio of receipts to national income is less than 16 percent, near the lowest reading for this ratio in 60 years (figure 22). The robust rise in revenues thus far this fiscal year is largely a result of strong growth in individual income tax receipts, likely reflecting some step-up in the growth of nominal wage and salary income and an increase in capital gains realizations. Corporate taxes in the first eight months of the fiscal year were up only about 5 percent from last year, as the effect of strong profits growth on receipts was partially 7. The SCOOS is available on the Federal Reserve Board’s website 21. Components of net equity issuance, 2005–11 NOTE: The data for 2011:Q1 are estimates. Net equity issuance is the difference between equity issued by domestic companies in public or private markets and equity retired through share repurchases, domestic cash-financed mergers, or foreign takeovers of U.S. firms. Equity issuance includes funds invested by private equity partnerships and stock option proceeds. offset by recent legislation providing more-favorable tax treatment for some business investment. Total federal outlays have risen nearly 6 percent in the first eight months of fiscal 2011 relative to the com- parable year-earlier period. Much of the increase in outlays this year relative to last has been related to financial transactions. In particular, repayments to the Treasury of obligations for the Troubled Asset Relief Program lowered measured outlays last year and hence reduced the base figure for this year’s comparison. 22. Federal receipts and expenditures, 1991–2011 NOTE: Through 2010, receipts and expenditures are for fiscal years (October through September); gross domestic product (GDP) is for the four quarters ending in Q3. For 2011, receipts and expenditures are for the 12 months ending in May, and GDP is the average of 2010:Q4 and 2011:Q1. Receipts and expenditures are on a unified-budget basis. Excluding these transactions, outlays were up less than 2 percent this year. This relatively small increase in outlays reflects reductions in both ARRA spending and unemployment insurance payments as well as a subdued pace of defense spending. By contrast, net interest payments have increased sharply, while most other spending has increased at rates comparable to fiscal 2010. As measured in the national income and product accounts (NIPA), real federal expenditures on con- sumption and gross investment—the part of federal spending that enters directly into the calculation of real GDP—fell at an annual rate of close to 8 percent in the first quarter (figure 23). Defense spending, which tends to be erratic from quarter to quarter, plunged almost 12 percent and nondefense purchases were unchanged. Federal debt expanded at a somewhat slower pace in the first half of this year than in 2010. On May 16, the federal debt reached the $14.294 trillion limit, and the Treasury began to implement extraordinary measures to extend its ability to fund government operations.8 The Treasury estimates that if the Congress does not raise the debt limit, the capacity of these extraordinary measures will be exhausted on August 2. Thus far, financial market participants do not seem to be pricing in significant odds of a “technical default.” However, the risk of such a default has been noted by the rating agencies. In June, Moody’s Investors Service, Fitch Ratings, and Standard & Poor’s each indicated that they may downgrade, to varying degrees, the credit rating of some or all U.S. debt securities if principal or interest payments are missed. Moody’s noted that even if default is avoided, its rating outlook would depend on the achievement of a credible agreement on sub- stantial deficit reduction. In mid-April, Standard & Poor’s revised its outlook for the federal government’s AAA long-term and A-1+ short-term sovereign credit ratings to negative, citing “material risks” that policy- makers might fail to reach an agreement within the next two years on how to address medium- and long- term fiscal imbalances. 8. On May 16, the Secretary of the Treasury declared a “debt issu- ance suspension period” for the Civil Service Retirement and Disabil- ity Fund, permitting the Treasury to redeem a portion of existing Treasury securities held by that fund as investments and to suspend issuance of new Treasury securities to that fund as investments. The Treasury also began suspending some of its daily reinvestment of Treasury securities held as investments by the Government Securities Investment Fund of the Federal Employees’ Retirement System Thrift Savings Plan. 23. Change in real government expenditures on consumption and investment, 2005–11 Federal debt held by the public reached about 65 percent of nominal GDP in the second quarter of 2011 and, according to CBO projections, will surpass 70 percent of GDP in 2012 (figure 24). Despite contin- ued high levels of federal government financing needs and the concerns raised by the debt limit, Treasury auctions have been generally well received so far this year. For the most part, bid-to-cover ratios and indica- tors of foreign participation at auctions fell within his- torical ranges. Demand for Treasury securities likely continued to be supported by heightened investor demand for relatively safe and liquid assets in light of fiscal troubles in some European countries. However, foreign net purchases of Treasury securities and the 24. Federal government debt held by the public, 1960–2011 NOTE: The data for debt through 2010 are as of year-end, and the corresponding values for GDP are for Q4 at an annual rate. The observation for 2011:Q2 is based on an estimate for debt in that quarter and GDP in the first quarter. Excludes securities held as investments of federal government accounts. pace of growth of foreign custody holdings of Treas- ury securities at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York moderated, on net, during the first half of the year. State and local governments remained under signifi- cant fiscal pressure in the first half of 2011. Over the first six months of the year, these governments cut an average of 28,000 jobs per month, similar to the pace of job loss observed in 2010. Real construction expen- ditures have also declined. After falling modestly in 2010, real structures investment by state and local gov- ernments plunged in the first quarter of 2011, and available information on nominal construction through May suggests that construction spending continued to decline in recent months. Although federal stimulus funds have boosted construction expenditures on high- ways and other transportation infrastructure, other types of construction spending—most notably con- struction of schools—have been declining. Capital expenditures are not typically subject to balanced bud- get requirements. Nevertheless, the payments of princi- pal and interest on the bonds used to finance capital projects are generally made out of operating budgets, which are subject to balanced budget constraints. As a result, state and local governments have had to make difficult choices even about this form of spending. State and local revenues appear to have risen moder- ately over the first half of this year. Many states reported strong revenue collections during the income tax filing season, but federal stimulus grants, while still sizable, have begun to phase out. At the local level, property tax collections appear to be softening as the sharp declines in house prices increasingly show through to assessments and hence to collections. Thus, despite the recent good news on state revenues, the state and local sector is likely to continue to face con- siderable budgetary strain for a while. Moreover, many state and local governments will need to set aside money in coming years to rebuild their employee pen- sion funds after the financial losses sustained over the past couple of years and to fund health-care benefits for their retired employees. While conditions in the municipal bond market improved somewhat in the first half of the year, those conditions continue to reflect ongoing concerns over the financial health of state and local governments. On balance this year, yields on long-term general obliga- tion bonds fell somewhat more than those on comparable-maturity Treasury securities; however, the ratio of municipal bond yields to Treasury yields remained high by historical standards. Credit default swap (CDS) spreads for many states narrowed to their lowest levels in at least a year but remain well above their pre-crisis levels, while downgrades of the credit ratings of state and local governments continued to outpace upgrades by a notable margin during the first half of the year. Issuance of long-term securities by state and local governments dropped to multiyear lows in the first half of 2011. In part, the decline is a consequence of the outsized issuance seen in the fourth quarter of 2010, when states and municipalities rushed to issue long- term bonds before the expiration of the Build America Bond program at the end of the year.9 However, the recent weakness likely also reflected tepid investor demand. Mutual funds that invest in long-term munici- pal bonds experienced heavy net outflows late last year and in January 2011. Net redemptions slowed substan- tially in subsequent months, and flows have been roughly flat since May. Both real exports and imports of goods and services expanded at a solid pace in the first quarter of 2011. Real exports increased at an annual rate of 7½ percent, supported by continued robust foreign demand and the lower value of the dollar (figure 25). Most major cat- egories of exports rose, with industrial supplies, capital goods, and automotive products posting the largest gains. Across trading partners, exports to Canada, Mexico, and other emerging market economies (EMEs) were particularly strong, while exports to the European Union (EU) and China were about flat. Data for April and May suggest that exports continued to grow at a robust pace in the second quarter. After moving up only modestly in the second half of 2010, real imports of goods and services accelerated noticeably in the first quarter of this year, increasing at an annual rate of almost 5¼ percent, reflecting a return to a more normal pace of expansion. Imports of all major categories increased, with these gains fairly broad based across trading partners. Data for April 9. The Build America Bond program, authorized under the ARRA, allowed state and local governments to issue taxable bonds for capital projects and receive a subsidy payment from the Treasury for 35 percent of interest costs. 25. Change in real imports and exports of goods and May indicate that, despite some drag from the dis- ruptions to automotive imports from Japan following the earthquake, imports of goods and services have continued to rise at a moderate pace. All told, net exports made a small positive contribu- tion of almost ¼ percentage point to real GDP growth in the first quarter of 2011. The current account deficit widened slightly from an average annual rate of $465 billion in the second half of 2010 to $477 billion, or about 3¼ percent of GDP, in the first quarter of this year; the widening resulted primarily from the increase in the price of imported oil (figure 26). The spot price of West Texas Intermediate (WTI) crude oil continued its ascent into the early months of 2011, rising sharply from around $90 per barrel at the beginning of the year to peak at almost $115 by late April (figure 27). The increase over the first four 26. U.S. trade and current account balances, 2003–11 NOTE: The data are quarterly and extend through 2011:Q1. SOURCE: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis. 27. Prices of oil and nonfuel commodities, 2006–11 NOTE: The data are monthly. The oil price is the spot price of West Texas Intermediate crude oil, and the last observation is the average for July 1–8, 2011. The price of nonfuel commodities index of 45 is an primary-commodity prices and extends through June 2011. months of the year likely reflected continued robust growth in global oil demand, particularly in the EMEs, coupled with supply disruptions and the potential for further disruptions due to the political unrest in the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) region. In recent weeks, the spot price of WTI has fallen back to under $100 per barrel because of increasing concerns that global activity might be decelerating. On June 23, the International Energy Agency decided to release 60 million barrels of oil from strategic reserves over the following 30 days. The price of the far-dated futures contracts for crude oil (that is, the contracts expiring in December 2019) mostly fluctuated in the neighbor- hood of $100 during the first half of the year, implying that the markets viewed the run-up in oil prices seen earlier in the year as partly transitory. Over the first quarter, prices for a broad variety of nonfuel commodities also moved up significantly. As with oil, these increases were supported primarily by continued strength in global demand, especially from the EMEs. In addition, tight supply conditions played a significant role in pushing up prices for many food commodities. At the onset of the second quarter, prices stabilized and generally began to retreat amid growing uncertainty about the outlook for the global economy, falling back to around the elevated levels registered at the start of this year. (See the box “Commodity Price Developments.”) Prices of non-oil imported goods accelerated in the first quarter of 2011, surging at an annual rate of 7¼ percent, the fastest pace since the first half of 2008. This pickup was driven by a few factors, including the Despite recent declines, nominal prices for many commodities are near record highs. The increase in commodity prices since 2002 runs counter to the trend over the prior two decades of declining real prices (ﬁgure A). The earlier trend decline in part reﬂected the aftermath of a spike in commodity prices in the 1970s, which eventually boosted sup- ply and curtailed demand for commodities. The relatively low real commodity prices of the 1980s and 1990s, in turn, set the stage for the pickup in prices over the past decade, as underinvestment in new supply capacity left commodity markets ill- prepared to meet a surge in demand linked to rapid growth in global real gross domestic product (GDP) (ﬁgure B). The pickup in world GDP growth was led by the emerging market economies (EMEs). As EME growth is relatively commodity intensive, the concentration of world GDP growth in these NOTE: The data are quarterly and extend through 2011:Q1. SOURCE: International Monetary Fund price indexes deflated by rise in commodity prices, significant increases in foreign inflation, and the depreciation of the dollar. In the sec- ond quarter of this year, with commodity prices appar- entlystabilizing,importpriceinflationlikelymoderated. Total U.S. net national saving—that is, the saving of U.S. households, businesses, and governments, exclud- economies added to upward pressures on demand for commodities and thus their prices. EME demand has been important for growth in global consumption of various commodities over the past decade (ﬁgure C). For oil, metals, and soy- beans, the entire increase in consumption over the period is attributable to the EMEs, particularly China. For corn, increased U.S. ethanol production also has been an important factor in boosting consumption. While demand for commodities has been strong, growth of supply has been relatively lim- ited. For example, oil production over the past decade increased by only about half as much as was projected by the U.S. Department of Energy at the start of the decade (ﬁgure D). Production in the Emerging market economies NOTE: The data are quarterly and extend through 2010:Q4. The data for emerging market economies and for world are aggregated using GDP at purchasing-power-parity weights. The world aggregate consists of 36 countries that, together, represent about 85 percent of world GDP measured on a purchasing-power-parity basis. ing depreciation charges—remains extremely low by historical standards (figure 28). After having reached nearly 4 percent of nominal GDP in early 2006, net national saving dropped over the subsequent three years, reaching a low of negative 3 percent in the third quarter of 2009. Since then, the national saving rate has edged up, on balance, but remains negative: Net national saving was negative 1.4 percent of nominal GDP in the first quarter of 2011 (the latest data avail- able). The increase in the federal deficit more than Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development countries was depressed by lower- than-expected production in Mexico and the North Sea. The substantial miss in the forecasted production by the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) in part reﬂects a sur- prising unresponsiveness of OPEC’s supply to higher prices, suggesting that an upward shift in OPEC’s perceived price target also held back sup- ply growth. Likewise, for metals, industry groups were repeatedly overly optimistic in regard to pro- jected supply growth, most notably for copper. For agricultural products, although yields and acreage increased over the past 10 years, unusually unfavor- able weather has restrained supplies in recent years. The current high level of commodity prices is likely to prompt an expansion of supply and a moderation in demand that could relieve some of the pressures currently boosting prices. For energy, nonconventional oil production continues to expand, including the Canadian oil sands and the recent developments in North Dakota’s Bakken Shale. Similarly, for natural gas, new drilling tech- nology has unlocked previously inaccessible deposits of shale gas, resulting in much higher U.S. culture, although harvested acres overseas have expanded briskly since 2000, yields for corn and some other crops are currently much lower than in the United States, suggesting the potential for fur- Although there are reasons for optimism, the demand adjustments are uncertain. Commodity prices will continue to be affected by the general Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development countries was depressed by lower- than-expected production in Mexico and the North Sea. The substantial miss in the forecasted production by the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) in part reﬂects a sur- prising unresponsiveness of OPEC’s supply to higher prices, suggesting that an upward shift in OPEC’s perceived price target also held back sup- ply growth. Likewise, for metals, industry groups were repeatedly overly optimistic in regard to pro- jected supply growth, most notably for copper. For agricultural products, although yields and acreage increased over the past 10 years, unusually unfavor- able weather has restrained supplies in recent years. economies added to upward pressures on demand for commodities and thus their prices. nonconventional oil production continues to expand, including the Canadian oil sands and the recent developments in North Dakota’s Bakken Shale. Similarly, for natural gas, new drilling tech- nology has unlocked previously inaccessible deposits of shale gas, resulting in much higher U.S. natural gas production and lower prices. For agri- culture, although harvested acres overseas have expanded briskly since 2000, yields for corn and some other crops are currently much lower than in the United States, suggesting the potential for fur- ther gains abroad. commodities are near record highs. The increase in EME demand has been important for growth in global consumption of various commodities over the past decade (ﬁgure C). For oil, metals, and soy- beans, the entire increase in consumption over the period is attributable to the EMEs, particularly China. For corn, increased U.S. ethanol production also has been an important factor in boosting trend over the prior two decades of declining real prices (ﬁgure A). The earlier trend decline in part reﬂected the aftermath of a spike in commodity prices in the 1970s, which eventually boosted sup- and 1990s, in turn, set the stage for the pickup in While demand for commodities has been strong, growth of supply has been relatively lim- ited. For example, oil production over the past decade increased by only about half as much as was projected by the U.S. Department of Energy at the start of the decade (ﬁgure D). Production in the new supply capacity left commodity markets ill- prepared to meet a surge in demand linked to Although there are reasons for optimism, the relative timing and magnitude of these supply and demand adjustments are uncertain. Commodity prices will continue to be affected by the general evolution of the global economy and by even less predictable factors, such as weather and political strife. (GDP) (ﬁgure B). The pickup in world GDP growth was led by the emerging market economies (EMEs). As EME growth is relatively commodity intensive, The current high level of commodity prices is likely to prompt an expansion of supply and a moderation in demand that could relieve some of the pressures currently boosting prices. For energy, United States U.S. ethanol China Other emerging market economies Advanced foreign economies Forecast made in 2002 accounts for the decline in the net national saving rate since 2006, as private saving rose considerably, on bal- ance, over this period. National saving will likely remain relatively low this year in light of the continu- ing large federal budget deficit. If low levels of national saving persist over the longer run, they will likely be associated with both low rates of capital for- mation and heavy borrowing from abroad, limiting the rise in the standard of living of U.S. residents over time. Conditions in the labor market have improved only gradually and unevenly. In the first four months of 2011, private payroll employment increased an average of about 200,000 jobs per month, up from the average pace of 125,000 jobs per month recorded in the second half of 2010 (figure 29). However, private employment 28. Net saving, 1991–2011 NOTE: The data are quarterly and extend through 2011:Q1. Nonfederal saving is the sum of personal and net business saving and the net saving of state and local governments. GDP is gross domestic product. gains slowed in May and June, averaging only 65,000, with the step-downs widespread across industries. In addition, cutbacks in jobs continued at state and local governments. The unemployment rate, which had appeared to be on a downward trajectory at the turn of the year, lev- eled off at around 9 percent in the early months of the year. Since then, it has edged up, and it reached 9.2 percent in June (figure 30). Long-term joblessness has also remained elevated. In June, 44 percent of those unemployed had been out of work for more than six months (see the box “Long-Term Unemploy- ment”). Meanwhile, the labor force participation rate, which had declined gradually over 2009 and 2010, has remained roughly flat at a low level since the beginning of 2011 (figure 31). 29. Net change in private payroll employment, 2005–11 NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through June 2011. SOURCE: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. 30. Civilian unemployment rate, 1981–2011 NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through June 2011. SOURCE: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. Other labor market indicators also corroborate the view that the labor market remains weak. Initial claims for unemployment insurance, which had trended steadily downward over the first part of this year, backed up some in the second quarter. Measures of job vacancies edged up, on balance, over the first half of the year, but hiring has remained quite tepid. Labor productivity has risen less rapidly recently. Fol- lowing an outsized increase of 6 percent in 2009, out- put per hour in the nonfarm business sector increased 2 percent in 2010 and at an annual rate of 1¾ percent in the first quarter of 2011 (figure 32). Available infor- 31. Labor force participation rate, 1981–2011 NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through June 2011. SOURCE: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. The deep recession and subsequent slow improve- ment in the labor market have resulted in a sharp increase in the incidence of long-term unemploy- ment, deﬁned here as being out of work 27 weeks or longer. In the ﬁrst quarter of this year, about 6 million persons (4 percent of the labor force) were long-term unemployed. The long-term unem- ployment rate is almost twice as high as its previous peak of about 2½ percent of the labor force fol- lowing the recession of the early 1980s (ﬁgure A). Indeed, the long-term unemployed currently make up 44 percent of all unemployed, up from a previ- ous peak of 25 percent in the early 1980s. job by degrading their skills, employment net- works, and reputations. Moreover, some who have been unsuccessful in their job search for a long period may permanently drop out of the labor force, in some cases by retiring earlier than planned or applying for disability beneﬁts, thereby reducing aggregate employment for years to come. Although all unemployed persons experience a loss of income, the long-term unemployed often face particularly serious economic hardships. They are at greater risk of exhausting unemployment insurance beneﬁts and drawing down savings and other assets, and thus they likely suffer a greater deterioration of living standards. Even in good times, the likelihood of ﬁnding a new job is generally lower for those who have remained unemployed longer (ﬁgure B). During the most recent recession, job ﬁnding rates fell for workers at all unemployment durations. More recently, job ﬁnding rates have inched up some from their lows at the end of the recession, but they remain quite low at all durations. In part, low job ﬁnding rates among the long- term unemployed reﬂect the fact that, at any given time, some attributes—including certain skills, loca- tions, or other characteristics—are associated with greater difficulty in ﬁnding employment. In addi- tion, long-term unemployment may compound the difficulty that some individuals have in ﬁnding a NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through May 2011; they are six-month moving averages. Duration is through the month before potentially becoming employed. The shaded bar indicates a period of business recession as defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Board staff calculations based on microdata from the Current Population Survey, conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau for the Bureau of Labor Statistics. A. Unemployed and long-term unemployed, 1970–2011 NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through June 2011; they are three-month moving averages. Long-term unemployed persons are defined as persons who have been unemployed for 27 weeks or more. The shaded bars indicate periods of business recession as defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research. 32. Change in output per hour, 1948–2011 NOTE: Nonfarm business sector. Change for each multiyear period is measured to the fourth quarter of the final year of the period from the fourth quarter of the year immediately preceding the period. mation suggests that labor productivity likely deceler- ated further in the second quarter. Increases in hourly compensation continue to be restrained by the weak condition of the labor market. The 12-month change in the employment cost index for private industry workers, which measures both wages and the cost to employers of providing benefits, has been 2 percent or less since the start of 2009 after several years of increases in the neighborhood of 3 percent (figure 33). Nominal compensation per hour in the nonfarm business sector—a measure derived 33. Measures of change in hourly compensation, 2001–11 NOTE: The data are quarterly and extend through 2011:Q1. For nonfarm business compensation, change is over four quarters; for the employment cost index (ECI), change is over the 12 months ending in the last month of each quarter. The nonfarm business sector excludes farms, government, nonprofit institutions, and households. The sector covered by the ECI used here is the nonfarm business sector plus nonprofit institutions. from the labor compensation data in the NIPA—has also decelerated noticeably over the past couple of years; this measure rose just 2 percent over the year ending in the first quarter of 2011, well below the aver- age increase of about 4 percent in the years before the recession. Similarly, average hourly earnings for all employees—the timeliest measure of wage develop- ments—rose 1.9 percent in nominal terms over the 12 months ending in June. Unit labor costs in the nonfarm business sector edged up ¾ percent over the year ending in the first quarter of 2011, as the rate of increase of nominal hourly compensation was just slightly higher than that of labor productivity. Over the preceding year, unit labor costs fell nearly 3 percent. Inflation stepped up considerably in the first half of 2011. After rising less than 1¼ percent over the 12 months of 2010, the overall PCE chain-type price index increased at an annual rate of more than 4 per- cent between December 2010 and May 2011 as energy prices soared and food prices accelerated (figure 34). PCE prices excluding food and energy also accelerated over the first five months of the year, rising at an annual rate of 2¼ percent, compared with the extremely low rate of about ¾ percent over the 12 months of 2010. The recent increases in both overall inflation and infla- tion excluding food and energy appear to reflect influ- ences that are likely to wane in coming months. 34. Change in the chain-type price index for personal consumption expenditures, 2005–11 34. Change in the chain-type price index for personal consumption expenditures, 2005–11 NOTE: Through 2010, change is from December to December; for 2011, change is from December to May. months of 2011 as the price of crude oil surged. Between December and April, the PCE price index for consumer energy items climbed almost 12 percent (not at an annual rate), and the national-average price of gasoline approached $4 per gallon. But consumer energy prices began to turn down in May in response to declines in the prices of crude oil and wholesale refined products; while the June reading on the PCE index is not yet available, survey-based information on retail gasoline prices suggests that consumer energy prices likely declined further last month. After rising modestly last year, consumer prices for food and beverages accelerated this year, rising at an annual rate of more than 6 percent from December to May. Farm commodity prices increased sharply over the past year as the emerging recovery in the global economy coincided with poor harvests in several major producing countries, and this sharp increase has fed through to consumer prices for meats and a wide range of other more-processed foods. In addition, a freeze- related upswing in consumer prices for fruits and veg- etables boosted PCE food prices earlier this year; these prices began to retreat in the spring. Price inflation for consumer goods and services other than energy and food appears to have been boosted during the first five months of 2011 by higher prices of imported items as well as by cost pressures generated by increases in the prices of oil and other industrial commodities; given the apparent stabiliza- tion of commodity prices, these pressures should fade in coming months. In addition, prices of motor vehicles increased sharply when supplies of new mod- els were curtailed by parts shortages associated with the earthquake in Japan. These shortages are expected to diminish in coming months as supply chain problems are alleviated and motor vehicle production increases. Longer-term inflation expectations remained stable during the first half of the year. In the Thomson Reuters/University of Michigan Surveys of Consum- ers, median longer-term expectations were 3 percent in June, well within the range seen over the past several years (figure 35). Moreover, the second-quarter reading of 10-year-ahead inflation expectations from the Sur- vey of Professional Forecasters, conducted by the Fed- eral Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, stood at 2¼ percent in the second quarter, only slightly higher than the 2 percent reading recorded in the fourth quarter of last year. Measures of inflation compensation derived from yields on nominal and inflation-indexed Treasury secu- rities fluctuated over the first half of the year in response to changes in commodity prices and the out- look for economic growth. On balance, medium-term 35. Median inflation expectations, 2001–11 NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through June 2011. SOURCE: Thomson Reuters/University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers. inflation compensation ended the first half of the year slightly higher, but compensation at longer-term hori- zons was little changed. Survey-based measures of near-term inflation expec- tations moved up during the first half of the year, likely reflecting the run-up in energy and food prices. Median year-ahead inflation expectations in the Michigan sur- vey, which had been relatively stable throughout much of 2010, stepped up markedly through April but then fell back a bit in May and June as prices for gasoline and food decreased. Financial market conditions became somewhat more supportive of economic growth, on balance, in the first half of 2011, reflecting in part continued monetary policy accommodation provided by the Federal Reserve. In the early part of the year, strong corporate profits and investors’ perceptions that the economic recovery was firming supported a rise in equity prices and a narrowing of credit spreads. Since May, however, indications that the U.S. economic recovery was pro- ceeding at a slower pace than previously anticipated, a perceived moderation in global growth, and mounting concerns about the persisting fiscal pressures in Europe weighed on investor sentiment, prompting some pull- back from riskier financial assets. On net over the first half of the year, amid indications of a slowing in the pace of economic recovery, market participants pushed out the date when they expect the target federal funds rate to first rise above its current range of 0 to ¼ percent and scaled back their expecta- tions of the pace at which monetary policy accommo- dation will be removed. Quotes on money market futures contracts imply that, as of early July 2011, investors expect the federal funds rate to rise above its current target range in the fourth quarter of 2012, about three quarters later than the date implied at the start of the year.10 Investors also expect, on average, that the effective federal funds rate will be about 75 basis points by the middle of 2013, about 90 basis points lower than anticipated at the beginning of 2011. Over the first half of the year, investors coalesced around the view that the Federal Reserve would com- plete the $600 billion program of purchases of longer- term Treasury securities announced at the November 2010 meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC); the program was completed at the end of June. Yields on nominal Treasury securities declined, on balance, over the first half of 2011 (figure 36). Treasury yields initially rose in the first quarter amid signs that the U.S. economic recovery was on a firmer footing and that higher prices for energy and other commodi- ties were boosting inflation and investor uncertainty about future inflation. However, yields subsequently more than reversed their earlier increases, as weaker- than-expected economic data pointed to a slower pace of economic recovery in the United States, commodity prices eased somewhat, and investors sought the rela- tive safety and liquidity of Treasury securities in the face of heightened concerns about the ongoing fiscal strains in Europe. As of early July, yields on 2-, 5-, and 10-year Treasury notes had dropped about 20, 40, and 10. When interest rates are close to zero, determining the point at which financial market quotes indicate that the federal funds rate will move above its current range can be challenging. The path described in the text is the mean of a distribution calculated from derivatives contracts on federal funds and Eurodollars. The asymmetry induced in this distribution by the zero lower bound causes the mean to be influenced strongly by changes in uncertainty regarding the policy path, complicating the interpretation of the expected path. Alterna- tively, one can use similar derivatives to calculate the most likely, or “modal,” path of the federal funds rate, which tends to be more stable. This alternative measure has also moved down, on net, since the beginning of the year, but it suggests a flatter overall trajectory for the target federal funds rate, according to which the effective rate does not rise above its current target range until the second half of 2013. Interest rates on Treasury securities at selected maturities, 2004–11 NOTE: The data are daily and extend through July 8, 2011. SOURCE: Department of the Treasury. 30 basis points, respectively, since the start of the year, reaching very low levels. Uncertainty about longer- term interest rates, as measured by the implied volatil- ity on 10-year Treasury securities, declined, on balance, reflecting in part the resolution of uncertainty about the ultimate size and duration of the Federal Reserve’s asset purchase program and the lower odds perceived by investors of a rapid removal of monetary policy accommodation. However, volatility increased for a time in mid-June as concerns escalated about the effects of Europe’s fiscal problems on European banks. Thus far, the issues surrounding the statutory debt limit seem not to have affected either Treasury yields or implied volatility noticeably, suggesting that investors generally believe that policymakers will reach an agree- ment to raise the limit before the Treasury exhausts its capacity to borrow in early August. Yields on corporate bonds across the credit spectrum generally declined, on net, during the first half of the year by amounts broadly similar to those on comparable-maturity Treasury securities, leaving risk spreads little changed (figure 37). After narrowing in the first four months of the year, spreads subsequently retraced, reflecting disappointing news about the strength of the economic recovery at home as well as the ongoing fiscal stresses in Europe. Nonetheless, bond spreads remained at the lower ends of their his- torical ranges. The term structure of corporate yield spreads indicated that the recent widening was concen- trated in near-term forward spreads rather than far- 37. Spreads of corporate bond yields over comparable off-the-run Treasury yields, by securities rating, 1997–2011 NOTE: The data are daily and extend through July 8, 2011. The spreads shown are the yields on 10-year bonds less the 10-year Treasury yield. SOURCE: Derived from smoothed corporate yield curves using Merrill term forward spreads. This information suggests that while investors have become a bit more concerned about near-term risks, there has been little if any change in their willingness to bear risk at longer hori- zons; in fact, far-term forward spreads, particularly for high-yield bonds, are close to their historical lows. In the secondary market for syndicated leveraged loans, the average bid price edged up further, reflecting strong demand from institutional investors for the asset class and a further improvement in fundamentals (figure 38). Broad equity price indexes posted hefty gains in the first quarter of 2011 because of strong earnings reports 38. Secondary-market bid prices for syndicated loans, 2007–11 NOTE: The data are daily and extend through July 8, 2011. SOURCE: LSTA/Thomson Reuters Mark-to-Market Pricing. and expectations that the economic recovery was firm- ing. Equity prices fell back somewhat in May and June as investors downgraded their expectations for eco- nomic growth and reacted to the situation in Europe, but the market subsequently rebounded as concerns about the near-term risks in Europe appeared to ease. On net, stock prices ended the first half of the year significantly higher (figure 39). Implied volatility of the S&P 500 stock price index, as calculated from options prices, was slightly lower, on net, but fluctuated in response to various risk events during the first half of the year (figure 40). With some investors seeking to boost nominal returns in an environment of very low interest rates, monies continued to flow, on net, into mutual funds that invest in higher-yielding debt instruments (includ- ing speculative-grade corporate bonds and leveraged loans) in the first half of 2011 (figure 41). These inflows likely supported strong issuance and contrib- uted to the easing of conditions in corporate bond markets. However, consistent with the subsequent downturn in risk sentiment, equity mutual funds expe- rienced large net outflows in May and June—the first monthly outflows from such funds since October 2010. Money market mutual funds continued to have moder- ate net outflows amid the very low yields that these funds pay. Within the universe of money market funds, institutional prime money market funds experienced a stepped-up pace of outflows in June, likely reflecting in part some concerns about such funds’ exposures to European financial institutions. 39. Stock price index, 1995–2011 NOTE: The data are daily and extend through July 8, 2011. SOURCE: Dow Jones Indexes. NOTE: The data are weekly and extend through the week ending July 8, 2011. The final observation is an estimate based on data through July 6, 2011. The series shown—the VIX—is the implied 30-day volatility of the S&P 500 stock price index as calculated from a weighted average of options prices. Conditions in short-term funding markets were gener- ally stable in the first half of 2011. Spreads of London interbank offered rates, or Libor, over comparable- maturity overnight index swap rates—a measure of stress in short-term bank funding markets—remained relatively narrow (figure 42). However, forward agree- ments for short-term U.S. dollar funding starting three months hence jumped in mid-June as concerns increased regarding the exposures of some European banks to peripheral European sovereign debt. In addi- tion, some European financial institutions faced 41. Net flows into mutual funds, 2006–11 NOTE: The data exclude reinvested dividends and are not seasonally adjusted. The data for 2011:Q2 are estimated. SOURCE: Investment Company Institute. 42. Libor minus overnight index swap rate, 2007–11 NOTE: The data are daily and extend through July 8, 2011. An overnight index swap (OIS) is an interest rate swap with the floating rate tied to an index of daily overnight rates, such as the effective federal funds rate. At maturity, the two parties to the swap agreement exchange, on the basis of the agreed notional amount, the difference between interest accrued at the fixed rate and interest accrued by averaging the floating, or index, rate. Libor is the London interbank offered rate. reduced access to U.S. dollar funding, as evidenced by their declining issuance of commercial paper in the United States and rates on their paper that remain noticeably elevated compared with rates paid by other issuers. In commercial paper markets more broadly, spreads of yields on lower-quality A2/P2-rated paper over those on higher-quality AA-rated nonfinancial paper edged slightly higher, both at overnight and 30-day tenors; spreads of yields on AA-rated asset- backed commercial paper over those on AA-rated non- financial paper remained narrow (figure 43). In repurchase agreement (repo) transactions, hair- cuts on securities used as collateral were, on balance, little changed over the first half of the year. The Fed- eral Deposit Insurance Corporation’s implementation on April 1 of a change in its deposit insurance assess- ment system—which, for the first time, effectively assessed premiums on the nondeposit liabilities of large banks—reduced banks’ demand for short-term funding, putting downward pressure on short-term rates.11 Money market rates softened further in late 11. On April 1, 2011, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation implemented changes to its deposit insurance assessment system that broadened the definition of the assessment base and altered assess- ment rates, especially for large banks. Under the new system, insur- ance premiums are based on an insured depository institution’s total assets less tangible capital—essentially all liabilities—rather than domestic deposits. The new assessment rate schedule continued to assign higher assessment rates to banks that pose greater risks to the insurance system. In the aggregate, the changes in the assessment system were intended to be revenue neutral. 43. Commercial paper spreads, 2007–11 NOTE: The data are weekly and extend through July 8, 2011. Commercial paper yield spreads are for an overnight maturity and are expressed relative to the AA nonfinancial rate. June, with rates in secured funding markets near zero; investors pointed to a shortage of collateral and higher demand for safe, liquid assets as factors contributing to the decline. Information from the Federal Reserve’s quarterly SCOOS suggested a continued gradual easing in credit terms for most types of counterparties in securities financing and over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives mar- kets in the first half of the year. Dealers indicated that the easing came primarily in response to more- aggressive competition from other institutions and an improvement in general market liquidity and function- ing. The easing of terms occurred primarily for securi- ties financing transactions, while nonprice terms on OTC derivatives transactions were little changed on balance. Dealers also reported a continued increase in demand for funding for most types of securities, excluding equities (figure 44). The use of dealer-intermediated leverage appears to have increased from its very low level reached during the financial crisis. Responses to special questions included in the SCOOS in March 2011 and June 2011 also tended to corroborate the view that dealer- intermediated leverage had increased somewhat over the past six months among both hedge funds and tra- ditionally unlevered investors. Nonetheless, respon- dents to the June survey reported that the overall use of leverage remained at levels roughly midway between the pre-crisis peak and the post-crisis trough. That the usage of dealer-intermediated leverage is still well below the peak appears consistent with other evidence, including current triparty and securities lending activ- ity, a lack of any meaningful issuance of structured 44. Net percentage change in demand for securities financing, 2010–11 44. Net percentage change in demand for securities financing, 2010–11 NOTE: The data are drawn from a survey conducted four times per year; the last observation is from the June 2011 survey, which covers 2011:Q2. Net percentage change equals the percentage of institutions that reported increased demand (“increased considerably” or “increased somewhat”) minus the percentage of institutions that reported decreased demand (“decreased considerably” or “decreased somewhat”). ABS are asset-backed securities; MBS are mortgage-backed securities. finance products other than CLOs, and no sign of a pickup in financing instruments that embed significant leverage, such as total return swaps. Responses to another special question on the June 2011 SCOOS indicated that there was some unused funding capacity under existing agreements for all types of institutional clients, and that unused capacity had generally increased since the beginning of 2011. This finding suggests that leverage is constrained by counterparties’ risk appetites rather than funding availability. With the pullback from risk-taking and turn in market senti- ment in June (after responses to the June SCOOS were filed), leverage use appears to have declined. Hedge funds saw an erosion of the returns posted during the first few months of the year, leaving their returns roughly flat for the year to date. Measures of liquidity and functioning in most financial markets suggest that conditions were gener- ally stable during the first half of 2011. In the Treasury market, various indicators, such as differences in the prices between alternative securities with similar remaining maturities and spreads between yields on on-the-run and off-the-run issues, suggest that the mar- ket continued to operate normally and that the imple- mentation and subsequent completion of the Federal Reserve’s program of purchases of longer-term Treas- ury securities did not have an adverse effect on market functioning. Bid-asked spreads and dealer transaction volumes were within historically normal ranges. Esti- mates of the bid-asked spreads in corporate bond mar- kets were steady at low levels, and the dispersion of dealer quotes in the CDS market reached the lowest level since the financial crisis. In the secondary market for leveraged loans, bid-asked spreads also moved modestly lower, on net, over the first half of the year. After a relatively positive first quarter, market senti- ment toward the banking industry dimmed in the sec- ond quarter against the backdrop of the more guarded economic outlook and heightened uncertainty over future regulatory requirements for financial institu- tions. As a result, equity prices of commercial banks fell markedly, significantly underperforming the broader stock market over the first half of the year (figure 45). Measures of the profitability of the bank- ing industry in the first quarter remained at levels noticeably below those that prevailed before the finan- cial crisis (figure 46). A decline in pre-provision net revenue was about offset by a further reduction in loan loss provisions, which presumably reflected the improvement in most measures of the quality of banks’ assets.12 However, net charge-offs exceeded pro- visions for the fifth consecutive quarter, and loan loss reserves remained low relative to delinquent loans and charge-offs. Net interest margins slid a bit, while a decline in banks’ income from deposit fees was offset by gains in income from trading activities. About 50 of 12. Pre-provision net revenue is the sum of net interest income and 45. Equity price index for banks, 2009–11 NOTE: The data are daily and extend through July 8, 2011. SOURCE: Standard & Poor’s. 46. Profitability of bank holding companies, 1988–2011 NOTE: The data are quarterly and extend through 2011:Q1. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Board, Consolidated Financial Statements for the roughly 6,500 banks in the United States failed in the first half of the year, fewer than the approximately 70 failures in the second half of 2010. Indicators of credit quality at commercial banks improved in the first quarter of 2011; the overall delin- quency rate on loans held by such banks fell somewhat and charge-off rates declined. Median spreads on CDS written on banking institutions, which reflect investors’ assessments of and willingness to bear the risk that those institutions will default on their debt obligations, were about unchanged, on net, for a group of six of the largest banks and slightly narrower for a group of nine other banks (figure 47). CDS spreads for foreign banking organizations with a presence in U.S. markets 47. Spreads on credit default swaps for selected U.S. banks, 2007–11 Large bank holding companies NOTE: The data are daily and extend through July 8, 2011. Median spreads for six bank holding companies and nine other banks. widened some, owing to concerns about developments in Europe and the organizations’ exposures to sover- eign European debt. Credit provided by domestic banks and the U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks decreased slightly further in the first half of this year, as banks’ holdings of securities were about flat and an increase in C&I loans to businesses was more than offset by declines in real estate loans and consumer loans (fig- ure 48). C&I loan balances rose vigorously over the first half of the year; most of this increase was concen- trated at large domestic banks and branches and agen- cies of foreign banks, consistent with the easing of credit conditions for large corporate borrowers seen in other credit markets. In contrast, available proxies for lending to small businesses continued to suggest con- siderable weakness, likely reflecting constraints on both the demand for, and the supply of, such credit. CRE loans contracted sharply, especially those funding con- struction and land development activities. On the household side, banks’ holdings of closed-end residen- tial mortgages declined as banks sold large quantities of such loans to the GSEs. Moreover, originations trailed off with the end of the refinancing wave that occurred last fall, when interest rates declined in antici- pation of the Federal Reserve’s second round of large- scale asset purchases. Bank lending through home equity lines also remained extraordinarily weak, reflecting in part tight lending standards amid declines in home prices that cut further into home equity. Both credit card and other consumer loans from banks con- 48. Change in total bank loans, 1990–2011 NOTE: The data, which are seasonally adjusted, are quarterly and extend through 2011:Q2. Data have been adjusted for banks’ implementation of certain accounting rule changes (including the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s Statements of Financial Accounting Standards Nos. 166 and 167) and for the effects of large nonbank institutions converting to commercial banks or merging with a commercial bank. tracted, on balance, over the first half of the year, albeit at a much slower pace in the second quarter than in the first. Banks’ holdings of securities were little changed over the first half of the year, as an increase in holdings of agency MBS was about offset by declines in holdings of Treasury and other securities. Regulatory capital ratios of bank holding companies rose further as large institutions prepared to meet future requirements that are expected to be more strin- gent than those currently in place. The Basel III frame- work agreed to by the governors and heads of supervi- sion of countries represented on the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision will raise required capital ratios, tighten the definition of regulatory capital, and increase the risk weights assigned to some assets and off-balance-sheet exposures. The Basel III framework will also strengthen banks’ liquidity requirements. In addition, the Basel Committee is expected to release later this summer a proposal to require that global sys- temically important banks hold additional capital to reduce the potential economic and financial effect of the failure of such banks. This proposal would be con- sistent with the requirement of the Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act that bank holding companies with more than $50 billion in assets be subject to additional capital and liquidity requirements. The M2 monetary aggregate expanded at a moderate annual rate of 5 percent in the first half of 2011 (fig- ure 49).13 Liquid deposits, the largest component of M2, continued to rise at a solid pace, while investors extended their reallocation away from other lower- yielding M2 assets. Balances held in small time deposits and retail money market mutual funds contracted to their lowest levels since 2005 as their yields remained 13. M2 consists of (1) currency outside the U.S. Treasury, Federal Reserve Banks, and the vaults of depository institutions; (2) traveler’s checks of nonbank issuers; (3) demand deposits at commercial banks (excluding those amounts held by depository institutions, the U.S. government, and foreign banks and official institutions) less cash items in the process of collection and Federal Reserve float; (4) other checkable deposits (negotiable order of withdrawal, or NOW, accounts and automatic transfer service accounts at depository insti- tutions; credit union share draft accounts; and demand deposits at thrift institutions); (5) savings deposits (including money market deposit accounts); (6) small-denomination time deposits (time depos- its issued in amounts of less than $100,000) less individual retirement account (IRA) and Keogh balances at depository institutions; and (7) balances in retail money market mutual funds less IRA and Keogh balances at money market mutual funds. 49. M2 growth rate, 2005–11 NOTE: For definition of M2, see text note 13. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Board, Statistical Release H.6, “Money Stock extremely low. The currency component of the money stock increased at an annual rate of 10 percent in the first half of the year, likely driven by both further strong demand from abroad and solid domestic demand. The monetary base—which is roughly equal to the sum of currency in circulation and the reserve balances of depository institutions held at the Federal Reserve—increased rapidly in the first half of the year, reflecting an expansion of reserve balances that resulted from the Federal Reserve’s longer-term secu- rity purchase program and a reduction in the Treasury Department’s Supplementary Financing Account as well as the strong increase in currency. The size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet rose to $2.9 trillion as of July 6, 2011, about $450 billion more than at the end of 2010 (table 1). Holdings of Treasury securities rose more than $600 billion for the year to date as a result of the FOMC’s decisions to reinvest the proceeds from paydowns of agency debt and agency MBS in longer-term Treasury securities, announced at the August 2010 FOMC meeting, and to purchase an additional $600 billion of longer-term Treasury securities by the end of the second quarter of 2011, announced at the November 2010 FOMC meet- ing. In contrast, holdings of agency debt and agency MBS declined about $115 billion as securities either matured or experienced principal prepayments related to mortgage refinancing activity. such as the primary credit facility, continued to be minimal. Loans outstanding under the Term Asset- Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) declined from $25 billion at the end of 2010 to $12 billion in mid- 2011 as improved conditions in securitization markets 1. Selected components of the Federal Reserve balance sheet, 2010–11 Millions of dollars 1. Selected components of the Federal Reserve balance sheet, 2010–11 Millions of dollars Selected assets Credit extended to depository institutions and Central bank liquidity swaps ..................... Credit extended to other market participants Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility Securities held outright U.S. Treasury securities.......................... 1,016,102 147,460 Agency debt securities........................... Agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS)2...... 992,141 Selected liabilities 943,749 Federal Reserve notes in circulation.............. Reverse repurchase agreements .................. 59,246 Deposits held by depository institutions ......... 1,025,839 5,113 88,905 NOTE: LLC is a limited liability company. 1. The Federal Reserve has extended credit to several LLCs in conjunction with efforts to support critical institutions. Maiden Lane LLC was formed to acquire certain assets of The Bear Stearns Companies, Inc. Maiden Lane II LLC was formed to purchase residential mortgage-backed securities from the U.S. securities lending reinvestment portfolio of subsidiaries of American International Group, Inc. (AIG). Maiden Lane III LLC was formed to purchase multisector collateral- ized debt obligations on which the Financial Products group of AIG has written credit default swap contracts. 2. Includes only MBS purchases that have already settled. … Not applicable. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Board, Statistical Release H.4.1, “Factors Affecting Reserve Balances of Depository Institutions and Condition Statement of Federal Reserve Banks.” resulted in prepayments of loans made under the facil- ity. The facility, which was established to assist finan- cial markets in accommodating the credit needs of consumers and businesses by facilitating the issuance of ABS collateralized by a variety of consumer and business loans, was closed to new lending in June 2010. All remaining TALF loans are current on their pay- ments and will mature no later than March 30, 2015. In the first half of this year, the Federal Reserve reduced some of its exposures from lending facilities established during the financial crisis to support spe- cific institutions. On January 14, 2011, in conjunction with the closing of a recapitalization plan that termi- nated the Federal Reserve’s assistance to American International Group, Inc. (AIG), AIG repaid the credit extended by the Federal Reserve under the revolving credit line, and the Federal Reserve was paid in full for its preferred interests in the special purpose vehicles AIA Aurora LLC and ALICO Holdings LLC. Neither the revolving credit facility nor the preferred interests held in connection with the revolving credit facility generated any loss to the Federal Reserve or taxpayers. The portfolio holdings of Maiden Lane LLC, Maiden Lane II LLC, and Maiden Lane III LLC—entities that were created during the crisis to acquire certain assets from The Bear Stearns Companies, Inc., and AIG to avoid the disorderly failures of those institutions— declined, on net, primarily as a result of principal pay- ments and asset sales. Of note, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (FRBNY) sold a total of $10 bil- lion in current face value of residential mortgage- backed securities out of the Maiden Lane II portfolio; competitive sales of these securities were conducted through the FRBNY’s investment manager.14 The esti- mated fair values of the portfolios of the three Maiden Lane LLCs continue to exceed the corresponding loan balances outstanding to each limited liability company from the FRBNY. arrangements between the Federal Reserve and foreign central banks have been made since their reestablish- ment in May 2010, and there have been no draws on them since early March of this year. On the liability side of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet, reserve balances held by depository institutions rose about $640 billion over the first half of the year to $1.7 trillion as of July 6. Federal Reserve notes in cir- culation rose from $944 billion to $991 billion. The Treasury reduced the balance in its Supplementary Financing Account at the Federal Reserve to $5 billion early in the year as part of its efforts to maximize flex- ibility in its debt management as the statutory debt limit approached. Balances in the Treasury’s general account at the Federal Reserve also declined. Reverse repurchase agreements executed with foreign official and international accounts were generally steady. As part of its ongoing program to expand the range of tools available to drain reserves, the Federal Reserve conducted three 28-day, $5 billion auctions of term deposits to depository institutions as well as a series of 14. Current face value is the remaining principal balance of the mortgage assets underlying the securities, after prepayments and amortizations. On March 22, the Federal Reserve System released audited financial statements for 2010 for the combined Federal Reserve Banks, the 12 individual Reserve Banks, the limited liability companies that were created to respond to strains in financial markets, and the Board of Governors. The Reserve Banks reported comprehensive income of close to $82 billion for the year ending December 31, 2010, an increase of $28 bil- lion from 2009. The increase was attributable primarily to interest earnings on the Federal Reserve’s holdings of agency debt and MBS, acquired largely in 2009. The Reserve Banks transferred $79 billion of the $82 bil- lion in comprehensive income to the U.S. Treasury in 2010, a record high and $32 billion more than was transferred in 2009. In the first half of the year, developments abroad have largely been dominated by several shocks, including the political turmoil in the MENA region, a major earth- quake and tsunami in Japan, heightened fiscal stresses in Europe, and swings in commodity prices. In the face of these shocks, global financial markets were fairly resilient and foreign economic activity held up. Foreign real GDP accelerated in the first quarter, most notably in the EMEs, where performance has continued to out- pace that in the advanced foreign economies (AFEs). Recent data indicate that foreign economic growth slowed in the second quarter, but the recovery from the global recession continued. Spurred in part by monetary policy tightening abroad and fears that the pace of economic recovery in the United States was slowing, the foreign exchange value of the dollar declined over much of the first half of the year (figure 50). The lower level of the dollar is consis- tent with a weakening of the safe-haven demands that had boosted it during the global financial crisis; how- ever, the dollar has moved slightly higher since May on heightened concerns over the fiscal problems in Europe and uncertainties about global economic growth. On net, the dollar is about 3¾ percent lower on a trade- weighted basis against a broad set of currencies over the first half of the year. Following Japan’s earthquake, as traders anticipated that Japanese investors would 50. U.S. dollar nominal exchange rate, broad index, 2006–11 NOTE: The data, which are in foreign currency units per dollar, are daily. The last observation for the series is July 8, 2011. The broad index is a weighted average of the foreign exchange values of the U.S. dollar against the currencies of a large group of the most important U.S. trading partners. The index weights, which change over time, are derived from U.S. export shares and from U.S. and foreign import shares. need to repatriate funds, the yen appreciated sharply, reaching a record high versus the dollar (figure 51). In response, the Group of Seven (G-7) countries con- ducted coordinated sales of yen in the foreign exchange markets on March 18. The yen more than reversed its steep appreciation immediately following the intervention. Ten-year sovereign yields in the AFEs generally rose early in the year on expectations that continued eco- 51. U.S. dollar exchange rate against selected major currencies, 2009–11 NOTE: The data, which are in foreign currency units per dollar, are daily. The last observation for each series is July 8, 2011. nomic recovery and greater inflationary pressures would prompt monetary policy tightening. However, since April, yields have begun to retreat (figure 52). On net, yields for Germany, Canada, and the United Kingdom are down slightly from the end of last year. Fiscal and financial stresses worsened in Greece, Portugal, and Ireland over the first half of the year, with the major credit rating agencies downgrading sig- nificantly these countries’ sovereign credit ratings. The spreads of yields on Greek, Portuguese, and Irish bonds over those on German bonds soared as market confidence in the ability of these three countries to meet their fiscal obligations diminished (figure 53). Fol- lowing a €78 billion rescue package by the EU and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in early May, spreads for Portuguese bonds stabilized but soon rose again amid the high-profile discussions by European officials on a possible restructuring of Greek debt. In late June, Greece approved a new austerity and privati- zation package, opening the door for approval of a €12 billion EU–IMF disbursement needed to meet upcoming payments. Although spreads for Greek, Por- tuguese, and Irish bonds declined some following these developments, they have since risen as Moody’s Inves- tors Service downgraded Portugal’s sovereign debt rat- ing to junk status and EU officials continued to seek commitments from private creditors to roll over matur- ing Greek debt. Movements in spreads for the sover- eign debts of Italy and Spain have been more muted, but they have moved up in recent months. Equity prices in the AFEs generally continued to rise through the first few months of this year, falling sharply after Japan’s earthquake on March 11 but, 52. Yields on benchmark government bonds in selected advanced foreign economies, 2008–11 July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July NOTE: The data, which are for 10-year bonds, are daily. The last observation for each series is July 8, 2011. 53. Government debt spreads for peripheral European economies, 2009–11 NOTE: The data are weekly. The last observation for each series is July 8, 2011. The spreads shown are the yields on 10-year bonds less the 10-year German bond yield. outside of Japan, recouping their losses afterward. By early May, increased uncertainties about global eco- nomic growth and heightened concerns over the sover- eign debt problems in Europe prompted a pullback in equity prices. However, the passage of Greece’s auster- ity and privatization legislations in late June, which assuaged market concerns about an imminent Greek default, prompted some renewed demand for risky assets; equity prices in most of the AFEs were, on net, at about their levels at the start of the year (figure 54). In the EMEs, equity prices had also risen early in the 54. Equity indexes in selected advanced foreign economies, 2008–11 July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July NOTE: The data are daily. The last observation for each series is July 8, year, but, as in the AFEs, they began to pull back by early May. On net, over the first half of the year, equity prices are down in Latin America but are up in emerg- ing Asia (figure 55). Bank stock prices in Europe have declined nearly 9 percent since the start of the year. CDS premiums for European banks remained significantly higher than those of nonfinancial firms with similar credit ratings. European banks experienced large losses during the global financial crisis, and their lending exposure to Greece, Ireland, and other vulnerable European econo- mies remains a concern. In addition, some banks in the core European countries, such as France and Ger- many, still have considerable dollar funding needs. Most peripheral European banks have only limited access to market funding and have relied on ECB fund- ing instead. In Japan, banks have not experienced crisis-related losses nearly as large as those incurred by European institutions, but Japanese bank profits have been persistently weaker, reflecting the fragile state of Japan’s economy. The newly created European Banking Authority is in the process of completing an EU-wide stress test of large European banks. The methodology used in this year’s test is broadly similar to that of the stress tests conducted by the Committee of European Banking Supervisors last year. The results of the stress test are expected to be released on July 15 of this year. In anticipation of the test, some European banks took steps to raise additional capital in recent months. 55. Aggregate equity indexes for emerging market economies, 2008–11 July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July NOTE: The data are daily. The last observation for each series is July 8, 2011. The Latin American economies are Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, and Peru; the emerging Asian economies are China, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Pakistan, the Philippines, South Korea, Taiwan, and Thailand. Net purchases of U.S. securities by foreign private investors slowed in the first quarter from the pace of 2010, in part because of reduced safe-haven demand for U.S. Treasury securities. Foreign investors, on net, sold both U.S. agency and corporate bonds in the first quarter, in contrast to purchases of these securities in the second half of last year, but they continued to make large purchases of U.S. equities (figure 56). U.S. investors increased the pace of their purchases of for- eign securities, especially foreign equities (figure 57). Banks located in the United States registered strong net inflows from abroad in the first quarter following small net inflows in the fourth quarter of last year. These recent net inflows primarily reflect increased net borrowing from affiliated banking offices abroad and are in marked contrast to sizable net lending abroad from U.S. banks in the first half of 2010, when dollar funding pressures in European interbank markets had contributed to increased reliance on funding from U.S. counterparties (figure 58). Inflows from foreign official investors eased some- what in late 2010 and continued at a moderate pace in the first quarter this year. Such inflows continued to come primarily from countries seeking to counteract upward pressure on their currencies by purchasing U.S. dollars in foreign currency markets. These countries then used the proceeds to acquire U.S. assets, mainly Treasury and U.S. agency securities. Available data through May indicate that foreign official inflows slowed a bit further in the second quarter. 56. Net foreign purchases of U.S. securities, 2007–11 NOTE: Other U.S. securities include corporate equities and bonds, agency 57. Net U.S. purchases of foreign securities, 2007–11 indicate a balance of payments outflow associated with positive U.S. purchases of foreign securities. The pace of economic recovery in the AFEs picked up in early 2011 following a soft patch in the second half of 2010, but performance was uneven across countries. Real GDP rose at a solid pace in the first quarter in Canada, boosted by a surge in investment. In the euro area, economic activity was strong in Germany and France but remained generally weak in the peripheral countries, as concerns about sovereign debt sustain- ability continued to weigh on economic growth. In the United Kingdom, output rebounded in the first quar- ter of this year from a contraction in the fourth quar- ter of 2010, but the pace was restrained by declines in households’ real incomes as inflation increased. Japan’s economic activity was also bouncing back from its dip 58. U.S. net financial inflows, 2007–11 Private (including banking) U.S. official Foreign official NOTE: U.S. official flows include the foreign currency acquired when foreign central banks draw on their swap lines with the Federal Reserve. SOURCE: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis. in the fourth quarter of last year until the earthquake and ensuing tsunami and nuclear disaster caused first- quarter real GDP to contract sharply. The disaster in Japan damaged production facilities, disrupted supply chains, and reduced electricity gen- eration capacity. In addition, spending on consumer durables and capital investment fell sharply, reflecting a substantial slump in consumer and business confi- dence. The Japanese authorities responded swiftly to support the economy. The Bank of Japan injected record amounts of liquidity into money markets, doubled the size of its asset purchase program to ¥10 trillion, set up a ¥1 trillion loan program for firms in disaster-hit areas, and expanded by ¥500 billion the funds for an existing program aimed at supporting eco- nomic growth. The Japanese Diet approved a ¥4 tril- lion supplementary budget to fund the construction of temporary housing, the restoration of damaged infra- structure, and the provision of low-interest loans to small businesses. Japan also requested a coordinated intervention of G-7 countries’ central banks in foreign exchange markets to stem the appreciation of the yen. Supported by the various official actions, the financial system continued to operate smoothly and reconstruc- tion activity has begun, setting the stage for an eco- nomic recovery in the second half of the year. Supply disruptions due to the Japanese earthquake weighed on economic growth in other AFEs, and other incoming data corroborate that economic activity in the AFEs slowed in the second quarter. The composite purchasing managers indexes have moved lower in 59. Change in consumer prices for major foreign economies, 2007–11 NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through May 2011, except for the euro area, for which the data extend through June 2011; the percent change is from one year earlier. recent months across the AFEs. In addition, business confidence has turned down, and the underlying momentum in consumer spending has remained weak in the euro area. cases, higher value-added taxes lifted headline inflation rates in the major foreign economies earlier in the year (figure 59). Twelve-month headline inflation rose to 4½ percent in the United Kingdom and to about 3¾ percent and 2¾ percent in Canada and the euro area, respectively. In Japan, the rise in commodity prices pushed inflation above zero. Excluding the effects of commodity price movements and tax changes, inflation in the AFEs has remained relatively subdued amid considerable economic resource slack. With the recent pullback in commodity prices, overall inflation also appears to be stabilizing. Monetary policy remained accommodative in all the major AFEs, and market participants appear to expect only gradual tightening (figure 60). After having kept its benchmark policy rate at 1 percent since May 2009, the ECB raised it twice—by 25 basis points in April and by another 25 basis points in early July—citing upside risks to the inflation outlook. The Bank of Canada, which began to tighten last year, has paused so far this year, maintaining its target for the overnight rate at 1 percent. The Bank of England kept its policy rate at 0.5 percent and the size of its Asset Purchase Facility at £200 billion. 60. Official or targeted interest rates in selected advanced foreign economies, 2007–11 NOTE: The data are daily and extend through July 8, 2011. The data shown are, for Canada, the target for the overnight rate; for the euro area, the minimum bid rate on main refinancing operations; for Japan, the target for the call rate; and, for the United Kingdom, the official bank rate. SOURCE: The central bank of each area or country shown. The EMEs continued to expand at a strong pace in the first quarter of 2011, boosted by both exports and domestic demand. Exports were lifted by sustained global demand. Domestic demand was supported by macroeconomic policies that remained generally accommodative despite recent tightening and by robust household income amid strong labor market conditions. Recent data indicate that growth moder- ated in the second quarter, but to a still-solid pace, reflecting governments’ policies to cool the economies that were running unsustainably fast, a deceleration in activity in the advanced economies, and spillover effects of the Japanese earthquake. The Chinese economy expanded at a strong pace in the first half of 2011, although economic growth slowed a bit compared with the second half of last year, largely due to measures by authorities to rein in the economy. Headline consumer prices were up 6.4 percent in June from a year earlier, led by a rise in food prices. This year, Chinese authorities have raised required reserve ratios for all banks 300 basis points— the requirement for large banks now stands at 21.5 per- cent. Authorities have also raised the benchmark one- year bank lending rate ¾ percentage point. Over the first half of the year, the Chinese renminbi has appreci- ated, on net, about 2½ percent against the dollar. However, on a real multilateral, trade-weighted basis, which gauges the renminbi’s value against the curren- cies of China’s major trading partners and adjusts for differences in inflation rates, the renminbi has depreci- ated. Nonetheless, strong domestic demand led import growth in the first half of this year to exceed export growth,andconsequently,China’stradesurplusnarrowed. Elsewhere in emerging Asia, the vigorous Chinese economy provided impetus to exports for several coun- tries, and domestic demand was also robust. Accord- ingly, economic activity was upbeat in the first quarter, with several countries, including Hong Kong, Singa- pore, and Taiwan, all posting double-digit annualized growth rates. Economic activity was also upbeat in India. Available indicators for the second quarter sug- gestthatthepaceof expansionslowedbutremainedsolid. In Mexico, a country with stronger economic link- ages to the United States than most EMEs, perfor- mance continued to lag that of other EMEs. Reported first-quarter real GDP rose at an annual rate of only 2 percent. By contrast, first-quarter real GDP rose robustly in Brazil and in other South American coun- tries, supported by generally accommodative macro- economic policies and the tailwind from gains in com- modity prices. Higher food prices pushed up consumer price infla- tion in the EMEs earlier in the year. As food price pressures subsequently eased, 12-month inflation stabi- lized and began to retreat in several countries. In the midst of elevated inflation and strong economic growth, the stance of macroeconomic policy in the EMEs has been tightened further to mitigate the risks of overheating. In the first half of the year, many EMEs tightened monetary policy by raising policy rates and reserve requirement ratios several times, and progress was also made on the removal of the fiscal support measures enacted at the height of the global financial crisis. tee noted that it would regularly review the size and composition of its securities holdings and was pre- pared to adjust those holdings, as appropriate, to foster maximum employment and price stability. To promote the economic recovery and price stability, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) main- tained a target range for the federal funds rate of 0 to ¼ percent throughout the first half of 2011 (figure 61). In the statement accompanying each FOMC meeting over the period, the Committee noted that economic conditions were likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate for an extended period. At the end of June, the Federal Reserve concluded its purchases of longer-term Treasury securities under the $600 billion purchase program announced in Novem- ber 2010; that program was undertaken to support the economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, returns to levels consistent with the FOMC’s mandate of maximum employment and price stability. In addition, throughout the first half of 2011, the Committee maintained its existing policy of reinvest- ing principal payments from its agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in longer-term Treasury securities. In its June statement, the Commit- The information reviewed at the January 25–26 FOMC meeting indicated that the economic recovery was gaining a firmer footing, though the expansion had not yet been sufficient to bring about a significant improvement in labor market conditions. Consumer spending had risen strongly in late 2010, and the ongo- ing expansion in business outlays for equipment and software appeared to have been sustained in recent months. Industrial production had increased solidly in November and December. However, construction activity in both the residential and nonresidential sec- tors remained weak. Modest gains in employment had continued, and the unemployment rate remained elevated. Conditions in financial markets were viewed by FOMC participants as having improved somewhat further over the intermeeting period, as equity prices had risen and credit spreads on the debt of nonfinan- cial corporations had continued to narrow, while yields on longer-term nominal Treasury securities were little 61. Selected interest rates, 2008–11 NOTE: The data are daily and extend through July 8, 2011. The 10-year Treasury rate is the constant-maturity yield based on the most actively traded securities. The dates on the horizontal axis are those of regularly scheduled Federal Open Market Committee meetings. changed.15 Credit conditions were still tight for smaller, bank-dependent firms, although bank loan growth had picked up in some sectors. Despite further increases in commodity prices, measures of underlying inflation remained subdued and longer-run inflation expectations were stable. The information received over the intermeeting period had increased Committee members’ confidence that the economic recovery would be sustained, and the downside risks to both economic growth and infla- tion were viewed as having diminished. Nevertheless, members noted that the pace of the recovery was insufficient to bring about a significant improvement in labor market conditions and that measures of underly- ing inflation were trending down. Moreover, the eco- nomic projections submitted for this meeting indicated that unemployment was expected to remain above, and inflation to remain somewhat below, levels consistent with the Committee’s objectives for some time. Accordingly, the Committee decided to maintain its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its securities holdings and reaffirmed its intention to purchase $600 billion of longer-term Treasury securi- ties by the end of the second quarter of 2011. Mem- bers emphasized that the Committee would continue to regularly review the pace of its securities purchases and the overall size of the asset purchase program in light of incoming information and would adjust the program as needed to best foster maximum employ- ment and price stability. In addition, the Committee maintained the target range of 0 to ¼ percent for the federal funds rate and reiterated its expectation that economic conditions were likely to warrant exception- ally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period. The data presented at the March 15 FOMC meeting indicated that the economic recovery continued to pro- ceed at a moderate pace, with a gradual improvement in labor market conditions. Looking through weather- related distortions in various indicators, measures of consumer spending, business investment, and employ- ment continued to show expansion. Housing, however, remained depressed, and credit conditions were still uneven. Large firms with access to financial markets continued to find credit, including bank loans, avail- able on relatively attractive terms; however, credit con- ditions reportedly remained tight for smaller, bank- 15. Members of the FOMC in 2011 consist of the members of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System plus the presi- dents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago, Dallas, Minneapolis, New York, and Philadelphia. Participants at FOMC meetings consist of the members of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and all Reserve Bank presidents. dependent firms. Sizable increases in prices of crude oil and other commodities pushed up headline inflation, but measures of underlying inflation were subdued, and longer-run inflation expectations remained stable. A number of participants expected that slack in resource utilization would continue to restrain increases in labor costs and prices. Nonetheless, par- ticipants observed that rapidly rising commodity prices posed upside risks to the stability of longer-term infla- tion expectations, and thus to the outlook for inflation, even as they posed downside risks to the outlook for growth in consumer spending and business investment. In addition, participants noted that unfolding events in the Middle East and North Africa, along with the tragic developments in Japan, had further increased uncertainty about the economic outlook. In the FOMC’s discussion of monetary policy for the period ahead, the members agreed that no changes to the Committee’s asset purchase program or to its target range for the federal funds rate were warranted. The economic recovery appeared to be on a firmer footing, and overall conditions in the labor market were gradually improving. Although the unemploy- ment rate had declined in recent months, it remained elevated relative to levels that the Committee judged to be consistent, over the longer run, with its statutory mandate to foster maximum employment and price stability. Similarly, measures of underlying inflation continued to be somewhat low relative to levels seen as consistent with the dual mandate over the longer run. With longer-term inflation expectations remaining stable and measures of underlying inflation subdued, members anticipated that recent increases in the prices of energy and other commodities would result in only a transitory increase in headline inflation. Given this economic outlook, the Committee agreed to maintain the existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its securities holdings and reaffirmed its intention to purchase $600 billion of longer-term Treasury secu- rities by the end of the second quarter of 2011 to pro- mote a stronger pace of economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, was at levels consistent with the Committee’s mandate. Members emphasized that the Committee would continue to regularly review the pace of its securities purchases and the overall size of the asset purchase program in light of incoming information and would adjust the program as needed to best foster maximum employment and price stabil- ity. The Committee maintained the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and continued to anticipate that economic conditions were likely to war- rant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate for an extended period. The information reviewed at the April 26–27 FOMC meeting indicated that, on balance, economic activity was expanding at a moderate pace and that labor mar- ket conditions were continuing to improve gradually. Headline consumer price inflation had been boosted by large increases in food and energy prices, but measures of underlying inflation were still subdued and longer- run inflation expectations remained stable. Participants observed that while construction activity was still ane- mic, measures of consumer spending and business investment continued to expand, and overall labor market conditions were improving, albeit gradually. Nevertheless, they agreed that the pace of economic growth in the first quarter had slowed unexpectedly. Participants viewed this weakness as likely to be largely transitory, influenced by unusually severe weather, increases in energy and other commodity prices, and lower-than-expected defense spending; as a result, they saw economic growth picking up later in the year. In addition, they noted that higher gasoline and food prices had weighed on consumer sentiment about near- term economic conditions but that underlying funda- mentals pointed to continued moderate growth in spending. Activity in the industrial sector had expanded further and manufacturers remained upbeat, although automakers were reporting some difficulties in obtaining parts normally produced in Japan, which could damp motor vehicle production in the second quarter. Participants noted that financial conditions continued to improve. Equity prices had risen signifi- cantly since the beginning of the year, buoyed by an improved outlook for earnings. Although loan demand in general remained weak, banks reported an easing of their lending standards and terms on commercial and industrial loans. Consumer credit conditions also eased somewhat, although the demand for consumer credit other than auto loans reportedly changed little. Meeting participants judged the information received over the intermeeting period as indicating that the economic recovery was proceeding at a moderate pace, although somewhat more slowly than had been anticipated earlier in the year. Overall conditions in the labor market were gradually improving, but the unem- ployment rate remained elevated relative to levels that the Committee judged to be consistent, over the longer run, with its statutory mandate of maximum employ- ment and price stability. Significant increases in the prices of energy and other commodities had boosted overall inflation, but members expected this rise to be transitory. Indicators of medium-term inflation remained subdued and somewhat below the levels seen as consistent with the dual mandate as indicated by the Committee’s longer-run inflation projections. Accord- ingly, the Committee agreed that no changes to its asset purchase program or to its target range for the federal funds rate were warranted at this meeting. Spe- cifically, the Committee agreed to maintain its policy of reinvesting principal payments from its securities hold- ings and affirmed that it would complete purchases of $600 billion of longer-term Treasury securities by the end of the second quarter. The Committee also agreed to maintain the target range of the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and anticipated that economic condi- tions would likely warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate for an extended period. Members agreed that the Committee would regularly review the size and composition of its securities holdings in light of incoming information and that they were prepared to adjust those holdings as needed to best foster maxi- mum employment and price stability. The information received ahead of the June 21–22 FOMC meeting indicated that the pace of the eco- nomic recovery had slowed in recent months and that conditions in the labor market had softened. Measures of inflation had picked up this year, reflecting in part higher prices for some commodities and imported goods. Longer-run inflation expectations, however, remained stable. In their discussion of the economic situation and outlook, meeting participants noted a number of transitory factors that were restraining growth, including the global supply chain disruptions in the wake of the earthquake in Japan, the unusually severe weather in some parts of the United States, a drop in defense spending, and the effect of increases in oil and other commodity prices on household purchas- ing power and spending. Participants expected that the expansion would gain strength as the effects of these temporary factors waned. Nonetheless, most partici- pants judged that the pace of economic recovery was likely to be somewhat slower over coming quarters than they had projected in April, reflecting the persis- tent weakness in the housing market, the ongoing efforts by some households to reduce debt burdens, the recent sluggish growth of income and consumption, the fiscal contraction at all levels of government, and the effect of uncertainty regarding the economic out- look and future tax and regulatory policies on the will- ingness of firms to hire and invest. Changes in finan- cial conditions since the April meeting suggested that investors had become more concerned about risk. Equity markets had seen a broad selloff, and risk spreads for many corporate borrowers had widened noticeably since April. Nonetheless, large businesses continued to enjoy ready access to credit. ahead, members agreed that the Committee should complete its $600 billion asset purchase program at the end of the month and that no changes to the target range of the federal funds rate were warranted. The information received over the intermeeting period indi- cated that the economic recovery was continuing at a moderate pace, though somewhat more slowly than the Committee had expected, and that the labor market had been weaker than anticipated. Inflation had increased in recent months as a result of higher prices for some commodities, as well as supply chain disrup- tions related to the tragic events in Japan. Nonetheless, members saw the pace of the economic expansion as picking up over the coming quarters and the unem- ployment rate resuming its gradual decline toward lev- els consistent with the Committee’s dual mandate. Moreover, with longer-term inflation expectations stable, members expected that inflation would subside to levels at or below those consistent with the Commit- tee’s dual mandate as the effects of past energy and other commodity price increases dissipate. However, many members saw the outlook for both employment and inflation as unusually uncertain. Against this backdrop, members agreed that it was appropriate to maintain the Committee’s current policy stance and accumulate further information regarding the outlook for growth and inflation before deciding on the next policy step. A few members noted that, depending on how economic conditions evolve, the Committee might have to consider providing additional monetary policy stimulus, especially if economic growth remained too slow to meaningfully reduce the unemployment rate in the medium run. A few other members, however, viewed the increase in inflation risks as suggesting that economic conditions might evolve in a way that would warrant the Committee taking steps to begin removing policyaccommodationsoonerthancurrentlyanticipated. Also at its June meeting, in light of ongoing strains in some foreign financial markets, the Committee approved an extension through August 1, 2012, of its temporary U.S. dollar liquidity swap arrangements with the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the European Central Bank, the Bank of Japan, and the Swiss National Bank. The authorization of the swap arrangements had been set to expire on August 1, 2011. Although the FOMC continues to anticipate that eco- nomic conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period, the Federal Reserve will eventually need to remove policy accommodation to maintain a stance of policy that is consistent with its statutory mandate to foster maximum employment and stable prices. The FOMC has several tools for smoothly and effectively exiting at the appropriate time from the current accom- modative policy stance. One tool is the ability to pay interest on reserve balances; the Federal Reserve will be able to put significant upward pressure on short-term market interest rates by increasing the rate paid on excess reserves. Two other tools—executing triparty reverse repurchase agreements (RRPs) with primary dealers and other counterparties and issuing term deposits to depository institutions through the Term Deposit Facility (TDF)—will be capable of temporar- ily reducing the quantity of reserves held by the bank- ing system and thereby tightening the relationship between the interest rate paid on reserves and short- term market interest rates.16 Finally, the Federal Reserve could pare the size of its balance sheet over time by ceasing to reinvest principal payments from its securities holdings or by selling its securities holdings. During the first half of 2011, the Federal Reserve continued to refine and test its temporary reserve draining tools. The Federal Reserve Bank of New York (FRBNY) took further steps to expand the range of counterparties for RRPs to include entities other than primary dealers in order to enhance the capacity of such operations. The FRBNY completed its third wave of counterparty expansions aimed at domestic money market funds in May, bringing the total number of RRP counterparties, including the primary dealers, to 110. In May, the FRBNY also set forth criteria for the acceptance of government-sponsored enterprises as eligible counterparties for the next counterparty expan- sion wave. During the first half of the year, the FRBNY conducted a series of small-scale triparty RRP transactions with its primary dealer and money market fund RRP counterparties. The Federal Reserve also conducted three 28-day, $5 billion auctions of term deposits. As a matter of prudent planning, these operations are intended to ensure the operational readiness of the TDF and RRP programs and to increase the familiarity of the participants with the auction procedures. At its April and June meetings, the Committee dis- cussed strategies for normalizing both the stance and 16. In a triparty repurchase agreement, both parties to the agree- ment must have cash and collateral accounts at the same triparty agent, which is by definition also a clearing bank. The triparty agent will ensure that collateral pledged is sufficient and meets eligibility requirements, and all parties agree to use collateral prices supplied by the triparty agent. conduct of monetary policy. Participants noted that their discussions of this topic were undertaken as part of prudent planning and did not imply that a move toward such normalization would necessarily begin sometime soon. Almost all participants agreed with the following principles to guide the exit process: • The Committee will determine the timing and pace of policy normalization to promote its statutory mandate of maximum employment and price stability. To begin the process of policy normalization, the Committee will likely first cease reinvesting some or all payments of principal on the securities holdings in the System Open Market Account (SOMA). • At the same time or sometime thereafter, the Com- mittee will modify its forward guidance on the path of the federal funds rate and will initiate temporary reserve-draining operations aimed at supporting the implementation of increases in the federal funds rate when appropriate. When economic conditions warrant, the Commit- tee’s next step in the process of policy normalization will be to begin raising its target for the federal funds rate, and from that point on, changing the level or range of the federal funds rate target will be the pri- mary means of adjusting the stance of monetary policy. During the normalization process, adjust- ments to the interest rate on excess reserves and to the level of reserves in the banking system will be used to bring the funds rate toward its target. Sales of agency securities from the SOMA portfolio will likely commence sometime after the first increase in the target for the federal funds rate. The timing and pace of sales will be communicated to the public in advance; that pace is anticipated to be relatively gradual and steady, but it could be adjusted up or down in response to material changes in the eco- nomic outlook or financial conditions. Once sales begin, the pace of sales is expected to be aimed at eliminating the SOMA’s holdings of agency securities over a period of three to five years, thereby minimizing the extent to which the SOMA portfolio might affect the allocation of credit across sectors of the economy. Sales at this pace would be expected to normalize the size of the SOMA securities portfolio over a period of two to three years. In particular, the size of the securities portfolio and the associated quantity of bank reserves are expected to be reduced to the smallest levels that would be consistent with the efficient implementation of monetary policy. • The Committee is prepared to make adjustments to its exit strategy if necessary in light of economic and financial developments. Transparency is an essential principle of modern cen- tral banking because it appropriately contributes to the accountability of central banks to the government and to the public and because it can enhance the effective- ness of central banks in achieving their macroeco- nomic objectives. To this end, the Federal Reserve provides a considerable amount of information con- cerning the conduct of monetary policy. Immediately following each meeting of the FOMC, the Committee releases a statement that lays out the rationale for its policy decision, and detailed minutes of each FOMC meeting are made public three weeks following the meeting. Lightly edited transcripts of FOMC meetings are released to the public with a five-year lag.17 In recent years, the Federal Reserve has taken addi- tional steps to enhance its communications regarding monetary policy decisions and deliberations. In November 2010, the FOMC directed a subcommittee, headed by Governor Yellen, to conduct a review of the Committee’s communications guidelines with the aim of ensuring that the public is well informed about monetary policy issues while preserving the necessary confidentiality of policy discussions until their sched- uled release. In a discussion on external communica- tions at the January 25–26 FOMC meeting, partici- pants noted the importance of fair and equal access by the public to information about future policy decisions. Several participants indicated that increased clarity of communications was a key objective, and some referred to the central role of communications in the monetary policy transmission process. Discussion focused on how to encourage dialogue with the public in an appropriate and transparent manner, and the subcommittee on communications was to consider providing further guidance in this area. At the March 15 FOMC meeting, the Committee endorsed the communications subcommittee’s recom- mendation that the Chairman conduct regular press conferences after the four FOMC meetings each year for which participants provide numerical projections of several key economic variables. While those projections are already made public with the minutes of the rel- evant FOMC meetings, press conferences were viewed as being helpful in explaining how the Committee’s monetary policy strategy is informed by participants’ projections of the rates of output growth, unemploy- ment, and inflation likely to prevail during each of the 17. FOMC statements, minutes, and transcripts, as well as other related information, are available on the Federal Reserve Board’s website at www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomc.htm. next few years, and by their assessments of the values of those variables that would prove most consistent, over the longer run, with the Committee’s mandate to promote both maximum employment and stable prices. It was agreed that the Chairman would begin holding press conferences effective with the April 26–27, 2011, FOMC meeting; the second press briefing was held on June 22 in conjunction with the forecasts that policy- makers submitted at that FOMC meeting. At its June 21–22 meeting, the Committee followed up on the discussions from its January meeting about policies to support effective communication with the public regarding the outlook for the economy and monetary policy. The Committee unanimously approved a set of principles, proposed by the subcom- mittee on communications, for Committee participants and for the Federal Reserve System staff to follow in their communications with the public in order to rein- force the public’s confidence in the transparency and integrity of the monetary policy process.18 18. The FOMC policies on external communications of Commit- tee participants and of the Federal Reserve System staff are available on the Federal Reserve Board’s website at www.federalreserve.gov/ monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_ExtCommunicationParticipants.pdf and www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_ ExtCommunicationStaff.pdf, respectively. The following material appeared as an addendum to the minutes of the June 21–22, 2011, meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee. In conjunction with the June 21–22, 2011, Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting, the mem- bers of the Board of Governors and the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks, all of whom participate in the deliberations of the FOMC, submitted projections for growth of real output, the unemployment rate, and inflation for the years 2011 to 2013 and over the longer run. The projections were based on information avail- able at the time of the meeting and on each partici- pant’s assumptions about factors likely to affect eco- nomic outcomes, including his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy. “Appropriate monetary policy” is defined as the future path of policy that each participant deems most likely to foster outcomes for economic activity and inflation that best satisfy his or her interpretation of the Federal Reserve’s dual objec- tives of maximum employment and stable prices. Longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge over time under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks. As depicted in figure 1, FOMC participants expected the economic recovery to continue at a mod- erate pace, with growth of real gross domestic product (GDP) about the same this year as in 2010 and then strengthening over 2012 and 2013. With the pace of economic growth modestly exceeding their estimates of the longer-run sustainable rate of increase in real GDP, the unemployment rate is projected to trend gradually lower over this projection period. However, partici- pants anticipated that, at the end of 2013, the unem- ployment rate would still be well above their estimates of the unemployment rate that they see as consistent, over the longer run, with the Committee’s dual man- date of maximum employment and price stability. Most participants marked up their projections of inflation for 2011 in light of the increase in inflation in the first half of the year, but they projected this increase to be transitory, with overall inflation moving back in line with core inflation in 2012 and 2013 and remaining at or a bit below rates that they see as con- sistent, over the longer run, with the Committee’s dual mandate. Participants generally saw the rate of core inflation as likely to stay roughly the same over the next two years as this year. On balance, as indicated in table 1, participants anticipated somewhat lower real GDP growth over the Longer run Longer run                                                           NOTE: Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP) and projections for both measures of inflation are from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. PCE inflation and core PCE inflation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) and the price index for PCE excluding food and energy. Projections for the unemployment rate are for the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. Each participant’s projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy. Longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. The April projections were made in conjunction with the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on April 26–27, 2011. 1. The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each year. 2. The range for a variable in a given year consists of all participants’ projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year. 3. Longer-run projections for core PCE inflation are not collected. Figure 1. Central tendencies and ranges of economic projections, 2011–13 and over the longer run NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the notes to table 1. The data for the actual values of the variables are annual. Longer run Longer run Longer run near term relative to their projections in April but left their projections for inflation mostly unchanged since the April meeting. Participants made noticeable down- ward revisions to their projections for GDP growth this year and next, but they made little change to their projection for 2013 and no change to their longer-run projections. Meeting participants revised up their pro- jections for the unemployment rate over the forecast period, although they continue to expect a gradual decline in the unemployment rate over time. Partici- pants’ projections for overall inflation this year were somewhat more narrowly distributed than in April, and their projections for 2012 and 2013 were similar to the projections made in April. A sizable majority of participants continued to judge the level of uncertainty associated with their pro- jections for economic growth and inflation as unusually high relative to historical norms. Most participants viewed the risks to output growth as being weighted to the downside, and none saw those risks as weighted to the upside. Meanwhile, a majority of participants saw the risks to overall inflation as balanced. Participants marked down their forecasts for real GDP growth in 2011 to reflect the unexpected weakness wit- nessed in the first half of the year, with the central ten- dency of their projections moving down to 2.7 to 2.9 percent from 3.1 to 3.3 percent in April. Partici- pants attributed the downward revision in their growth outlook to the likely effects of elevated commodity prices on real income and consumer sentiment, as well as indications of renewed weakness in the labor mar- ket, surprisingly sluggish consumer spending, a contin- ued lack of recovery in the housing market, supply disruptions from the events in Japan, and constraints on government spending at all levels. Looking further ahead, participants’ forecasts for economic growth were also marked down in 2012, as participants saw some of the weakness in economic activity this year as likely to persist. Nevertheless, par- ticipants still anticipated a modest acceleration in eco- nomic output next year, and they expected a further modest acceleration in 2013 to growth rates that were largely unchanged from their previous projection. The central tendency of their current projections for real GDP growth in 2012 was 3.3 to 3.7 percent, compared with 3.5 to 4.2 percent in April, and in 2013 the central tendency of the projections for real GDP growth was 3.5 to 4.2 percent. Participants cited the effects of con- tinued monetary policy accommodation, some further easing in credit market conditions, a waning in the drag from elevated commodities prices, and an increase in spending from pent-up demand as factors likely to contribute to a pickup in the pace of the expansion. Participants did, however, see a number of factors that would likely continue to weigh on GDP growth over the next two years. Most participants pointed to strains in the household sector, noting impaired bal- ance sheets, continued declines in house prices, and persistently high unemployment as restraining the growth of consumer spending. In addition, some par- ticipants noted that although energy and commodity prices were expected to stabilize, they would do so at elevated levels and would likely continue to damp spending growth for a time. Finally, several partici- pants pointed to a likely drag from tighter fiscal policy at all levels of government. In the absence of further shocks, participants generally expected that, over time, real GDP growth would eventually settle down at an annual rate of 2.5 to 2.8 percent in the longer run. Partly in response to the recent weak indicators of labor demand and participants’ downwardly revised views of the economic outlook, participants marked up their forecasts for the unemployment rate over the entire forecast period. For the fourth quarter of this year, the central tendency of their projections rose to 8.6 to 8.9 percent from 8.4 to 8.7 percent in April. Similar upward revisions were made for 2012 and 2013, with the central tendencies of the projections for those years at 7.8 to 8.2 percent and 7.0 to 7.5 percent, respectively. Consistent with their expectations of a moderate recovery, with growth only modestly above trend, the central tendency of the projections of the unemployment rate at the end of 2013 was well above the 5.2 to 5.6 percent central tendency of their esti- mates of the unemployment rate that would prevail over the longer run in the absence of further shocks. The central tendency for the participants’ projections of the unemployment rate in the longer run was unchanged from the interval reported in April. Participants noted that measures of consumer price inflation had increased this year, reflecting in part higher prices of oil and other commodities. However, participants’ forecasts for total personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation in 2011 were little changed from April, with the central tendency of their estimates narrowing to a range of 2.3 to 2.5 percent, compared with 2.1 to 2.8 percent in April. Most par- ticipants anticipated that the influence of higher com- modity prices and supply disruptions from Japan on inflation would be temporary, and that inflation pres- sures in the future would be subdued as commodity prices stabilized, inflation expectations remained well anchored, and large margins of slack in labor markets kept labor costs in check. As a result, participants anticipated that total PCE inflation would step down in 2012 and 2013, with the central tendency of their projections in those years at 1.5 to 2.0 percent. The lower end of these central tendencies was revised up somewhat from April, suggesting that fewer partici- pants saw a likelihood of very low inflation in those years. The projections for these two years were at or slightly below the 1.7 to 2.0 percent central tendency of participants’ estimates of the longer-run, mandate- consistent rate of inflation. The central tendencies of participants’ projections of core PCE inflation this year shifted up a bit to 1.5 to 1.8 percent, as partici- pants saw some of the run-up in commodity prices passing through to core prices. For 2012 and 2013, par- ticipants saw commodity prices as likely to stabilize near current levels, and the central tendencies for their forecasts of core inflation were 1.4 to 2.0 percent, essentially unchanged from their April projections. A substantial majority of participants continued to judge that the levels of uncertainty associated with their projections for economic growth and inflation were greater than the average levels that had prevailed over the past 20 years.19 They pointed to a number of factors that contributed to their assessments of the uncertainty that they attached to their projections, including the severity of the recent recession, the uncertain effects of the current stance of monetary policy, uncertainty about the direction of fiscal policy, and structural dislocations in the labor market. Most participants now judged that the balance of risks to economic growth was weighted to the down- side, and the rest viewed these risks as balanced. The most frequently cited downside risks included a poten- tial for a large negative effect on consumer spending from higher food and energy prices, a weaker labor market, falling house prices, uncertainty from the debate over the statutory debt limit and its potential implications for near-term fiscal policy, and possible negative financial market spillovers from European sovereign debt problems. The risks surrounding par- 19. Table 2 provides estimates of forecast uncertainty for the change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, and total consumer price inflation over the period from 1991 to 2010. At the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty” discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty in the economic forecasts and explains the approach used to assess the uncertainty and risks attending the participants’ projections. Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges NOTE: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root mean squared error of projections for 1991 through 2010 that were released in the sum- mer by various private and government forecasters. As described in the box “Fore- cast Uncertainty,” under certain assumptions, there is about a 70 percent probabil- ity that actual outcomes for real GDP, unemployment, and consumer prices will be in ranges implied by the average size of projection errors made in the past. Fur- ther information is in David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip (2007), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook from Historical Forecasting Errors,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2007-60 (Washington: Board of Gover- nors of the Federal Reserve System, November). 1. For definitions, refer to general note in table 1. 2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure that has been most widely used in government and private economic forecasts. Projection is per- cent change, fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. ticipants’ forecasts of the unemployment rate shifted higher, with a slight majority of participants now view- ing the risks to the projection as weighted to the upside, and the rest of the participants seeing the risks as broadly balanced. Although a majority of participants judged the risks to their inflation projections over the period from 2011 to 2013 to be weighted to the upside in April, most participants now viewed these risks as broadly balanced. On the one hand, participants noted that the effect on headline inflation of the rise in commodity prices earlier this year was likely to subside as those prices stabilized, but they could not rule out the possi- bility of those effects being more persistent than antici- pated. On the other hand, with the outlook for the economy somewhat weaker than previously expected, some participants saw a risk that greater resource slack could produce more downward pressure on inflation than projected. A few participants noted the possibility that the current highly accommodative stance of mon- etary policy, if it were to be maintained longer than is appropriate, could lead to higher inflation expectations and actual inflation. Figures 2.A and 2.B provide further details on the diversity of participants’ views regarding the likely outcomes for real GDP growth and the unemployment rate in 2011, 2012, 2013, and over the longer run. The dispersion in these projections continued to reflect dif- ferences in participants’ assessments of many factors, including the current degree of underlying momentum in economic activity, the outlook for fiscal policy, the timing and degree of the recovery of labor markets following the very deep recession, and appropriate future monetary policy and its effects on economic activity. Regarding participants’ projections for real GDP growth, the distribution for this year shifted noticeably lower but remained about as concentrated as the distribution in April. The distribution for 2012 also shifted down somewhat and became a bit more concentrated, while the distribution for 2013 did not change appreciably. Regarding participants’ projec- tions for the unemployment rate, the distribution for this year and for 2012 shifted up relative to the corre- sponding distributions in April, and more than one- half of participants expected the unemployment rate in 2012 to be in the 8.0 to 8.1 percent interval. These shifts reflect the recent softening in labor market con- ditions along with the marking down of expected eco- nomic growth this year and next. The distribution of the unemployment rate in 2013 also shifted upward somewhat but was narrower than the distribution in April. The distributions of participants’ estimates of the longer-run growth rate of real GDP and of the unemployment rate were both little changed from the April projections. Corresponding information about the diversity of participants’ views regarding the inflation outlook is provided in figures 2.C and 2.D. In general, the disper- sion of participants’ inflation forecasts for the next few years represented differences in judgments regarding the fundamental determinants of inflation, including the degree of resource slack and the extent to which such slack influences inflation outcomes and expecta- tions, as well as estimates of how the stance of mon- etary policy may influence inflation expectations. Regarding overall PCE inflation, the distributions for 2011, 2012, and 2013 all narrowed somewhat, with the top of the distributions remaining unchanged but the lower end of the distributions moving up somewhat. Although participants continued to expect that the somewhat elevated rate of inflation this year would subside in subsequent years, fewer participants antici- pated very low levels of inflation. The distribution of participants’ projections for core inflation for this year shifted noticeably higher, reflecting incoming data and a view that the pass-through of commodity prices to core prices may be greater than previously thought; however, the distributions for 2012 and 2013 were little changed. The distribution of participants’ projections for overall inflation over the longer run was essentially unchanged from its fairly narrow distribution in April, reflecting the broad similarity in participants’ assess- ments of the approximate level of inflation that is con- sistent with the Federal Reserve’s dual objectives of maximum employment and price stability. Figure 2.A. Distribution of participants’ projections for the change in real GDP, 2011–13 and over the longer run Longer run NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. Figure 2.B. Distribution of participants’ projections for the unemployment rate, 2011–13 and over the longer run Longer run NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. Figure 2.C. Distribution of participants’ projections for PCE inflation, 2011–13 and over the longer run Longer run NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. The economic projections provided by the mem- bers of the Board of Governors and the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks inform discussions of monetary policy among policymakers and can aid public understanding of the basis for policy actions. Considerable uncertainty attends these projections, however. The economic and statistical models and relationships used to help produce economic forecasts are necessarily imperfect descriptions of the real world, and the future path of the economy can be affected by myriad unfore- seen developments and events. Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, participants consider not only what appears to be the most likely eco- nomic outcome as embodied in their projections, but also the range of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of their occurring, and the potential costs to the economy should they occur. Table 2 summarizes the average historical accu- racy of a range of forecasts, including those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports and those prepared by the Federal Reserve Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee. The projection error ranges shown in the table illustrate the considerable uncertainty associated with economic forecasts. For example, suppose a participant projects that real gross domestic product (GDP) and total consumer prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty attend- ing those projections is similar to that experienced in the past and the risks around the projections are broadly balanced, the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a probability of about 70 percent that actual GDP would expand within a range of 2.1 to 3.9 percent in the current year, 1.4 to 4.6 percent in the second year, and 1.2 to 4.8 percent in the third year. The corresponding 70 percent conﬁdence intervals for overall inﬂation would be 1.2 to 2.8 percent in the current year, and 1.0 to 3.0 per- cent in the second and third years. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over history, par- ticipants provide judgments as to whether the uncertainty attached to their projections of each variable is greater than, smaller than, or broadly similar to typical levels of forecast uncertainty in the past, as shown in table 2. Participants also pro- vide judgments as to whether the risks to their pro- jections are weighted to the upside, are weighted to the downside, or are broadly balanced. That is, participants judge whether each variable is more likely to be above or below their projections of the most likely outcome. These judgments about the uncertainty and the risks attending each partici- pant’s projections are distinct from the diversity of participants’ views about the most likely outcomes. Forecast uncertainty is concerned with the risks associatedwithaparticularprojectionratherthanwith divergencesacrossanumberofdifferentprojections. asset-backed securities advanced foreign economy American International Group, Inc. American Recovery and Reinvestment Act Congressional Budget Office credit default swap commercial and industrial collateralized loan obligation commercial mortgage-backed securities commercial real estate The Board of Governors is pleased to submit its Monetary Policy Report pursuant to section 2B of the Federal Reserve Act. Statement on Longer-run goaLS and monetary PoLicy Strategy Adopted effective January 24, 2012; as amended effective January 31, 2017 The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) is firmly committed to fulfilling its statutory mandate from the Congress of promoting maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates. The Committee seeks to explain its monetary policy decisions to the public as clearly as possible. Such clarity facilitates well-informed decisionmaking by households and businesses, reduces economic and financial uncertainty, increases the effectiveness of monetary policy, and enhances transparency and accountability, which are essential in a democratic society. Inflation, employment, and long-term interest rates fluctuate over time in response to economic and financial disturbances. Moreover, monetary policy actions tend to influence economic activity and prices with a lag. Therefore, the Committee’s policy decisions reflect its longer-run goals, its medium- term outlook, and its assessments of the balance of risks, including risks to the financial system that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. The inflation rate over the longer run is primarily determined by monetary policy, and hence the Committee has the ability to specify a longer-run goal for inflation. The Committee reaffirms its judgment that inflation at the rate of 2 percent, as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, is most consistent over the longer run with the Federal Reserve’s statutory mandate. The Committee would be concerned if inflation were running persistently above or below this objective. Communicating this symmetric inflation goal clearly to the public helps keep longer-term inflation expectations firmly anchored, thereby fostering price stability and moderate long-term interest rates and enhancing the Committee’s ability to promote maximum employment in the face of significant economic disturbances. The maximum level of employment is largely determined by nonmonetary factors that affect the structure and dynamics of the labor market. These factors may change over time and may not be directly measurable. Consequently, it would not be appropriate to specify a fixed goal for employment; rather, the Committee’s policy decisions must be informed by assessments of the maximum level of employment, recognizing that such assessments are necessarily uncertain and subject to revision. The Committee considers a wide range of indicators in making these assessments. Information about Committee participants’ estimates of the longer-run normal rates of output growth and unemployment is published four times per year in the FOMC’s Summary of Economic Projections. For example, in the most recent projections, the median of FOMC participants’ estimates of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment was 4.8 percent. In setting monetary policy, the Committee seeks to mitigate deviations of inflation from its longer-run goal and deviations of employment from the Committee’s assessments of its maximum level. These objectives are generally complementary. However, under circumstances in which the Committee judges that the objectives are not complementary, it follows a balanced approach in promoting them, taking into account the magnitude of the deviations and the potentially different time horizons over which employment and inflation are projected to return to levels judged consistent with its mandate. The Committee intends to reaffirm these principles and to make adjustments as appropriate at its annual organizational meeting each January. Note: Unless stated otherwise, the time series in the figures extend through, for daily data, February 9, 2017; for monthly data, January 2017; and, for quarterly data, 2016:Q4. In bar charts, except as noted, the change for a given period is measured to its final quarter from the final quarter of the preceding period. For figures 14, 33, and 37, note that the S&P 500 Index and the Dow Jones Bank Index are products of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates and have been licensed for use by the Board. Copyright © 20I7 S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC, a subsidiary of the McGraw Hill Financial Inc., and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Redistribution, reproduction, and/or photocopying in whole or in part are prohibited without written permission of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC. For more information on any of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC’s indices please visit www.spdji.com. S&P® is a registered trademark of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC, and Dow Jones® is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. Neither S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC, Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC, their affiliates nor their third party licensors make any representation or warranty, express or implied, as to the ability of any index to accurately represent the asset class or market sector that it purports to represent, and neither S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC, Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC, their affiliates nor their third party licensors shall have any liability for any errors, omissions, or interruptions of any index or the data included therein. Labor market conditions continued to strengthen over the second half of 2016. Payroll employment has continued to post solid gains, averaging 200,000 per month since last June, a touch higher than the pace in the first half of 2016, though down modestly from its 225,000-per-month pace in 2015. The unemployment rate has declined slightly since mid-2016; the 4.8 percent reading in January of this year was in line with the median of Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants’ estimates of its longer-run normal level. The labor force participation rate has edged higher, on net, since midyear despite a structural trend that is moving down as a result of changing demographics of the population. In addition, wage growth seems to have picked up somewhat relative to its pace of a few years ago. Consumer price inflation moved higher last year but remained below the FOMC’s longer- run objective of 2 percent. The price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) increased 1.6 percent over the 12 months ending in December, 1 percentage point more than in 2015, importantly reflecting that energy prices have turned back up and declines in non-oil import prices have waned. The PCE price index excluding food and energy items, which provides a better indication than the headline index of where overall inflation will be in the future, rose 1.7 percent over the 12 months ending in December, about ¼ percentage point more than its increase in 2015. Meanwhile, survey-based measures of longer-run inflation expectations have remained generally stable, though some are at relatively low levels; market-based measures of inflation compensation have moved up in recent months but also are at low levels. Real gross domestic product is estimated to have increased at an annual rate of 2¾ percent in the second half of the year after rising only 1 percent in the first half. Consumer spending has been expanding at a moderate pace, supported by solid income gains and the ongoing effects of increases in wealth. The housing market has continued its gradual recovery, and fiscal policy at all levels of government has provided a modest boost to economic activity. Business investment had been weak for much of 2016 but posted larger gains toward the end of the year. Notwithstanding a transitory surge of exports in the third quarter, the underlying pace of exports has remained weak, a reflection of the appreciation of the dollar in recent years and the subdued pace of foreign economic growth. Domestic financial conditions have generally been supportive of economic growth since mid-2016 and remain so despite increases in interest rates in recent months. Long-term Treasury yields and mortgage rates moved up from their low levels earlier last year but are still quite low by historical standards. Broad measures of stock prices rose, and the financial sector outperformed the broader equity market. Spreads of yields of both speculative- and investment-grade corporate bonds over yields of comparable-maturity Treasury securities declined from levels that were somewhat elevated relative to the past several years. Even with an ongoing easing in mortgage credit standards, mortgage credit is still relatively difficult to access for borrowers with low credit scores, undocumented income, or high debt-to-income ratios. Student and auto loans are broadly available, including to borrowers with nonprime credit scores, and the availability of credit card loans for such borrowers appears to have expanded somewhat over the past several quarters. In foreign financial markets, meanwhile, equities, bond yields, and the exchange value of the U.S. dollar have all risen, and risk spreads have generally declined since June. Financial vulnerabilities in the U.S. financial system overall have continued to be moderate since mid-2016. U.S. banks are well capitalized and have sizable liquidity buffers. Funding markets functioned smoothly as money market mutual fund reforms took effect in October. The ratio of household debt to income has changed little in recent quarters and is still far below the peak level it reached about a decade ago. Nonfinancial corporate business leverage has remained elevated by historical standards even though outstanding riskier corporate debt declined slightly last year. In addition, valuation pressures in some asset classes increased, particularly late last year. The Federal Reserve has continued to take steps to strengthen the financial system, including finalizing a rule that imposes total loss-absorbing capacity and long-term debt requirements on the largest internationally active bank holding companies as well as concluding an extensive review of its stress- testing and capital planning programs. In December, the FOMC raised the target for the federal funds rate to a range of ½ to ¾ percent after maintaining it at ¼ to ½ percent for a year. The decision to increase the federal funds rate reflected realized and expected labor market conditions and inflation. With the stance of monetary policy remaining accommodative, the Committee has anticipated some further strengthening in labor market conditions and a return of inflation to the Committee’s 2 percent objective. The Committee has continued to emphasize that, in determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, it will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. The Committee has expected that economic conditions will evolve in a manner that will warrant only gradual increases in the federal funds rate, and that the federal funds rate will likely remain, for some time, below levels that are expected to prevail in the longer run. Consistent with this outlook, in the most recent Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), which was compiled at the time of the December meeting of the FOMC, most participants projected that the appropriate level of the federal funds rate would be below its longer-run level through 2018. (The December SEP is included as Part 3 of this report.) With respect to its securities holdings, the Committee has stated that it will continue to reinvest principal payments from its securities portfolio, and that it expects to maintain this policy until normalization of the level of the federal funds rate is well under way. This policy of keeping the Committee’s holdings of longer-term securities at sizable levels should help sustain accommodative financial conditions. Labor market conditions continued to improve during the second half of last year and early this year. Payroll employment has increased 200,000 per month, on average, since June, and the unemployment rate has declined slightly further, reaching 4.8 percent in January, in line with the median of Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants’ estimates of its longer-run normal level. The labor force participation rate has edged higher, on net, which is all the more notable given a demographically induced downward trend. The 12-month change in the price index for overall personal consumption expenditures (PCE) was 1.6 percent in December—still below the Committee’s 2 percent objective but up noticeably from 2015, when the increase in top-line prices was held down by declines in energy prices. The 12-month change in the index excluding food and energy prices (the core PCE price index) was 1.7 percent last year. Measures of longer-term inflation expectations have been generally stable, though some survey-based measures remain lower than a few years ago; market-based measures of inflation compensation moved higher in recent months but also remain below their levels from a few years ago. Real gross domestic product (GDP) is estimated to have increased at an annual rate of 2¾ percent over the second half of 2016 after increasing just 1 percent in the first half. The economic expansion continues to be supported by accommodative financial conditions—including the still- low cost of borrowing for many households and businesses—and gains in household net wealth, which has been boosted further by a rise in the stock market in recent months and by increases in households’ real income spurred by continuing job gains. However, net exports were a moderate drag on GDP growth in the second half, as imports picked up and the rise in the exchange value of the dollar in recent years remained a drag on export demand. The labor market has continued to tighten gradually . . . 1. Net change in payroll employment Labor market conditions strengthened over the second half of 2016 and early this year. Payroll employment has continued to post solid gains, averaging 200,000 per month since last June (figure 1). This rate of job gains is a bit higher than that seen during the first half of 2016, though it is a little slower than the 225,000 monthly pace in 2015. The unemployment rate has declined slightly further, on net, since the middle of last year. After dipping as low as 4.6 percent in November, the unemployment rate stood at 4.8 percent in January, in line with the median of FOMC participants’ estimates of its longer-run normal level. The labor force participation rate, at 62.9 percent, is up slightly since June 2016. Changing demographics and other longer-run structural changes in the labor market likely 2. Labor force participation rate and employment-to-population ratio NOTE: Both series are a percentage of the population aged 16 and over. SOURCE: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. have continued to put downward pressure on the participation rate. A flat or increasing trajectory of the participation rate should therefore be viewed as a cyclical improvement relative to that downward trend. Reflecting the slightly higher participation rate and the small drop in the unemployment rate, the employment-to-population ratio has moved up about ¼ percentage point since mid-2016 (figure 2). (For additional historical context on the economic recovery, see the box “The Recovery from the Great Recession and Remaining Challenges.”) . . . and is close to full employment Other indicators are also consistent with a healthy labor market. Layoffs as a share of private employment, as measured in the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey (JOLTS), remained at a low level through December, and recent readings on initial claims for unemployment insurance, a more timely measure, point to a very low pace of involuntary separations. The JOLTS quits rate has generally continued to trend up and is now close to pre-crisis levels, indicating that workers feel increasingly confident about their employment opportunities. In addition, the rate of job openings as a share of private employment has remained near record-high levels. The share of workers who are employed part time but would like to work full time—which is part of the U-6 measure of underutilization from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS)—is still somewhat elevated, however, even though it has declined further; as a result, the gap between U-6 and the headline unemployment rate is somewhat wider than it was in the years before the Great Recession (figure 3). The jobless rate for African Americans also continued to edge lower in the second half of 2016, while the rate for Hispanics remained flat; as with the overall unemployment rate, these rates are near levels seen leading into the recession. Despite these gains, the average unemployment rates for these groups of Americans have remained high relative to the aggregate, and those gaps have not narrowed over the past decade (figure 4). 3. Measures of labor underutilization NOTE: Unemployment rate measures total unemployed as a percentage of the labor force. U-4 measures total unemployed plus discouraged workers, as a percentage of the labor force plus discouraged workers. Discouraged workers are a subset of marginally attached workers who are not currently looking for work because they believe no jobs are available for them. U-5 measures total unemployed plus all marginally attached to the labor force, as a percentage of the labor force plus persons marginally attached to the labor force. Marginally attached workers are not in the labor force, want and are available for work, and have looked for a job in the past 12 months. U-6 measures total unemployed plus all marginally attached workers plus total employed part time for economic reasons, as a percentage of the labor force plus all marginally attached workers. The shaded bar indicates a period of business recession as defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research. 4. Unemployment rate by race and ethnicity NOTE: Unemployment rate measures total unemployed as a percentage of the labor force. Persons whose ethnicity is identified as Hispanic or Latino may be of any race. The shaded bar indicates a period of business recession as defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research. The Great Recession severely affected the U .S . economy . . . The Great Recession of 2008 and 2009, and the financial crisis that precipitated it, resulted in massive job losses and falling incomes for American households. The Great Recession was, along many dimensions, the most severe downturn since the Great Depression almost 80 years earlier. Economic output declined outright for 18 months, leaving real gross domestic product (GDP) 4½ percent below its previous peak. More than 8½ million jobs were lost, on net, and the unemployment rate soared from 4½ percent in 2007 to a peak of 10 percent in late 2009 (text figure 3). The labor force participation rate (LFPR), the fraction of the population either employed or counted as unemployed, fell steeply, from 66 percent in 2007 to 63 percent in 2014 (text figure 2). Household incomes tumbled, with real income for the median family declining more than 8 percent from 2007 to 2012. NOTE: Race refers to the race of the head of household. The Hispanic and Latino ethnicity and race categories are not mutually exclusive. Some individuals, for example, are both Hispanic and white, and they are represented in both lines. The hardships were particularly acute for certain groups of Americans. As text figure 4 shows, unemployment rates for blacks and Hispanics rose considerably more during the recession than did such rates for the nation as a whole. Of particular note, inflation-adjusted median household incomes for black households declined more than 12 percent from peak to trough, substantially more in percentage terms than for white, Hispanic, or Asian households (figure A).1 . . . but considerable progress has been made has made considerable progress across a broad range of measures; this progress has occurred while the resilience of the financial system has been shored up. More than 15 million jobs have been created, on net, since the fall of 2009, and the unemployment rate has fallen by half. In addition, the LFPR has moved roughly sideways since 2014, which should be viewed as a cyclical improvement given the demographic changes and other secular trends that have put downward pressure on participation for the past 10 years. The robust job gains seen during the current 1. Measures of household income derived from surveys— such as the Current Population Survey’s Annual Social and Economic Supplement, which informs the Census Bureau’s official statistics—may not fully capture earned income (such as from the self-employed) and unearned income (such as transfers and retirement income). These issues are likely to be much more pronounced for the various subgroups than they are for the national median. expansion are all the more noteworthy given these demographic pressures. The labor market at present is likely close to being at full employment. The unemployment rate is near the median of Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants’ assessments of its longer-run normal value. In addition, real GDP now stands 11 percent above its pre-recession peak, and it is approaching, though still a bit below, the Congressional Budget Office’s estimate of potential output—that is, the maximum sustainable level of economic output.2 Incomes for the median family have mostly recovered from the Great Recession. Of note, real median income is reported to have risen 5.2 percent in 2015 (figure B). The recovery compares favorably with those of other advanced economies. GDP has increased faster and unemployment has declined more quickly in the United States than in other major advanced economies (figures C and D). And the Federal Reserve’s challenges in getting inflation back up to target are similar to, but not as severe as, those faced by some other major monetary authorities in the past few years. Although 2. Congressional Budget Office (2017), The Budget and Economic Outlook: 2017 to 2027 (Washington: CBO, January), p. 41, www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/115th- congress-2017-2018/reports/52370-outlook.pdf. Indexed household income, by percentile consumer price inflation, as measured by the price index for personal consumption expenditures, has run below the FOMC’s 2 percent objective through most of the expansion, in recent months inflation has moved closer to the Committee’s target (text figure 7). Nonetheless, challenges remain While much progress has been made, important challenges remain for the U.S. economy. GDP growth SOURCE: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (2017), “OECD Economic Outlook No. 100 (Edition 2016/2),” OECD Economic Outlook: Statistics and Projections (database), http://dx.doi. org/10.1787/7fa317bf-en (accessed January 2017). has averaged only about 2 percent per year during this expansion, the slowest pace of any postwar recovery (figure E). In part, that subdued pace is due to slower growth in the labor force in recent decades compared with much of the postwar period.3 Another source of slow GDP growth has been lackluster labor productivity growth (text figure 6). Since 2008, output per hour in the business sector has risen about 1 percent per year, far below the pace that prevailed before the recession. Cyclical factors, like weak business investment and firms rebuilding workforces after cutting unusually deeply during the crisis, likely explain some of the slow rise in productivity during this expansion. But structural factors may also be at play, such as declines in innovation, reduced business dynamism, or decreased product market competition.4 The productivity slowdown has taken place in most advanced economies, which suggests a role for structural factors not specific to the United States. (continued on next page) 3. In particular, the Congressional Budget Office estimates that the contribution to potential GDP growth from trend labor force growth is 2 percentage points lower today than it was 40 years ago. This development reflects a slowing of population growth and a switch from a rising LFPR to a falling one, among other factors. See Congressional Budget Office, Budget and Economic Outlook, table 2-3, p. 58, in note 2. 4. See Robert J. Gordon (2016), The Rise and Fall of SOURCE: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (2017), “OECD Economic Outlook No. 100 (Edition 2016/2),” OECD Economic Outlook: Statistics and Projections (database), http://dx.doi.org /10.1787/7fa317bf-en (accessed January 2017). Meanwhile, despite the notable pickup in 2015, real incomes for the median family are still a bit lower than they were prior to the recession. Moreover, the gains have not been uniformly distributed; families at the 10th percentile of the income distribution earned about 4 percent less in 2015 than they did in 2007, while families at the 90th percentile earned about 4 percent more than before the Great Recession (figure B). Similarly, the economic circumstances of blacks and Hispanics have improved since the depths of the recession, but they remain worse, on average, than those of whites or Asians. Unemployment rates for blacks and Hispanics continue to be well above those for their white and Asian counterparts (text figure 4), while incomes for these groups have stayed noticeably lower (figure A). Davis and John Haltiwanger (2014), “Labor Market Fluidity and Economic Performance,” NBER Working Paper Series 20479 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, September); and Philippe Aghion, Nick Bloom, Richard Blundell, Rachel Griffith, and Peter Howitt (2005), “Competition and Innovation: An Inverted-U Relationship,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 120 (May), pp. 701–28. These challenges lie substantially beyond the reach of monetary policy to address. Monetary policy cannot, for instance, generate technological breakthroughs or address the root causes of inequality. Economists are divided about the causes of the productivity slowdown and their consequences for the outlook. For an optimistic view, see Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee (2014), The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress, and Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant Technologies (New york: W.W. Norton & Company). For a less optimistic perspective, see Gordon, Rise and Fall of American Growth, earlier in this note. Others have argued that difficulties associated with economic measurement may exaggerate the slowdown; see, for example, David M. Byrne, John G. Fernald, and Marshall B. Reinsdorf (2016), “Does the United States Have a Productivity Slowdown or a Measurement Problem?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, pp. 109–57, https://www.brookings. edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/03/byrnetextspring16bpea.pdf. Another, more optimistic explanation is that the slowdown in productivity reflects a “constructive pause” as firms adopt new productivity-enhancing technology and organizational practices; see, for example, Paul A. David (1990), “The Dynamo and the Computer: An Historical Perspective on the Modern Productivity Paradox,” American Economic Review, vol. 80 (May), pp. 355–61. NOTE: Real gross domestic product indexed to business cycle trough as dated by the National Bureau of Economic Research. The x-axis shows the number of quarters since the business cycle trough. Labor compensation growth is picking up . . . The improving labor market appears to be contributing to somewhat larger gains in labor compensation. Major BLS measures of hourly compensation posted larger increases last year. Of these, the measures that include the costs of benefits have posted smaller gains than wage-only measures because of a slowdown in the growth of employer health-care costs. A compensation measure computed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, which tracks only the wages of workers who were employed at two points in time spaced 12 months apart, shows even more pickup than these BLS measures (figure 5). As in the previous several years, gains in labor compensation last year occurred against a backdrop of persistently slow productivity growth. Since 2008, labor productivity gains have averaged around 1 percent per year, well below the pace that prevailed from the mid-1990s to 2007 and somewhat below the 1974–95 average of 1½ percent per year (figure 6). Since 2011, output per hour has averaged only a little more than ½ percent per year. The relatively slow pace of productivity growth in recent years is in part a consequence of the slower pace of capital accumulation; diminishing gains in technological innovations and downward trends in business formation also may have played a role. Price inflation has picked up over the past year . . . In recent years inflation has been persistently low, in part because the drop in oil prices and the rise in the exchange value of the dollar since mid-2014 have led to sharp declines in energy prices and relatively weak non-energy import prices. The effects of these earlier developments have been waning, however, and overall inflation has been moving up toward the FOMC’s 2 percent target; the 12-month 5. Measures of change in hourly compensation NOTE: Business-sector compensation is the four-quarter percentage change of the four-quarter moving average. For the employment cost index, change is over the 12 months ending in the last month of each quarter; for average hourly earnings, change is from 12 months earlier; for the Atlanta Fed’s Wage Growth Tracker, the data are shown as a three-month moving average and extend through December 2016. 6. Change in business-sector output per hour NOTE: Changes are measured from Q4 of the year immediately preceding the period through Q4 of the final year of the period. The final period is measured from 2007:Q4 through 2016:Q4. 7. Change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures Excluding food and energy NOTE: The data extend through December 2016; changes are from one year 8. Brent spot and futures prices NOTE: The data are weekly averages of daily data and extend through 9. Non-oil import prices and U.S. dollar exchange rate NOTE: The data for non-oil import prices extend through December 2016. SOURCE: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics; Federal Reserve change in overall PCE prices reached 1.6 percent in December, compared with only 0.6 percent over 2015. The PCE price index excluding food and energy items, which provides a better indication than the headline figure of where overall inflation will be in the future, rose 1.7 percent over the 12 months ending in December, somewhat greater than the 1.4 percent increase in the prior year, as prices for a wide range of core goods and services accelerated. Nonetheless, the rate of inflation for both total and core PCE prices remains below the Committee’s target (figure 7). . . . as oil and other commodity prices moved up moderately The similar readings for headline and core PCE inflation last year partly reflect an upturn in crude oil in 2016 following the sharp decline in the prior two years. Since July, oil prices traded mostly in the $45 to $50 per barrel range until the November OPEC agreement regarding production cuts in 2017 (figure 8). In the wake of that agreement, prices moved up to about $55, roughly $15 per barrel higher since late 2015. Retail gasoline prices also rose after the November OPEC agreement, but that increase has partially reversed in recent weeks. After falling during 2014 and 2015, non-oil import prices stabilized in late 2016, supported by the rise in nonfuel commodity prices as well as by an uptick in foreign inflation (figure 9). In particular, prices of metals have increased in the past few months, boosted by production cuts combined with improved prospects for demand both in the United States and abroad. However, factors holding non-oil import prices down include dollar appreciation in the second half of 2016 and lower prices of agricultural goods last fall, as U.S. harvests hit record-high levels for many crops. Survey measures of longer-term inflation expectations have been generally stable . . . Wage- and price-setting decisions are likely influenced by expectations for inflation. Surveys of professional forecasters outside the Federal Reserve System indicate that their longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable and consistent with the FOMC’s 2 percent objective for PCE inflation. In contrast, the median inflation expectation over the next 5 to 10 years as reported by the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers has generally trended downward over the past few years, though it is little changed from a year ago; this measure was at 2.5 percent in early February (figure 10). It is unclear how best to interpret that downtrend; this measure of inflation expectations has been above actual inflation for much of the past 20 years. . . . and market-based measures of inflation compensation have moved up notably in recent months but also remain relatively low TIPS-based inflation compensation (5 to 10 years forward), after declining to very low levels through the middle of 2016, has risen to nearly 2 percent and is about 20 basis points higher than it was at the end of 2015. However, this level is still below the 2½ to 3 percent range that persisted for most of the 10 years prior to 2014 (figure 11). Real GDP growth picked up in the second half of 2016 Real GDP is reported to have increased at an annual rate of 2¾ percent in the second half of 2016 after increasing just 1 percent in the first half (figure 12). Much of the step-up reflects the stabilization of inventory investment, which held down GDP growth considerably in the first half of last year, as well as a pickup in government purchases of goods and services. Private domestic final purchases— that is, final purchases by U.S. households 10. Median inflation expectations NOTE: The Michigan survey data are monthly and extend through February; the February data are preliminary. The SPF data for inflation expectations for personal consumption expenditures are quarterly and extend from 2007:Q1 through 2017:Q1. 11. 5-to-10-year-forward inflation compensation NOTE: The data are weekly averages of daily data and extend through February 10, 2017. TIPS is Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities. 12. Change in real gross domestic product and gross domestic income 13. Change in real personal consumption expenditures and disposable personal income Personal consumption expenditures Disposable personal income 14. Prices of existing single-family houses NOTE: The data for the S&P/Case-Shiller index extend through November 2016. The data for the Zillow and CoreLogic indexes extend through December 2016. SOURCE: CoreLogic Home Price Index; Zillow; S&P/Case-Shiller U.S. National Home Price Index. The S&P/Case-Shiller Index is a product of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. (For Dow Jones Indices licensing information, see the note on the Contents page.) 15. Nominal house prices and price–rent ratio NOTE: The data extend through December 2016. The CoreLogic price index is seasonally adjusted by Federal Reserve Board staff. The price–rent ratio is the ratio of nominal house prices to the consumer price index of rent of primary residence. The data are indexed to 100 in January 2000. and businesses—grew more steadily than GDP last year and posted a fairly solid gain in the second half. PCE growth was bolstered by rising incomes and wealth, while private fixed investment was weak despite the low costs of borrowing for many households and businesses. Although the FOMC has increased the federal funds rate twice as this expansion has progressed—once in December 2015 and again in December 2016—in ¼ percentage point steps, overall financial conditions have been sufficiently accommodative to support somewhat-faster-than-trend growth in real activity. Gains in income and wealth have continued to support consumer spending . . . Real consumer spending rose at an annual rate of 2¾ percent in the second half of 2016, a solid pace similar to the one seen in the first half. Consumption has been supported by the ongoing improvement in the labor market and the associated increases in real disposable personal income (DPI)—that is, income after taxes and adjusted for price changes. Real DPI increased 2¼ percent in 2016 following a gain of 3 percent in 2015, when purchasing power was boosted by falling energy prices (figure 13). Consumer spending has also been supported by further increases in household net worth. Broad measures of U.S. equity prices rose solidly over the past year, and house prices continued to move up (figure 14). (In nominal terms, national house prices are approaching their peaks of the mid-2000s, though relative to rents or income, house price valuations are much lower than a decade ago (figure 15).) Buoyed by these cumulative increases in home and equity prices, aggregate household net worth has risen appreciably from its level during the recession, and the ratio of household net worth to income remains well above its historical average (figure 16). The benefits of homeownership have not been distributed evenly; see the box “Homeownership by Race and Ethnicity.” . . . as does credit availability Consumer credit has continued to expand somewhat faster than income amid stable delinquencies on consumer debt (figure 17). Auto and student loans remain widely available even to borrowers with lower credit scores, and outstanding balances on these types of loans continued to expand at a robust pace. Credit card balances continued to grow and were 6 percent higher than one year earlier in December. That said, credit card standards have remained tight for nonprime borrowers. As a result, delinquencies on credit cards are still near low historical levels. Consumer confidence is strong Household spending has also been supported by favorable consumer sentiment. In 2015 and through most of 2016, readings from the overall index of consumer sentiment from the Michigan survey were solid, likely reflecting rising incomes and job gains. Sentiment has improved further in the past couple of months (figure 18). The share of households expecting real income gains over the next year or two is now close to its pre-recession level despite having lagged improvements in the headline sentiment measure earlier in the recovery. Housing construction has been sluggish despite rising home demand Residential investment spending appears to have only edged higher in 2016 following a larger gain in the previous year. Single-family housing starts registered a moderate increase in 2016, while multifamily housing starts flattened out on balance (figure 19). The pace of construction activity in 2016 remained sluggish despite solid gains in house prices and ongoing improvements in demand for both new and existing homes (figure 20). As a result, the months’ supply of inventories of homes for sale dropped to low levels, and the aggregate vacancy rate moved to its lowest level since 2005. Reportedly, tight supplies of skilled labor and developed lots have been restraining home construction. 16. Wealth-to-income ratio NOTE: The data extend through 2016:Q3. The series is the ratio of 17. Changes in household debt NOTE: Changes are calculated from year-end to year-end except 2016 changes, which are calculated from Q3 to Q3. NOTE: The data extend through February 2017; the February data are preliminary. The consumer sentiment data are monthly and are indexed to 100 in 1966. The real income expectations data are calculated as the net percentage of survey respondents expecting family income to go up more than prices during the next year or two plus 100 and are shown as a three-month moving average. Most households in the United States own their homes, and among those who do not, many continue to aspire to own their homes.1 The popularity of homeownership may stem from the amenities and financial benefits that are associated with ownership. For example, on the financial side, owning a home protects households against volatility in rental prices and may help them build wealth as they repay their mortgage.2 Historically, we have seen disparities in homeownership across racial and ethnic groups, and these disparities are an important dimension of racial inequality in the United States.3 1. A 2014 survey indicated that over 90 percent of young renters reported that they intended to purchase a home in the future. See Fannie Mae (2014), Fannie Mae National Housing Survey: What Younger Renters Want and the Financial Constraints They See (Washington: Fannie Mae, May), www. fanniemae.com/resources/file/research/housingsurvey/pdf/ nhsmay2014presentation.pdf. 2. See Todd Sinai and Nicholas S. Souleles (2005), “Owner- Occupied Housing as a Hedge against Rent Risk,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 120 (2), pp. 763–89; see also David Laibson (1997), “Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 112 (2), pp. 443–78. Of course, as the financial crisis made clear, homeownership carries risks as well. For example, highly leveraged homeowners are at risk of negative equity if house prices decline, which tends to impede mobility; see Fernando Ferreira, Joseph Gyourko, and Joseph Tracy (2010), “Housing Busts and Household Mobility,” Journal of Urban Economics, vol. 68 (July), pp. 34–45. 2015 indicate that the overall homeownership rate rose sharply from 1940 to 1960 (figure A).4 Research suggests that this surge in homeownership reflected a combination of factors, including the postwar economic boom and an easing of terms for mortgage credit (such as reduced down payment requirements and longer terms to maturity) through government- backed lending programs run by the Federal Housing Administration and the veterans Administration.5 The homeownership rate then edged up slightly further, on net, between 1960 and 2006. However, since the onset of the housing crash and the financial crisis in 2007, the homeownership rate has declined as foreclosures became elevated for several years and first-time homebuying dropped and remained subdued.6 These post-crisis declines in homeownership have been similar for white, black, and Hispanic households and somewhat smaller for Asian households.7 Thus, the large gaps between the homeownership rates of white households and those of black and Hispanic households have held steady, while the smaller gap between white and Asian households has narrowed slightly. Perhaps the most striking feature of the data is the persistence of the black–white homeownership gap, which has measured about 25 to 30 percentage points throughout the past 115 years. Potential reasons for this persistence will be discussed shortly. 3. Following standard practice, the homeownership rate is calculated here as the fraction of households that own their home. Thus, trends in household formation influence trends in the homeownership rate, and declining household formation in recent years has helped support the homeownership rate. See Andrew Paciorek (2016), “The Long and Short of Household Formation,” Real Estate Economics, vol. 44 (1), pp. 7–40. The likelihood of owning one’s home rises with age. Thus, the aging of the U.S. population contributed to increasing homeownership before 2006 and would 4. The data are decennial census data from 1900 through 2000 as well as American Community Survey (ACS) data from 2006, 2009, 2012, and 2015. For individual-level census and ACS data, see Steven Ruggles, Katie Genadek, Ronald Goeken, Josiah Grover, and Matthew Sobek (2015), Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: version 6.0 [machine-readable database] (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota). The ACS has been conducted annually by the U.S. Census Bureau since 2000. Data on homeownership are not available in the 1950 census data. 5. See Daniel K. Fetter (2014), “The Twentieth-Century Increase in U.S. Home Ownership: Facts and Hypotheses,” in Eugene N. White, Kenneth Snowden, and Price Fishback, eds., Housing and Mortgage Markets in Historical Perspective (Chicago: University of Chicago Press). 6. See Neil Bhutta (2015), “The Ins and Outs of Mortgage Debt during the Housing Boom and Bust,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 76, pp. 284–98. 7. Households are classified by race and ethnicity NOTE: The data are every 10 years through 2000, except 1950; after 2000, the data are for 2006, 2009, 2012, and 2015. Persons whose ethnicity is identified as Hispanic or Latino may be of any race. according to the race and ethnicity of the household head, defined here as either the survey respondent or the spouse of the respondent if older. The Hispanic ethnicity and race categories are not mutually exclusive. Some individuals are, for example, both Hispanic and white. The Asian category includes Pacific Islanders. Homeownership rates for Hispanic and Asian households are not shown before 1980 because, prior to 1980, Hispanic status was not asked about directly and the Asian population was quite small. have caused the homeownership rate to continue rising after 2006, all else being equal. Examining the data separately by age group reveals homeownership trends that differ from overall averages, with stronger declines in homeownership observed for young and middle- aged households. For example, among households headed by a person 30 to 39 years old, homeownership rates fell more than 10 percentage points between 2006 and 2015 for all major races and ethnicities (figure B).8 For both white and black households in this age range, the homeownership rate peaked in 1980, much earlier than the overall national average; by 2015, it stood well below its level in 1960. Over the past century, the black–white homeownership gap has actually widened for households in this age range. In light of the gains in education, income, and access to credit and housing over the long term for minorities in the United States, the persistence of the black–white gap is surprising. A considerable amount of academic research has sought to better understand differences in homeownership rates across racial and ethnic groups.9 Many factors have been found to influence the likelihood of homeownership, and 8. For more complete data on homeownership rates by age since 1900, see Laurie Goodman, Rolf Pendall, and Jun Zhu (2015), Headship and Homeownership: What Does the Future Hold? (Washington: Urban Institute, June), www.urban.org/ sites/default/files/2000257-headship-and-homeownership- what-does-the-future-hold.pdf. 9. For a review of the literature, see Donald R. Haurin, Christopher E. Herbert, and Stuart S. Rosenthal (2007), “Homeownership Gaps among Low-Income and Minority Households,” Cityscape, vol. 9 (2), pp. 5–52. B. Homeownership rates, by race and ethnicity, for households headed by persons aged 30 to 39 NOTE: The data are every 10 years through 2000, except 1950; after 2000, the data are for 2006, 2009, 2012, and 2015. Persons whose ethnicity is identified as Hispanic or Latino may be of any race. some of these may have had offsetting effects on the black–white gap. For example, from 1940 to 1960, the migration of many black families from the South to northern central cities (where owning a home was less likely regardless of race) tended to offset the positive effects on the homeownership rate from gains in income and education.10 In more recent decades, the relative rise in the fraction of black households headed by a single parent may have offset factors that otherwise would have generated increases in homeownership rates, including the introduction and enforcement of anti-discrimination laws, such as the Equal Credit Opportunity Act and the Fair Housing Act. Research on the black–white and Hispanic–white gaps indicates that a large portion of these gaps in recent years can be attributed to socioeconomic differences—such as age, income, and family structure—across groups.11 That said, some of the overall gap is not explainable on the basis of those variables and could reflect other factors such as location and housing preferences; it also could reflect continued discrimination in housing and credit markets.12 Finally, recent research has also documented larger differences in credit scores between whites and minorities than can be explained by income disparities; thus, the tighter mortgage credit environment that prevails today relative to a dozen or more years ago could cause the homeownership gap to widen in the near term.13 10. See William J. Collins and Robert A. Margo (2001), “Race and Home Ownership: A Century-Long view,” Explorations in Economic History, vol. 38 (January), pp. 68–92. 11. See Stuart A. Gabriel and Stuart S. Rosenthal (2005), “Homeownership in the 1980s and 1990s: Aggregate Trends and Racial Gaps,” Journal of Urban Economics, vol. 57 (January), pp. 101–27; and Eric Fesselmeyer, Kien T. Le, and Kiat ying Seah (2012), “A Household-Level Decomposition of the White–Black Homeownership Gap,” Regional Science and Urban Economics, vol. 42 (January), pp. 52–62. 12. See Kerwin Kofi Charles and Erik Hurst (2002), “The Transition to Home Ownership and the Black–White Wealth Gap,” Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 84 (May), pp. 281–97. 13. See Neil Bhutta and Daniel Ringo (2016), “Credit Availability and the Decline in Mortgage Lending to Minorities after the Housing Boom,” FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 29), https://www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/notes/feds- notes/2016/credit-availability-and-the-decline-in-mortgage- lending-to-minorities-after-the-housing-boom-20160929.html. For additional research on heightened credit score thresholds in recent years, see Steven Laufer and Andrew Paciorek (2016), “The Effects of Mortgage Credit Availability: Evidence from Minimum Credit Score Lending Rules,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-098 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, December), https://www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/feds/2016/ files/2016098pap.pdf. 19. Private housing starts and permits NOTE: The data extend through December 2016. SOURCE: Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. 20. New and existing home sales Existing home sales NOTE: The data extend through December 2016. New home sales includes only single-family sales. Existing home sales includes single-family, condo, townhome, and co-op sales. SOURCE: For new home sales, Census Bureau; for existing home sales, 21. Mortgage rates and housing affordability through November, and the mortgage rate data are weekly through February 9, 2017. At an index value of 100, a median-income family has exactly enough income to qualify for a median-priced home mortgage. Housing affordability is seasonally adjusted by Board staff. index data are monthly Homebuying and residential construction have been supported by low interest rates and ongoing easing of credit standards for mortgages. Banks indicated in the October 2016 Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS) that they eased standards on several categories of residential home purchase loans.1 Even so, mortgage credit is still relatively difficult to access for borrowers with low credit scores, harder-to-document income, or high debt- to-income ratios. Although mortgage rates moved up from their all-time low levels over the second half of last year, they remain quite low by historical standards, and, consequently, housing affordability remains favorable (figure 21). Business investment may be turning up after a period of surprising weakness Real outlays for business investment—that is, private nonresidential fixed investment—were generally weak in 2016 but posted larger gains toward the end of the year (figure 22). Last year’s weakness occurred despite moderate increases in aggregate demand and generally favorable financing conditions, and it was widespread across categories of equipment investment. Investment in equipment and intangibles moved down over most of the year, likely reflecting the effects of the combination of low oil prices, weak export demand, and a muted longer-run demand outlook among businesses. Although such declines are unusual outside of a recession, spending on these items did turn up in the fourth quarter. Investment in drilling and mining structures, which had been falling sharply since the drop in oil prices in 2014, fell further through most of 2016 but seems to be bottoming out. Outside of the energy sector, investment in nonresidential structures increased moderately in 2016. Finally, after having been subdued for much of 2016, a widespread set of business sentiment indicators improved notably near the end of last year. 1. The SLOOS is available on the Board’s website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/snloansurvey. Financing conditions for nonfinancial firms have generally remained favorable Nonfinancial businesses have continued to raise funds through bond issuance and bank loans, albeit at a somewhat slower pace than in the first half of 2016 (figure 23). The pace of such borrowing was supported in part by continued low interest rates: Corporate bond yields for speculative-grade borrowers have declined since last June, and those for investment-grade borrowers have increased but a fair bit less than those on comparable- maturity Treasury securities (figure 24). Banks indicated in the October 2016 and January 2017 SLOOS that they eased lending terms on commercial and industrial loans in the second half of the year, but that standards on such loans remained unchanged relative to earlier in 2016; banks continued to tighten standards on commercial real estate loans over the second half of last year. Net exports held down second-half real GDP growth The rise in the dollar since mid-2014 and subdued foreign economic growth have continued to weigh on U.S. exports (figure 25). Nevertheless, exports increased at a moderate pace in the second half of 2016, but with much of the increase a result of rising agricultural exports. In particular, soybean exports surged in the third quarter before falling back toward a more normal level in the fourth quarter. Consistent with the stronger exchange value of the dollar, imports jumped in the second half of the year after having been about flat in the first half, when investment demand for imported equipment was very weak. Overall, real net exports were a moderate drag on real GDP growth in the second half of 2016. Although the trade balance and current account deficit narrowed slightly in the second and third quarters of 2016, the trade balance widened in the fourth quarter, as imports significantly outpaced exports (figure 26). 22. Change in real private nonresidential fixed investment 23. Selected components of net debt financing for nonfinancial businesses 24. Corporate bond yields, by securities rating NOTE: The yields shown are yields on 10-year bonds. SOURCE: BofA Merrill Lynch Global Research, used with permission. 25. Change in real imports and exports of goods and services 26. U.S. trade and current account balances NOTE: The data for the current account extend through 2016:Q3. GDP is 27. Change in real government expenditures on consumption and investment Federal fiscal policy was a roughly neutral influence on GDP growth in 2016 . . . After being a drag on aggregate demand during much of the expansion, discretionary changes in federal fiscal policy have had a more neutral influence over the past two years. During 2016, policy actions had little effect on taxes and transfers, and federal purchases of goods and services are little changed over this period (figure 27). The federal budget deficit increased in fiscal year 2016 to 3.2 percent of GDP from 2.4 percent in fiscal 2015. Revenues rose only 1 percent last year in nominal terms and fell as a share of GDP because of soft personal income tax revenues and a decline in corporate income tax collections. Outlays rose 5 percent, edging up as a share of GDP, owing to increases in mandatory spending and interest payments as well as a shift in the timing of some payments that ordinarily would have been made in fiscal 2017 (figure 28). The Congressional Budget Office forecasts the deficit to be about the same size (as a share of GDP) in fiscal 2017 and in the next couple of years before rising thereafter. Consequently, the ratio of debt held by the public to nominal GDP is projected to remain near its current level of 77 percent of GDP for the next couple of years and then begin to rise (figure 29). . . . and real purchases at the state and local level continue to increase, albeit at a tepid pace The fiscal conditions of most state and local governments have continued to improve, though the pace of improvement has been slower in recent quarters than it had been previously. The ongoing improvement facilitated a step-up in the average pace of employment gain in the sector to the strongest rate since 2008. At the same time, however, real investment in structures by state and local governments has declined, on net, since the first quarter of 2016 after trending up during the prior two years (figure 30). All told, total real state and local purchases rose anemically in 2016. On the other side of the ledger, revenue growth was subdued overall, with little growth in tax collections at the state level but moderate gains at the local level. The expected path for the federal funds rate over the next several years steepened Against the backdrop of continued strengthening in the labor market and an increase in inflation over the course of 2016, the path of the federal funds rate implied by market quotes on interest rate derivatives has moved up, on net, since the middle of last year. Following the U.S. elections in November, the expected policy path in the United States steepened significantly, apparently reflecting investors’ expectations of a more expansionary fiscal policy. Meanwhile, market-based measures of uncertainty about the policy rate approximately one to two years ahead also increased, on balance, suggesting that some of the firming in market rates may reflect a rise in term premiums. Survey-based measures of the expected path of policy also moved up in recent months. In the Survey of Primary Dealers that was conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York just prior to the January 2017 FOMC meeting, the median dealer expected two rate hikes in 2017 and three rate hikes in 2018 as the most likely outcome.2 U .S . nominal Treasury yields increased considerably After dropping significantly during the first half of 2016 and reaching near-historical lows in the aftermath of the U.K. referendum on exit from the European Union, or Brexit, in June, yields on medium- and longer-term nominal Treasury securities rebounded strongly in the second half of last year, with a substantial rise following the U.S. 2. The Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s Survey of Primary Dealers is available at https://www.newyorkfed. org/markets/primarydealer_survey_questions.html. 28. Federal receipts and expenditures NOTE: The receipts and expenditures data are on a unified-budget basis and are for fiscal years (October through September); gross domestic product (GDP) data are for the four quarters ending in Q3. SOURCE: Office of Management and Budget. 29. Federal government debt held by the public NOTE: The data extend through 2016:Q3. The data for gross domestic product (GDP) are at an annual rate. Federal debt held by the public equals federal debt less Treasury securities held in federal employee defined benefit retirement accounts, evaluated at the end of the quarter. 30. State and local employment and structures investment Billions of chained (2009) dollars, annual rate NOTE: The employment data are monthly, and the structures data are 31. Yields on nominal Treasury securities NOTE: The Treasury ceased publication of the 30-year constant maturity series on February 18, 2002, and resumed that series on February 9, 2006. elections (figure 31). Market participants have attributed the increase in yields following the elections primarily to expectations of a more expansionary fiscal policy. The boost in longer- term nominal yields in recent months reflects roughly equal increases in real yields and inflation compensation. Consistent with the changes in Treasury yields, yields on 30-year agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS)––an important determinant of mortgage interest rates––increased significantly over the second half of the year (figure 32). However, Treasury and MBS yields remain quite low by historical standards. Broad equity price indexes increased notably . . . U.S. equity markets were volatile around the Brexit vote in the United Kingdom but operated without disruptions. Broad equity price indexes have increased notably since late June, with a sizable portion of the gain occurring after the U.S. elections in November (figure 33). Reportedly, equity prices have been supported in part by the perception that corporate tax rates may be reduced. Stock prices of banks, which tend to benefit from a steepening in the yield curve, outperformed the broader market. Moreover, market participants pointed to expectations of changes in the regulatory environment as a factor contributing to the outperformance of bank stocks. By contrast, stock prices of firms that tend to benefit from lower interest rates, such as utilities, declined moderately on net. The implied volatility of the S&P 500 index—the VIX— fell, ending the period close to the bottom of its historical range. (For a discussion of financial stability issues over this same period, see the box “Developments Related to Financial Stability.”) . . . while risk spreads on corporate bonds narrowed Bond spreads in the nonfinancial corporate sector declined significantly across the credit spectrum, suggesting increased investor confidence in the outlook for the corporate sector since the middle of last year. Declines in spreads were particularly large for firms in the energy sector, likely reflecting improved prospects for U.S. producers as they continue to increase efficiency and benefit from higher prices. Treasury market functioning and liquidity conditions in the mortgage-backed securities market were generally stable Indicators of Treasury market functioning remained broadly stable over the second half of 2016 and early 2017. A variety of liquidity metrics––including bid-asked spreads and bid sizes––have displayed minimal signs of liquidity pressures overall, with a modest reduction in liquidity following the U.S. elections. In addition, Treasury auctions generally continued to be well received by investors. Liquidity conditions in the agency MBS market were also generally stable. The compliance deadline for money market mutual fund reform passed in mid-October with no market disruption In the weeks leading up to the October 14, 2016, deadline for money market mutual funds (also referred to as money market funds, or MMFs) to comply with a variety of regulatory reforms, shifts in investments from prime to government MMFs were substantial. However, the transition was smooth and without any market disruptions. Overnight Eurodollar deposit volumes fell significantly and have remained low as prime funds pulled back from lending in this market. Meanwhile, the rise in total assets of government funds appeared to contribute to modestly higher levels of take-up at the overnight reverse repurchase agreement (ON RRP) facility through late 2016. Overnight money market rates were little affected, although the spread between the three-month LIBOR (London interbank offered rate) and the OIS (overnight index swap) rate has remained elevated, likely reflecting MMFs’ reduced appetite for term lending. 32. Yield and spread on agency mortgage-backed securities NOTE: The data are daily. Yield shown is for the Fannie Mae 30-year current coupon, the coupon rate at which new mortgage-backed securities would be priced at par, or face, value. Spread shown is to the average of the 5- and 10-year nominal Treasury yields. 33. Equity prices Jones Indices licensing information, see the note on the Contents page.) Financial vulnerabilities in the U.S. financial system overall have continued to be moderate since mid-2016. U.S. banks are well capitalized and have sizable liquidity buffers. Nonfinancial corporate business leverage has remained elevated by historical standards, and household borrowing has increased modestly, leaving the household debt-to-income ratio about unchanged. On balance, the ratio of aggregate nonfinancial credit to gross domestic product (GDP) has moved up a little in recent years to about its level in the mid-2000s but remains well below its recent peak. valuation pressures in some asset classes have been rising, particularly late last year. vulnerabilities stemming from leverage in the financial sector appear low. Regulatory capital has remained at historically high levels for most large domestic banks, and all 33 firms participating in the Federal Reserve’s supervisory stress tests for 2016 were able to maintain capital ratios above required minimums through the severely adverse recession scenario.1 Moreover, market-based measures of leverage for domestic banks have decreased somewhat since November. However, valuations of many of the largest foreign banks remain depressed. Despite the settlement on December 23 between Deutsche Bank and the U.S. Department of Justice and some progress toward addressing problems in the Italian banking sector, several large European financial institutions have continued to be vulnerable to unexpected developments. Available data suggest that the leverage of nonbank financial institutions was relatively stable in the second half of 2016. Asset valuation pressures have increased, on balance, since mid-2016, along with several indicators of investors’ risk appetite. Although yields on Treasury securities and term premiums increased as market expectations about future growth shifted higher in the fall, they both remain low. In addition, the spread of yields on corporate bonds over those on comparable- maturity Treasury securities narrowed. Estimates of risk premiums in equity markets also declined. Outstanding riskier corporate debt edged down over the past year, but gross issuance of leveraged loans was strong and the share of bond issuance rated B or below remained in the fourth quarter at the high end of its range over the past few years. Commercial real estate (CRE) valuations, which have been an area of growing concern over the past year, rose further, with property prices continuing to climb and capitalization rates decreasing to historically low levels. While CRE debt remains modest relative to the overall size of the economy and the tightening in bank lending standards for CRE loans in the second half of last year may reflect some reduction in the appetite for CRE lending, the heightening of valuation pressures may leave some smaller banks vulnerable to a sizable CRE price decline. Also, residential home prices continued to rise briskly through November. Although most measures of residential valuation have moved up somewhat, they are still only modestly above the levels that would be predicted, given rents and investment costs. The results of the Federal Reserve’s 2017 stress tests, for which the scenarios were released on February 3, will help gauge the vulnerability of large U.S. banks to all of these asset valuation pressures. On balance, vulnerabilities associated with liquidity and maturity transformation are also somewhat below their longer-run average. The reliance of large bank holding companies on short-term funding remains subdued, and their holdings of high-quality liquid assets are robust, owing in part to the implementation of the Liquidity Coverage Ratio. Money market mutual fund (also referred to as money market fund, or MMF) reforms designed to reduce the advantages associated with being the first to exit a fund in times of financial stress led to large declines in prime MMF assets under management, with most of these funds migrating to government MMFs. While the resulting smaller size of prime funds and the new regulations should make the industry more stable, the longer-term effect will depend on the degree to which such activity migrates to other types of short-term investment vehicles that may be subject to similar fragilities. vulnerabilities stemming from private nonfinancial- sector borrowing remain moderate. The credit-to-GDP ratio for the corporate sector is elevated after several years of rapid growth. Despite this high leverage, interest-expense ratios are low by historical standards even among higher-risk firms, as are measures of expected default based on accounting and stock return data, especially outside of the oil sector. Turning to households, debt growth was modest through the third quarter of 2016, and the debt-to-income ratio has changed little over the past few years. Except for a recent increase in early-payment delinquencies in subprime auto loans—a small segment of overall indebtedness—broad indicators of household solvency have remained within historical norms. On balance, the private nonfinancial-sector credit-to-GDP ratio is far below the levels seen late last decade and lies near its level in the mid-2000s (figure A). 1. The 2016 supervisory stress-test methodology and results are available on the Board’s website at https://www. federalreserve.gov/bankinforeg/stress-tests/2016-supervisory- stress-test-results.htm. Last fall, the Federal Reserve Board finalized its framework for setting the Countercyclical Capital Buffer NOTE: The data on the credit-to-GDP ratio and its year-over-year growth are quarterly and extend through 2016:Q3. The shaded bars indicate periods of business recession as defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research. (CCyB) and later voted to maintain the CCyB at zero.2 In forming its view about the appropriate size of the U.S. CCyB, the Board intends to monitor a wide range of financial and economic indicators and consider their implications for financial system vulnerabilities, including but not limited to asset valuation pressures, risk appetite, leverage in the financial and nonfinancial sectors, and maturity and liquidity transformation in the financial sector. The decision to maintain the CCyB at zero in part reflected an assessment that vulnerabilities associated with financial-sector leverage were at the lower end of their historical ranges. As part of its effort to improve the resilience of financial institutions and overall financial stability, the Board has also taken several further regulatory steps. Among those steps is that the Board finalized a rule that would impose total loss-absorbing capacity and long- term debt requirements on U.S. global systemically important bank holding companies (G-SIBs) and on the U.S. operations of certain foreign G-SIBS.3 The final rule would require each covered firm to maintain a 2. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016), “Federal Reserve Board Announces It Has voted to Affirm Countercyclical Capital Buffer (CCyB) at Current Level of 0 Percent,” press release, October 24, https://www. federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/bcreg/20161024a.htm. 3. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System minimum amount of unsecured long-term debt that could be converted into equity in a possible resolution of that firm, thereby recapitalizing the firm without putting taxpayer funds at risk and diminishing the threat that its failure would pose to financial stability. In addition, the Board completed an extensive review of its statutory stress-test and Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) programs and made some related modifications to the rules associated with those programs for the 2017 cycle.4 Among other changes, the Board removed certain large, noncomplex firms from the qualitative assessment of the CCAR.5 Moreover, the Board, together with the other federal banking agencies, issued an advance notice of proposed rulemaking, inviting public comment on a set of potential enhanced cybersecurity risk-management and resilience standards that would apply to depository institutions and regulated holding companies with over $50 billion in assets and to certain financial market infrastructure companies.6 The standards would be tiered, with an additional set of higher standards for systems that provide key functionality to the financial sector. The Board and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) also have continued to actively engage in the resolution-planning process with the largest banks. As part of that process, the Board and the FDIC announced that Bank of America, BNy Mellon, JPMorgan Chase, and State Street adequately remediated deficiencies in their 2015 resolution plans. The two agencies also announced that Wells Fargo did not adequately remedy all of its deficiencies and will be subject to restrictions on certain activities until the deficiencies are remedied.7 4. See Daniel K. Tarullo (2016), “Next Steps in the Evolution 5. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 6. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 7. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (2016), “Agencies Announce Determinations on October Resolution Plan Submissions of Five Systemically Important Domestic Banking Institutions,” joint press release, December 13, https://www. federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/bcreg/20161213a.htm. 34. Ratio of total commercial bank credit to nominal gross domestic product 35. Profitability of bank holding companies NOTE: The data, which are seasonally adjusted, are quarterly and extend Bank credit continued to expand, and bank profitability improved Aggregate credit provided by commercial banks continued to grow at a solid pace in the second half of 2016 (figure 34). The expansion in bank credit was driven by strong growth in core loans coupled with an increase in banks’ holdings of securities. Measures of bank profitability improved since the middle of last year but remained below their historical averages (figure 35). Municipal bond markets continued to function smoothly Credit conditions in municipal bond markets have generally remained stable since late June. Over that period, the MCDX—an index of credit default swap spreads for a broad portfolio of municipal bonds—decreased moderately, while yield spreads on 20-year general obligation municipal bonds over comparable-maturity Treasury securities were little changed on balance. The Puerto Rico Oversight, Management, and Economic Stability Act was passed into law in late June, providing the commonwealth with a clearer path toward debt restructuring. Although Puerto Rico missed a small amount of debt payments on general obligation bonds in August, this default appeared to have had no significant effect on the broader municipal bond market. Foreign financial market conditions improved despite global political uncertainties Financial market conditions in both the advanced foreign economies (AFEs) and the emerging market economies (EMEs) have generally improved since June. In the AFEs, increasing distance from the Brexit vote, better-than-expected economic data for Europe, and the continuation of accommodative monetary policies by advanced-economy central banks have contributed to improved risk sentiment. Advanced-economy bond yields reversed their downward trend seen in the first half of the year and increased notably following the U.S. elections, in part on expectations of a more expansionary U.S. fiscal policy (figure 36). Equity prices in the AFEs have generally risen since June, with financial stocks outperforming broader stock indexes as third-quarter earnings largely beat expectations, several major risk events passed, and the steepening of yield curves was expected to boost profits going forward (figure 37). Despite some widening of euro-area corporate spreads in the last months of 2016, corporate credit conditions in the advanced foreign economies have remained accommodative, with the continuation of corporate asset purchase programs by several AFE central banks and with low corporate spreads. In EMEs, equities have risen significantly and sovereign yield spreads have narrowed since June, supported in part by higher commodity prices. Financial conditions did tighten briefly following the U.S. elections, with increased capital outflows and wider sovereign spreads, on concerns that higher global interest rates, as well as the possibility of more protectionist trade policies, would weigh on EME growth (figure 38). However, the favorable risk sentiment seen in the summer and early fall of 2016 resumed by the end of the year for most EMEs. After depreciating slightly in the first half of last year, the dollar strengthened in the second half The dollar has strengthened since June, with the broad dollar index—a measure of the trade-weighted value of the dollar against foreign currencies—rising about 4 percent on balance (figure 39). Much of this strengthening of the U.S. dollar reflects the combined influences of the large depreciation of the Mexican peso, expectations of fiscal and trade policy changes after the U.S. elections, and 36. 10-year nominal benchmark yields in selected advanced economies NOTE: The data are weekly averages of daily data and extend through 37. Equity indexes for selected foreign economies Emerging market economies NOTE: The data are weekly averages of daily data and extend through SOURCE: For advanced foreign economies, MSCI EAFE Index via Thomson Reuters Datastream; for emerging market economies, MSCI Emerging Markets Index via Thomson Reuters Datastream; for euro-area banks, Dow Jones Euro STOXX Bank Index via Bloomberg. (For Dow Jones Indices licensing information, see the note on the Contents page.) 38. Emerging market mutual fund flows and spreads Bond fund flows (right axis) Equity fund flows (right axis) EMBI+ (left axis) NOTE: The EMBI+ data are weekly averages of daily data and extend through February 9, 2017. The EPFR data are monthly sums of weekly data. The fund flows data exclude funds located in China. 39. U.S. dollar exchange rate indexes NOTE: The data, which are in foreign currency units per dollar, are weekly averages of daily data and extend through February 9, 2017. 40. Real gross domestic product growth in selected advanced foreign economies NOTE: The data for the United Kingdom incorporate the flash estimate for 2016:Q4. The data for the euro area incorporate the preliminary flash estimate for 2016:Q4. The data for Japan and Canada extend through 2016:Q3. market expectations of tighter Federal Reserve monetary policy. The Chinese renminbi also weakened notably against the dollar, on net, as capital outflows from China picked up; Chinese authorities tightened capital controls in response. In general, AFE economic growth was moderate and inflation remained subdued In Canada, economic growth picked up sharply in the third quarter, following a contraction in the previous quarter, as oil extraction recovered from the disruptions caused by wildfires in May (figure 40). In contrast, economic growth in Japan in the second and third quarters slowed after a strong first quarter, returning to a more typical moderate pace. Euro-area growth firmed in the second half, and, in the United Kingdom, economic activity was resilient in the aftermath of the Brexit referendum in June. Available indicators suggest that growth in most AFEs was moderate near the end of 2016 and early this year. Headline inflation in most AFEs increased over the second half of 2016, in part driven by higher oil prices. In the United Kingdom, the substantial sterling depreciation after the Brexit referendum also exerted upward pressure on consumer prices. Even so, core inflation readings in AFEs remained generally subdued, and headline inflation stayed below central bank targets in Canada, the euro area, Japan, and the United Kingdom (figure 41). AFE central banks maintained highly accommodative monetary policies In August, the Bank of England cut its policy rate 25 basis points, announced additional purchases of government and corporate bonds, and introduced a term funding scheme. In September, the Bank of Japan committed to expanding the monetary base until inflation exceeds 2 percent in a stable manner and adopted a new policy framework aimed at controlling the yield curve by targeting short- and long-term interest rates. In December, the European Central Bank announced an extension of the intended duration of its asset purchases through at least December 2017, albeit with a slight reduction in those purchases beginning in April 2017. In EMEs, Asian growth was solid . . . Chinese economic activity remained robust in the second half of 2016, as earlier policy easing supported stable manufacturing growth and a strong property market (figure 42). However, the property market cooled somewhat toward the end of the year following the introduction of new macroprudential measures aimed at curbing rapidly rising house prices. Elsewhere in emerging Asia, growth held steady in the third quarter but stepped down in some countries in the fourth, even though exports and manufacturing improved. And in India, a surprise mandatory exchange of large-denomination bank notes—a move aimed at battling tax evasion and corruption— has disrupted activity. . . . but many Latin American economies continued to struggle In Mexico, after considerable weakness in the first half of 2016, growth surged in the third quarter, supported in part by a recovery in exports to the United States. However, activity weakened again in the fourth quarter, as consumer and business confidence dropped. Furthermore, inflation in Mexico jumped over the second half of the year, pressured in part by the peso’s sizable depreciation, prompting the Bank of Mexico to hike its policy rate sharply. Brazil’s recession deepened in the third quarter, reflecting in part tight macroeconomic policies, although the central bank began to ease monetary policy as inflation dropped in response to the weak economy. Elsewhere in the region, activity in the third quarter was mixed; Chile’s economy rebounded, but Argentina’s GDP contracted and the crisis in Venezuela deepened. Inflation in selected advanced foreign economies NOTE: The data for the euro area incorporate the flash estimate for January 2017. The data for Canada, Japan, and the United Kingdom extend through December 2016. 42. Real gross domestic product growth in selected emerging market economies NOTE: The data for Mexico incorporate the flash estimate for 2016:Q4. The data for China are seasonally adjusted by Board staff. The data for Mexico, Brazil, and Korea are seasonally adjusted by their respective government agencies. The data for Brazil extend through 2016:Q3. In December, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) raised the target for the federal funds rate by ¼ percentage point to a range of ½ to ¾ percent. The FOMC’s decision reflected realized and expected labor market conditions and inflation. Moreover, the decision to raise the target range was consistent with the Committee’s expectation that, with gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary policy, economic activity would expand at a moderate pace, labor market conditions would strengthen somewhat further, and inflation would rise to the FOMC’s 2 percent objective over the medium term. The Committee expects that economic conditions will evolve in a manner that will warrant only gradual increases in the federal funds rate; the federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some time, below levels that are expected to prevail in the longer run. However, the actual path of the federal funds rate will depend on the economic outlook as informed by incoming data. In addition, the Committee anticipates reinvesting principal payments of its securities holdings until normalization of the level of the federal funds rate is well under way. The FOMC raised the federal funds rate target range in December About a year ago, in December 2015, the FOMC raised the target range for the federal funds rate after holding the range at near zero since late 2008 to support economic activity and stem disinflationary pressures in the wake of the Great Recession. At that time, the Committee judged that it had seen sufficient improvement in the labor market and was reasonably confident that inflation would move back to its 2 percent objective, which would warrant an initial increase in the federal funds rate. Through most of 2016, the Committee maintained the target range of ¼ to ½ percent, pending further evidence of continued progress toward its objectives. In December, in view of realized and expected labor market conditions and inflation, the FOMC raised the target range for the federal funds rate another ¼ percentage point, to a range of ½ to ¾ percent (figure 43).3 The Committee kept that same target range at its most recent meeting, which concluded on February 1. 3. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016), “Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement,” press release, December 14, https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/ monetary/20161214a.htm. 43. Selected interest rates NOTE: The 2-year and 10-year Treasury rates are the constant-maturity yields based on the most actively traded securities. SOURCE: Department of the Treasury; Federal Reserve Board. Monetary policy continues to support the economic expansion The Committee has continued to see the federal funds rate as likely to remain, for some time, below the levels that are expected to prevail in the longer run. With gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary policy, the FOMC expects that economic activity will expand at a moderate pace, labor market conditions will strengthen somewhat further, and inflation will rise to 2 percent over the medium term. Consistent with this outlook, in the most recent Summary of Economic Projections (included as Part 3 of this report), which was compiled at the time of the December 2016 meeting, most participants projected that the appropriate level of the federal funds rate would be below its longer-run level through 2018. Future changes in the federal funds rate will depend on the economic outlook as informed by incoming data Although the Committee has expected that economic conditions will evolve in a manner that will warrant only gradual increases in the federal funds rate, the Committee has continued to emphasize that the actual path of monetary policy will depend on the evolution of the economic outlook. In determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. This assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. In light of the current shortfall of inflation from 2 percent, the Committee has indicated that it will carefully monitor actual and expected progress toward its inflation goal. The size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet has remained stable To help maintain accommodative financial conditions, the Committee has continued its existing policy of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction and reinvesting principal payments on all agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities. The Federal Reserve’s total assets have held steady at around $4.5 trillion, with holdings of U.S. Treasury securities at $2.5 trillion and holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities at approximately $1.8 trillion (figure 44). The Committee has for some time stated that it anticipates maintaining this policy until normalization of the level of the federal funds rate is well under way. Interest income on the System Open Market Account, or SOMA, portfolio has continued to support substantial remittances to the U.S. Treasury. Preliminary results indicate that the Reserve Banks provided for payments of $92 billion of their estimated 2016 net income to the Treasury. The Federal Reserve’s remittances to the Treasury have averaged about $80 billion a year since 2008, compared with about $25 billion a year over the decade prior to 2008.4 The Federal Reserve’s implementation of monetary policy has continued smoothly As in December 2015, the Federal Reserve successfully raised the effective federal funds rate in December 2016 using the interest rate paid on reserve balances, together with an overnight reverse repurchase agreement 4. Total remittances include a one-time transfer of $19.3 billion in December 2015 to reduce the aggregate Reserve Bank capital surplus to $10 billion, as required by the Fixing America’s Surface Transportation Act. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016), “Federal Reserve System Publishes Annual Financial Statements,” press release, March 18, https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/ other/20160317a.htm. 44. Federal Reserve assets and liabilities Treasury securities held outright NOTE: “Credit and liquidity facilities” consists of primary, secondary, and seasonal credit; term auction credit; central bank liquidity swaps; support for Maiden Lane, Bear Stearns, and AIG; and other credit facilities, including the Primary Dealer Credit Facility, the Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility, the Commercial Paper Funding Facility, and the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility. “Other assets” includes unamortized premiums and discounts on securities held outright. “Capital and other liabilities” includes reverse repurchase agreements, the U.S. Treasury General Account, and the U.S. Treasury Supplementary Financing Account. The data extend through February 8, 2017. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Board, Statistical Release H.4.1, “Factors Affecting Reserve Balances.” (ON RRP) facility.5 Specifically, the Federal Reserve raised the interest rate paid on required and excess reserve balances to ¾ percent and the ON RRP offering rate to ½ percent. In addition, the Board of Governors approved an increase in the discount rate (the primary credit rate) to 1.25 percent. The effective federal funds rate rose into the new range amid orderly trading conditions in money markets. Increases in interest rates in other money markets were similar to the rise in the federal funds rate following the December meeting. 5. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2014), “Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement on Policy Normalization Principles and Plans,” press release, September 17, https://www.federalreserve.gov/ newsevents/press/monetary/20140917c.htm. The total take-up at the ON RRP facility increased modestly in the second half of 2016 as a result of higher demand by government money market mutual funds in the wake of money fund reform that took effect in mid-October. Although the implementation of monetary policy has been smooth, the Federal Reserve has continued to test the operational readiness of other policy tools as part of prudent planning. Two operations of the Term Deposit Facility were conducted in the second half of 2016; seven-day deposits were offered at both operations with a floating rate of 1 basis point over the interest rate on excess reserves. In addition, the Open Market Desk conducted several small-value exercises solely for the purpose of maintaining operational readiness. The following material appeared as an addendum to the minutes of the December 13–14, 2016, meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee. In conjunction with the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting held on December 13–14, 2016, meeting participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real output growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for each year from 2016 to 2019 and over the longer run.6 Each participant’s projection was based on information available at the time of the meeting, together with his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy, including a path for the federal funds rate and its longer-run value, and assumptions about other factors likely to affect economic outcomes. The longer- run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the value to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. “Appropriate monetary policy” is defined as the future path of policy that each participant deems most likely to foster outcomes for economic activity and inflation that best satisfy his or her individual interpretation of the Federal Reserve’s objectives of maximum employment and stable prices. level through 2019. All participants projected that inflation, as measured by the four-quarter percentage change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), would increase over the next two years, and several expected inflation to slightly exceed the Committee’s 2 percent objective in 2018 or 2019. Table 1 and figure 1 provide summary statistics for the projections. As shown in figure 2, almost all participants expected that the evolution of economic conditions would warrant only gradual increases in the federal funds rate to achieve and sustain maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. Many participants judged that the appropriate level of the federal funds rate in 2019 would be close to their estimates of its longer-run normal level. However, the economic outlook is uncertain, and participants noted that their economic projections and assessments of appropriate monetary policy may change in response to incoming information. Most FOMC participants expected that, under appropriate monetary policy, growth in real gross domestic product (GDP) would pick up a bit next year and run at or slightly above their individual estimates of its longer-run rate through 2019. Almost all participants projected that the unemployment rate would run below their estimates of its longer-run normal level in 2017 and remain below that 6. One participant did not submit longer-run A majority of participants viewed the level of uncertainty associated with their individual forecasts for economic growth, unemployment, and inflation as broadly similar to the norms of the previous 20 years, though some participants saw uncertainty associated with their forecasts as higher than average. Most participants also judged the risks around their projections for economic activity, the unemployment rate, and inflation as broadly balanced, while several participants saw the risks to their forecasts of real GDP growth as weighted to the upside and the risks to their unemployment rate forecasts as tilted to the downside. Table 1. Economic projections of Federal Reserve Board members and Federal Reserve Bank presidents, under their individual assessments of projected appropriate monetary policy, December 2016 Percent Longer run Longer run Longer run Memo: Projected appropriate policy path Note: Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP) and projections for both measures of inflation are percent changes from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. PCE inflation and core PCE inflation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) and the price index for PCE excluding food and energy. Projections for the unemployment rate are for the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. Each participant’s projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy. Longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. The projections for the federal funds rate are the value of the midpoint of the projected appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the projected appropriate target level for the federal funds rate at the end of the specified calendar year or over the longer run. The September projections were made in conjunction with the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on September 20–21, 2016. One participant did not submit longer-run projections for the change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, or the federal funds rate in conjunction with the September 20–21, 2016, meeting, and one participant did not submit such projections in conjunction with the December 13–14, 2016, meeting. 1. For each period, the median is the middle projection when the projections are arranged from lowest to highest. When the number of projections is even, the median is the average of the two middle projections. 2. The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each year. 3. The range for a variable in a given year includes all participants’ projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year. 4. Longer-run projections for core PCE inflation are not collected. The median of participants’ projections for the growth rate of real GDP, conditional on their individual assumptions about appropriate monetary policy, was 1.9 percent in 2016, 2.1 percent in 2017, 2.0 percent in 2018, and 1.9 percent in 2019; the median of projections for the longer-run normal rate of real GDP growth was 1.8 percent. Most participants projected that economic growth would pick up a bit in 2017 from the current year’s pace and run at or slightly above their individual estimates of its longer-run rate through 2019. Compared with the September Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), the medians of the projections for real GDP growth were slightly higher over the period from 2017 to 2019, while the median assessment of the longer-run growth rate was unchanged. Since September, almost half of the participants revised up their projections for real GDP growth in 2018 or 2019, generally only slightly. Those increasing their projections for output growth in those years cited expected changes in fiscal, regulatory, or other policies as factors contributing to their revisions. However, many participants noted that the effects on the economy of such policy changes, if implemented, would likely be partially offset by tighter financial conditions, including higher longer-term interest rates and a strengthening of the dollar. The median of projections for the unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of 2016 was 4.7 percent, slightly lower than in September. Based on the median projections, the anticipated path of the unemployment rate for coming years also shifted down a bit, with the median for the end of 2019 at 4.5 percent, 0.3 percentage point below the median assessment of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment, which was unchanged from September. Figure 1. Medians, central tendencies, and ranges of economic projections, 2016–19 and over the longer run Longer run Longer run Longer run Longer run Note: Definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. The data for the actual values of the variables are annual. Longer run Note: Each shaded circle indicates the value (rounded to the nearest ⅛ percentage point) of an individual participant’s judgment of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the appropriate target level for the federal funds rate at the end of the specified calendar year or over the longer run. One participant did not submit longer-run projections for the federal funds rate. Figures 3.A and 3.B show the distributions of participants’ projections for real GDP growth and the unemployment rate from 2016 to 2019 and in the longer run. The distributions of individual projections of real GDP growth shifted slightly higher relative to the distribution of the September projections for 2017 through 2019. The distributions of projections for the unemployment rate shifted modestly lower for 2016 through 2019, while the distribution of projections for the longer-run normal rate of unemployment was unchanged. In the December SEP, the median of projections for headline PCE price inflation in 2016 was 1.5 percent, a bit higher than in September. The median of projections for headline PCE price inflation was 1.9 percent in 2017 and 2.0 percent in 2018 and 2019, unchanged from September. Several participants projected that inflation will slightly exceed the Committee’s objective in 2018 or 2019. The medians of projections for core PCE price inflation were the same as in September, rising from 1.7 percent in 2016 to 1.8 percent in 2017 and 2.0 percent in 2018 and 2019. Figure 3.A. Distribution of participants’ projections for the change in real GDP, 2016 –19 and over the longer run Longer run Note: Definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Figure 3.B. Distribution of participants’ projections for the unemployment rate, 2016 –19 and over the longer run Longer run Note: Definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Figures 3.C and 3.D provide information on the distribution of participants’ views about the outlook for inflation. The distributions of projections for headline and core PCE price inflation shifted up slightly relative to projections for the September meeting. Some participants attributed the upward shift in projected inflation this year and next to recent data that showed somewhat higher inflation than they had expected. A few saw higher inflation in 2019 in conjunction with somewhat greater undershooting of the unemployment rate below its longer-run normal level. Figure 3.E provides the distribution of participants’ judgments regarding the appropriate target for the federal funds rate at the end of each year from 2016 to 2019 and over the longer run.7 All participants saw an increase of 25 basis points in the federal funds rate at the December meeting as appropriate. The distributions for 2017 through 2019 shifted up modestly. The median projections of the federal funds rate continued to show gradual increases, to 1.4 percent at the end of 2017, 2.1 percent at the end of 2018, and 2.9 percent at the end of 2019; the median of the longer-run projections of the federal funds rate was 3.0 percent. The medians of the projections for the level of the federal funds rate for 2017 through 2019 were all 25 basis points higher than in the September projections. A few participants revised up their assessments of the longer-run federal funds 7. One participant’s projections for the federal funds rate, real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation were informed by the view that there are multiple possible medium-term regimes for the U.S. economy, that these regimes are persistent, and that the economy shifts between regimes in a way that cannot be forecast. Under this view, the economy currently is in a regime characterized by expansion of economic activity with low productivity growth and a low short-term real interest rate, but longer-term outcomes for variables other than inflation cannot be usefully projected. rate 25 basis points, resulting in an increase in the median of 13 basis points. In discussing their December forecasts, many participants expressed a view that increases in the federal funds rate over the next few years would likely be gradual in light of a short- term neutral real interest rate that currently was low—a phenomenon that a number of participants attributed to the persistence of low productivity growth, continued strength of the dollar, a weak outlook for economic growth abroad, strong demand for safe longer- term assets, or other factors—and that was likely to rise only slowly as the effects of these factors faded over time. Some participants noted the continued proximity of short- term nominal interest rates to the effective lower bound, even with an increase at this meeting, as limiting the Committee’s ability to increase monetary accommodation to counter possible adverse shocks to the economy. These participants judged that, as a result, the Committee should take a cautious approach to removing policy accommodation. Many participants noted that there was currently substantial uncertainty about the size, composition, and timing of prospective fiscal policy changes, but they also commented that a more expansionary fiscal policy might raise aggregate demand above sustainable levels, potentially necessitating somewhat tighter monetary policy than currently anticipated. Furthermore, several participants indicated that recent inflation data and the continued strengthening in labor market conditions increased their confidence that inflation would move toward the 2 percent objective, making a slightly firmer path of monetary policy appropriate. The left-hand column of figure 4 shows that, for each variable, a majority of participants judged the levels of uncertainty associated with their December projections for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, headline Figure 3.C. Distribution of participants’ projections for PCE inflation, 2016 –19 and over the longer run Longer run Note: Definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Note: Definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Figure 3.E. Distribution of participants’ judgments of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the appropriate target level for the federal funds rate, 2016 –19 and over the longer run Longer run Note: Definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Risks to core PCE inflation Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Note: For definitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” Definitions of variables are in the notes to table 1. inflation, and core inflation to be broadly similar to the average of the past 20 years.8 However, more participants than in September saw uncertainty surrounding real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, or inflation as higher than average. Many participants mentioned an increase in uncertainty associated with fiscal, trade, immigration, or regulatory policies as a factor influencing their judgments about the degree of uncertainty surrounding their projections. Participants cited the difficulty of predicting the size, composition, and timing of these policy changes as well as the magnitude and timing of their effects on the economy. As can be seen in the right-hand column of figure 4, a majority of participants continued to see the risks to real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, headline inflation, and core inflation as broadly balanced; however, fewer participants saw risks to economic growth and inflation as weighted to the downside or saw risks to the unemployment rate as weighted to the upside than in September. A number of participants noted that the prospect of expansionary fiscal policy had increased the upside risks to economic activity and inflation, and a few assessed the possibility of a reduction in regulation as posing upside risks to their forecasts of economic activity. Moreover, 8. Table 2 provides estimates of the forecast uncertainty for the change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, and total consumer price inflation over the period from 1996 through 2015. At the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty” discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty in the economic forecasts and explains the approach used to assess the uncertainty and risks attending the participants’ projections. Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges Change in real GDP1 . . . . . . Unemployment rate1 . . . . . . Total consumer prices2 . . . . Note: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root mean squared error of projections for 1996 through 2015 that were released in the winter by various private and government forecasters. (The note to this table that was included in the Summary of Economic Projections for the meeting of September 20–21, 2016, incorrectly stated that the error ranges were based on projections for 1995 through 2015. The correct time period was 1996 through 2015.) As described in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain assumptions, there is about a 70 percent prob- ability that actual outcomes for real GDP, unemployment, and consumer prices will be in ranges implied by the average size of projection errors made in the past. For more information, see David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip (2007), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook from Historical Forecasting Errors,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2007-60 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November), available at www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/ feds/2007/200760/0760abs.html; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Division of Research and Statistics (2014), “Updated Historical Forecast Errors,” memorandum, April 9, www.federalreserve.gov/foia/files/20140409-histori- cal-forecast-errors.pdf. 1. Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure that has been most widely used in government and private economic forecasts. Projection is percent change, fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. some participants judged that the recent rise in market-based measures of inflation compensation suggested that downside risks to inflation had declined. However, many also pointed to various sources of downside risk to economic activity, such as the limited potential for monetary policy to respond to adverse shocks when the federal funds rate is near the effective lower bound, downside risks in Europe and China, a possible increase in trade barriers, and the possibility of a sharp rise in financial market volatility in the event that fiscal and other policy changes diverged from market expectations. In addition, some participants pointed to factors such as global disinflationary trends and downward pressure on import prices from further strengthening of the dollar as sources of downside risk to inflation. The economic projections provided by the members of the Board of Governors and the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks inform discussions of monetary policy among policymakers and can aid public understanding of the basis for policy actions. Considerable uncertainty attends these projections, however. The economic and statistical models and relationships used to help produce economic forecasts are necessarily imperfect descriptions of the real world, and the future path of the economy can be affected by myriad unforeseen developments and events. Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, participants consider not only what appears to be the most likely economic outcome as embodied in their projections, but also the range of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of their occurring, and the potential costs to the economy should they occur. Table 2 summarizes the average historical accuracy of a range of forecasts, including those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports and those prepared by the Federal Reserve Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee. The projection error ranges shown in the table illustrate the considerable uncertainty associated with economic forecasts. For example, suppose a participant projects that real gross domestic product (GDP) and total consumer prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty attending those projections is similar to that experienced in the past and the risks around the projections are broadly balanced, the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a probability of about 70 percent that actual GDP would expand within a range of 2.1 to 3.9 percent in the current year, 1.3 to 4.7 percent in the second year, and 0.9 to 5.1 percent in the third and fourth years. The corresponding 70 percent confidence intervals for overall inflation would be 1.8 to 2.2 percent in the current year, 1.0 to 3.0 in the second year, and 0.9 to 3.1 percent in the third and fourth years. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over history, participants provide judgments as to whether the uncertainty attached to their projections of each variable is greater than, smaller than, or broadly similar to typical levels of forecast uncertainty in the past, as shown in table 2. Participants also provide judgments as to whether the risks to their projections are weighted to the upside, are weighted to the downside, or are broadly balanced. That is, participants judge whether each variable is more likely to be above or below their projections of the most likely outcome. These judgments about the uncertainty and the risks attending each participant’s projections are distinct from the diversity of participants’ views about the most likely outcomes. Forecast uncertainty is concerned with the risks associated with a particular projection rather than with divergences across a number of different projections. As with real activity and inflation, the outlook for the future path of the federal funds rate is subject to considerable uncertainty. This uncertainty arises primarily because each participant’s assessment of the appropriate stance of monetary policy depends importantly on the evolution of real activity and inflation over time. If economic conditions evolve in an unexpected manner, then assessments of the appropriate setting of the federal funds rate would change from that point forward. emerging market economy London interbank offered rate The Board of Governors is pleased to submit its Monetary Policy Report pursuant to section 2B of the Federal Reserve Act. statement on Longer-run goaLs and monetary PoLicy strategy Adopted effective January 24, 2012; as reaffirmed effective January 30, 2024 The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) is firmly committed to fulfilling its statutory mandate from the Congress of promoting maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates. The Committee seeks to explain its monetary policy decisions to the public as clearly as possible. Such clarity facilitates well-informed decisionmaking by households and businesses, reduces economic and financial uncertainty, increases the effectiveness of monetary policy, and enhances transparency and accountability, which are essential in a democratic society. Employment, inflation, and long-term interest rates fluctuate over time in response to economic and financial disturbances. Monetary policy plays an important role in stabilizing the economy in response to these disturbances. The Committee’s primary means of adjusting the stance of monetary policy is through changes in the target range for the federal funds rate. The Committee judges that the level of the federal funds rate consistent with maximum employment and price stability over the longer run has declined relative to its historical average. Therefore, the federal funds rate is likely to be constrained by its effective lower bound more frequently than in the past. Owing in part to the proximity of interest rates to the effective lower bound, the Committee judges that downward risks to employment and inflation have increased. The Committee is prepared to use its full range of tools to achieve its maximum employment and price stability goals. The maximum level of employment is a broad-based and inclusive goal that is not directly measurable and changes over time owing largely to nonmonetary factors that affect the structure and dynamics of the labor market. Consequently, it would not be appropriate to specify a fixed goal for employment; rather, the Committee’s policy decisions must be informed by assessments of the shortfalls of employment from its maximum level, recognizing that such assessments are necessarily uncertain and subject to revision. The Committee considers a wide range of indicators in making these assessments. The inflation rate over the longer run is primarily determined by monetary policy, and hence the Committee has the ability to specify a longer-run goal for inflation. The Committee reaffirms its judgment that inflation at the rate of 2 percent, as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, is most consistent over the longer run with the Federal Reserve’s statutory mandate. The Committee judges that longer-term inflation expectations that are well anchored at 2 percent foster price stability and moderate long-term interest rates and enhance the Committee’s ability to promote maximum employment in the face of significant economic disturbances. In order to anchor longer-term inflation expectations at this level, the Committee seeks to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time, and therefore judges that, following periods when inflation has been running persistently below 2 percent, appropriate monetary policy will likely aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time. Monetary policy actions tend to influence economic activity, employment, and prices with a lag. In setting monetary policy, the Committee seeks over time to mitigate shortfalls of employment from the Committee’s assessment of its maximum level and deviations of inflation from its longer-run goal. Moreover, sustainably achieving maximum employment and price stability depends on a stable financial system. Therefore, the Committee’s policy decisions reflect its longer-run goals, its medium-term outlook, and its assessments of the balance of risks, including risks to the financial system that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. The Committee’s employment and inflation objectives are generally complementary. However, under circumstances in which the Committee judges that the objectives are not complementary, it takes into account the employment shortfalls and inflation deviations and the potentially different time horizons over which employment and inflation are projected to return to levels judged consistent with its mandate. The Committee intends to review these principles and to make adjustments as appropriate at its annual organizational meeting each January, and to undertake roughly every 5 years a thorough public review of its monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices. Employment and Earnings across Demographic Groups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 Recent Housing Market Developments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 Developments Related to Financial Stability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27 Developments in the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet and Money Markets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38 Monetary Policy Rules in the Current Environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41 Forecast Uncertainty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60 Note: This report reflects information that was publicly available as of noon EST on February 29, 2024. Unless otherwise stated, the time series in the figures extend through, for daily data, February 27, 2024; for monthly data, January 2024; and, for quarterly data, 2023:Q4. In bar charts, except as noted, the change for a given period is measured to its final quarter from the final quarter of the preceding period. For figures 33 and 40 as well as figure C in the box “Recent Housing Market Developments,” note that the S&P/Case-Shiller U.S. National Home Price Index, the S&P 500 Index, and the Dow Jones Bank Index are products of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates and have been licensed for use by the Board. Copyright © 2024 S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC, a division of S&P Global, and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Redistribution, reproduction, and/or photocopying in whole or in part are prohibited without written permission of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC. For more information on any of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC’s indices, please visit www.spdji.com. S&P® is a registered trademark of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC, and Dow Jones® is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. Neither S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC, Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC, their affiliates, nor their third-party licensors make any representation or warranty, express or implied, as to the ability of any index to accurately represent the asset class or market sector that it purports to represent, and neither S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC, Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC, their affiliates, nor their third- party licensors shall have any liability for any errors, omissions, or interruptions of any index or the data included therein. While inflation remains above the Federal Open Market Committee’s (FOMC) objective of 2 percent, it has eased substantially over the past year, and the slowing in inflation has occurred without a significant increase in unemployment. The labor market remains relatively tight, with the unemployment rate near historically low levels and job vacancies still elevated. Real gross domestic product (GDP) growth has also been strong, supported by solid increases in consumer spending. The FOMC has maintained the target range for the federal funds rate at 5¼ to 5½ percent since its July 2023 meeting. The Committee views the policy rate as likely at its peak for this tightening cycle, which began in early 2022. The Federal Reserve has also continued to reduce its holdings of Treasury and agency mortgage-backed securities. As labor market tightness has eased and progress on inflation has continued, the risks to achieving the Committee’s employment and inflation goals have been moving into better balance. Even so, the Committee remains highly attentive to inflation risks and is acutely aware that high inflation imposes significant hardship, especially on those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials. The FOMC is strongly committed to returning inflation to its 2 percent objective. In considering any adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will carefully assess incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks. The Committee does not expect it will be appropriate to reduce the target range until it has gained greater confidence that inflation is moving sustainably toward 2 percent. Inflation. Consumer price inflation has slowed notably but remains above 2 percent. The price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) rose 2.4 percent over the 12 months ending in January, down from a peak of 7.1 percent in 2022. The core PCE price index—which excludes volatile food and energy prices and is generally considered a better guide to the direction of future inflation—rose 2.8 percent in the 12 months ending in January, and the slowing in inflation was widespread across both goods and services prices. More recently, core PCE prices increased at an annual rate of 2.5 percent over the six months ending in January, though measuring inflation over relatively short periods risks exaggerating the influence of idiosyncratic or temporary factors. Measures of longer-term inflation expectations are within the range of values seen in the decade before the pandemic and continue to be broadly consistent with the FOMC’s longer- run objective of 2 percent. The labor market. The labor market has remained relatively tight, with job gains averaging 239,000 per month since June and the unemployment rate near historical lows. Labor demand has eased—as job openings have declined in many sectors of the economy—but continues to exceed the supply of available workers. Labor supply has trended higher over the past year, reflecting a continued strong pace of immigration and increases in the labor force participation rate, particularly among prime-age workers. Reflecting the improved balance between labor demand and supply, nominal wage gains slowed in 2023, but they remain above a pace consistent with 2 percent inflation over the longer term, given prevailing trends in productivity growth. Economic activity. Real GDP increased 3.1 percent last year, notably faster than in 2022 despite tighter financial conditions, including elevated longer-term interest rates. Consumer spending grew at a solid pace, and housing market activity started to turn back up in the second half of last year after having declined since early 2021. However, real business fixed investment growth slowed, likely reflecting tighter financial conditions and downbeat business sentiment. In contrast to GDP, manufacturing output was little changed, on net, last year, a downshift following two years of robust post-pandemic gains. Financial conditions. Conditions in financial markets tightened considerably further over the summer and early fall before reversing course toward the end of the year. The FOMC raised the target range for the federal funds rate a further 25 basis points at its meeting last July, bringing the overall increase in the target range for this tightening cycle to 525 basis points. The market-implied expected path of the federal funds rate has moved up, on net, since the middle of 2023, and yields on longer-term nominal Treasury securities are notably higher on balance. Credit remains generally available to most households and businesses but at elevated interest rates, which have weighed on financing activity. Lending by banks to households and businesses slowed notably since June as banks continued to tighten standards and demand for loans softened. Financial stability. Overall, the banking system remains sound and resilient; although acute stress in the banking system has receded since last March, a few areas of risk warrant continued monitoring. Upward pressure on asset valuations continued, with real estate prices elevated relative to rents and high price-to-earnings ratios in equity markets. Borrowing from nonfinancial businesses and households continued to increase at a pace slower than that of nominal GDP, and the combined debt-to-GDP ratio now sits close to its 20-year low. Vulnerabilities from financial-sector leverage remain notable. While risk-based bank capital ratios stayed solid and increased broadly, declines in the fair values of fixed-rate assets have been sizable relative to the regulatory capital at some banks. Meanwhile, leverage at hedge funds has stabilized at high levels, and leverage at life insurers increased to values close to the historical averages but with a liability composition that has become more reliant on nontraditional sources of funding. Most banks maintained high liquidity and stable funding, while bank funding costs continue to increase. (See the box “Developments Related to Financial Stability” in Part 1.) International developments. Following a rebound in early 2023, growth in foreign economic activity was subdued in the second half of last year. Economic growth was particularly weak in advanced foreign economies (AFEs) as monetary policy tightening weighed on activity and high inflation eroded real household incomes. Structural adjustment to higher energy prices in Europe continued to hinder economic performance, while property-sector weakness and sluggish domestic demand restrained Chinese economic activity. Foreign headline inflation has fallen further, reflecting declines in core and food inflation. However, the pace of disinflation has varied across countries and sectors, with the moderation in goods inflation generally outpacing that in services inflation. Most foreign central banks paused policy interest rate hikes in the second half of last year and have since held rates steady. Policy rate paths implied by financial market pricing suggest that central banks in many AFEs are expected to begin lowering their policy rates in 2024. Several central banks in emerging market economies have already begun easing monetary policy. The trade-weighted exchange value of the U.S. dollar has increased slightly, on net, since the middle of last year. Interest rate policy. After significantly tightening the stance of monetary policy since early 2022, the FOMC has maintained the target range for the policy rate at 5¼ to 5½ percent since its meeting last July. Although the FOMC judges that the risks to achieving its employment and inflation goals are moving into better balance, the Committee remains highly attentive to inflation risks. The Committee has indicated that it does not expect it will be appropriate to reduce the target range until it has gained greater confidence that inflation is moving sustainably toward 2 percent. In considering any adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will carefully assess incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks. Balance sheet policy. The Federal Reserve has continued the process of significantly reducing its holdings of Treasury and agency securities in a predictable manner, contributing to the tightening of financial conditions.1 Beginning in June 2022, principal payments from securities held in the System Open Market Account have been reinvested only to the extent that they exceeded monthly caps. Under this policy, the Federal Reserve has reduced its securities holdings about $640 billion since mid-June 2023, bringing the total reduction in securities holdings since the start of balance sheet runoff to about $1.4 trillion. The FOMC has stated that it intends to maintain securities holdings at amounts consistent with implementing monetary policy efficiently and effectively in its ample-reserves regime. To ensure a smooth transition, the FOMC intends to slow and then stop reductions in its securities holdings when reserve balances are somewhat above the level that the FOMC judges to be consistent with ample reserves. Employment and earnings across groups. An exceptionally tight labor market over the past two years has been especially beneficial for historically disadvantaged groups of workers. As a result, many of the long-standing disparities in employment and wages by sex, 1. See the May 4, 2022, press release regarding the Plans for Reducing the Size of the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet, available on the Board’s website at https:// www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/ monetary20220504b.htm. race, ethnicity, and education have narrowed, and some gaps reached historical lows in 2023. However, despite this narrowing, significant disparities in absolute levels across groups remain. (See the box “Employment and Earnings across Demographic Groups” in Part 1.) Housing sector. The rise in mortgage rates over the past two years has reduced housing demand, resulting in a steep drop in housing activity in 2022 and a marked slowing in house price growth from its historically high pace. Offsetting factors boosting housing demand, such as the robust job market and the increased prevalence of remote work, have prevented significant price declines. High mortgage rates have also discouraged some potential sellers with low rates on their current mortgages from moving, which has kept the existing home market unusually thin. The shortage of available existing homes has pushed some remaining homebuyers toward new homes and supported a modest rebound in construction of single-family homes later in 2023. In contrast, multifamily starts rose to historically high levels in 2022 but have more recently fallen back because of builders’ concerns about the effect of the significant amount of new multifamily supply on rents and property prices. (See the box “Recent Housing Market Developments” in Part 1.) Federal Reserve’s balance sheet and money markets. The size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet has decreased since June as the FOMC continued to reduce its securities holdings. Despite ongoing balance sheet runoff, reserve balances—the largest liability on the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet—edged up as declines in the usage of the overnight reverse repurchase agreement facility— another Federal Reserve liability—more than matched the decline in assets. (See the box “Developments in the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet and Money Markets” in Part 2.) Monetary policy rules. Simple monetary policy rules, which prescribe a setting for the policy interest rate in response to the behavior of a small number of economic variables, can provide useful guidance to policymakers. With inflation easing and supply and demand conditions in labor markets coming into better balance, the policy rate prescriptions of most simple monetary policy rules have decreased recently and now call for levels of the federal funds rate that are close to the current target range for the federal funds rate. (See the box “Monetary Policy Rules in the Current Environment” in Part 2.) 1. Personal consumption expenditures price indexes Inflation has eased but remains elevated After surging in 2021 and 2022, inflation slowed notably last year. The price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) rose 2.4 percent over the 12 months ending in January, down from a peak of 7.1 percent in 2022, though still above the Federal Open Market Committee’s (FOMC) longer-run objective of 2 percent (figure 1). The core PCE price index—which excludes volatile food and energy prices—rose 2.8 percent over the 12 months ending in January. More recently, core PCE prices increased at an annual rate of 2.5 percent over the six months ending in January, though measuring inflation over relatively short periods risks exaggerating the influence of idiosyncratic or temporary factors (figure 2). The trimmed mean measure of PCE prices constructed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas—which provides an alternative approach to reducing the influence of idiosyncratic price movements—increased 3.3 percent over the 12 months ending in December, somewhat higher than the core index (figure 1). Trimmed mean Excluding food and energy Total NOTE: Trimmed mean data extend through December 2023. SOURCE: For trimmed mean, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas; for all 2. Core personal consumption expenditure price index Consumer energy prices have declined, while food price inflation has slowed markedly After hovering around $80 per barrel in the first half of last year, oil prices rose notably in late summer, albeit to levels still well below those seen in 2022, but have since declined, on net, to around $83 per barrel (figure 3). Gasoline prices have followed a similar pattern. The moderation in oil prices last fall reflects weak economic activity abroad and increases in U.S. and other non-OPEC (Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries) oil production. Since late last year, geopolitical tensions in the Middle East and rerouting of shipping away from the Red Sea have placed some upward pressure on oil 3. Spot and futures prices for crude oil 4. Subcomponents of personal consumption expenditures price indexes NOTE: The data are monthly. SOURCE: Bureau of Economic Analysis via Haver Analytics. 5. Spot prices for commodities prices. Continuing geopolitical tensions pose an upside risk to energy prices. Natural gas prices remain well below the elevated 2022 levels due to strong production and high inventory levels. All told, consumer energy prices fell 4.9 percent in the 12 months ending in January (figure 4, left panel). NOTE: The data are weekly averages of daily data and extend through Food price inflation slowed markedly last year, as prices of agricultural commodities and livestock fell (figure 5). This moderation brought the 12-month change in food prices down to 1.4 percent in January, a substantial slowing from the 11 percent increase recorded over 2022 (figure 4, left panel). Prices of both energy and food products are of particular importance for lower-income households, for which such necessities account for a large share of expenditures. Reflecting the sharp increases seen in 2021 and 2022, these price indexes are about 25 percent higher than before the pandemic. Core goods prices have been declining as supply bottlenecks ease and import price inflation falls . . . Outside of food and energy prices, there has been significant deceleration across the main spending categories, though disinflation has been more pronounced in some than in others (figure 4, right panel). Core goods prices fell 0.6 percent in the 12 months ending in January, and the deceleration was broad based, as the supply chain issues and other capacity constraints that had earlier boosted inflation so much eased substantially. For example, suppliers’ delivery times had lengthened considerably during the pandemic but have been getting shorter over the past year (figure 6). Core goods inflation was also held down last year by a net decline in nonfuel import prices, which, in turn, largely reflected falling commodity prices (figure 7). . . . while core services price inflation has been slowing but remains elevated Price inflation for both housing services and core services other than housing slowed over the past year, though it remains elevated. Increases in housing services prices began to moderate, coming in at 6.1 percent in the 12 months ending in January, down from a peak of more than 8 percent (figure 4, right panel). This slowing is consistent with the notably smaller increases in market rents on new housing leases to new tenants seen since late 2022 (figure 8). Because prices for housing services measure the rents paid by all tenants (and the equivalent rent implicitly paid by all homeowners)—including those whose leases have not yet come up for renewal—they tend to adjust slowly to changes in rental market conditions. The softening in market rents therefore points to a continued deceleration in housing services prices over the year ahead. Prices for nonhousing core services—a broad group that includes services such as travel and dining, financial services, and car repair—rose 3.5 percent in the 12 months ending in January, down from their recent peak of 5.2 percent (figure 4, right panel). As labor costs are a significant input in these service sectors, the ongoing softening of labor demand and improvements in labor supply should contribute to a further slowing in core services price inflation as labor cost growth moderates. 6. Suppliers’ delivery times NOTE: Values greater than 50 indicate that more respondents reported longer delivery times relative to a month earlier than reported shorter delivery times. 7. Nonfuel import price index 8. Housing rents Zillow CoreLogic single-family detached PCE housing services RealPage NOTE: CoreLogic data extend through December 2023. Zillow, CoreLogic, and RealPage measure market-rate rents—that is, rents for a new lease by a new tenant. 9. Measures of inflation expectations NOTE: The Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF) data are quarterly and extend through 2024:Q1. The data for the Michigan survey are monthly and extend through February 2024; the February data are preliminary. Inflation compensation implied by Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities NOTE: The data are at a business-day frequency and are estimated from smoothed nominal and inflation-indexed Treasury yield curves. Measures of longer-term inflation expectations have been stable, while shorter-term expectations have fallen back The generally held view among economists and policy analysts is that inflation expectations influence actual inflation by affecting wage- and price-setting decisions. Survey-based measures of expected inflation over a longer horizon have generally been moving sideways over the past year, within the range seen during the decade before the pandemic, and they appear broadly consistent with the FOMC’s longer-run 2 percent inflation objective. This development is seen for surveys of households, such as the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers, and for surveys of professional forecasters (figure 9). For example, the median forecaster in the Survey of Professional Forecasters, conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, continued to expect PCE price inflation to average 2 percent over the five years beginning five years from now. Moreover, inflation expectations over a shorter horizon—which tend to follow observed inflation more closely—have been reversing their earlier run-ups. In the Michigan survey, the median value for inflation expectations over the next year was 3.0 percent in February, well below the peak rate of 5.4 percent observed in spring 2022. Expected inflation for the next year as measured in the Survey of Consumer Expectations, conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, has also declined, on net, over this period and has returned to the range of values seen before the pandemic. Market-based measures of longer-term inflation compensation, which are based on financial instruments linked to inflation such as Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities, are also broadly in line with readings seen in the years before the pandemic and consistent with inflation returning to 2 percent. These measures have been little changed, on net, since last summer (figure 10). The labor market remains strong 11. Nonfarm payroll employment Payroll employment gains have been robust, averaging 239,000 since June of last year. The pace of job gains has nevertheless been softening, having averaged more than 375,000 per month in 2022 and about 290,000 in the first half of 2023 (figure 11). This slowing has come primarily from the professional and business services, manufacturing, and leisure and hospitality sectors, which tend to be cyclically sensitive. In contrast, employment growth has remained strong in the health- care and social assistance sector and at state and local governments, which tend to be less cyclically sensitive and are still recovering from pandemic-era staffing shortages. NOTE: The data shown are a 3-month moving average of the change in 12. Civilian unemployment rate The unemployment rate edged up, on net, since the middle of last year, but at 3.7 percent in January, it is only slightly above its pre- pandemic level and remains very low by historical standards (figure 12). Indeed, unemployment rates among most age, educational attainment, sex, and ethnic and racial groups are near their respective historical lows (figure 13). (The box “Employment and Earnings across Demographic Groups” provides further details.) 13. Unemployment rate, by race and ethnicity NOTE: Unemployment rate measures total unemployed as a percentage of the labor force. Persons whose ethnicity is identified as Hispanic or Latino may be of any race. Small sample sizes preclude reliable estimates for Native Americans and other groups for which monthly data are not reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Economic expansions have tended to narrow long- standing disparities in employment and earnings across demographic groups, which can help make up for disproportionate losses experienced during downturns. These benefi ts have been especially pronounced during the current expansion, which has been characterized by an exceptionally tight labor market and robust demand for workers over the past two years. Among prime-age individuals (ages 25 to 54), employment for Black or African American workers, which declined more relative to white and Asian workers in early 2020, reached a historical peak in 2023 (fi gure A, left panel). As a result, the gap in the employment-to-population (EPOP) ratio between prime-age Black and white workers fell to its lowest point in almost 50 years.1 Hispanic or Latino workers experienced especially large employment losses in 2020, due in part to greater exposure to the industries most affected by the pandemic.2 By early 2022, however, this group’s EPOP ratio gap relative to prime- age white workers had recovered to its 2019 average and has remained near this historically low level for the past two years. The EPOP ratio for prime-age Asian 1. In fact, for the population aged 16 or older, the EPOP ratio was the same for Black and white individuals in January 2024 (not shown). This equivalence, however, partly refl ects the fact that these groups have different age distributions, with whites older, on average, and thus more likely to be retired. 2. On the relationship between occupation, industry, and the differential effect of the COvID-19 pandemic across demographic groups, see Guido Matias Cortes and Eliza Forsythe (2023), “Heterogeneous Labor Market Impacts of the COvID-19 Pandemic,” ILR Review, vol. 76 (January), pp. 30–55. workers was also historically high in early 2023, although it has since moved down closer to its 2019 level.3 Similarly, the EPOP ratio for prime-age women increased steadily over the past two years and reached a record high in 2023 (fi gure A, right panel). As a result, the EPOP ratio gap between prime-age men and women fell to a record low. The recent increase in female employment is mostly attributable to rising labor force participation, which had also been increasing briskly before the pandemic, bolstered by a growing share of women with a college degree.4 Other factors, including tight labor market conditions and greater availability of remote-work options, may have also contributed to rising prime-age female labor force participation.5 (continued) 3. As monthly series have greater sampling variability for smaller groups, we do not plot EPOP ratio estimates for American Indians or Alaska Natives. 4. For a discussion of the contribution of educational attainment to prime-age female labor force participation before the pandemic, see Didem Tüzemen and Thao Tran (2019), “The Uneven Recovery in Prime-Age Labor Force Participation,” Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Economic Review, vol. 104 (Third Quarter), pp. 21–41, https://www. kansascityfed.org/Economic%20Review/documents/652/2019- The%20Uneven%20Recovery%20in%20Prime-Age%20 Labor%20Force%20Participation.pdf. 5. For a discussion on access to remote work and participation rates, see Maria D. Tito (2024), “Does the Ability to Work Remotely Alter Labor Force Attachment? An Analysis of Female Labor Force Participation,” FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January 19), https://doi.org/10.17016/2380- 7172.3433. A. Prime-age employment-to-population ratios compared with the 2019 average ratio, by group NOTE: The data extend through December 2023. Prime age is 25 to 54. All series are seasonally adjusted by the Federal Reserve Board staff. SOURCE: Bureau of Labor Statistics; U.S. Census Bureau, Current Population Survey; Federal Reserve Board staff calculations. Robust labor demand over the past two years has also reversed pandemic-induced employment losses across education groups. For both prime-age men and women, the EPOP ratio fell signifi cantly more for workers with a high school diploma or less compared with those with at least some college education, largely refl ecting industry exposure to pandemic-related closures or some differences in the ability to work remotely across jobs. Notably, the EPOP ratio declined similarly for men and women with the same education level, a result that contrasts with those in previous recessions, in which male EPOP losses have historically outpaced female losses.6 The unusually large effect on women during the pandemic also refl ects the industry composition of job losses, as well as caregiving needs.7 demographic groups are now within historically narrow ranges, substantial gender, racial, and ethnic gaps remain, underscoring long-standing structural factors. Currently, prime-age women are employed at a rate 11 percentage points less than men, while prime-age Black and Hispanic workers are employed at a rate 3 to 4 percentage points less than white workers. Further, the differential effect of the pandemic on the employment of older workers has proven highly persistent. The EPOP ratio for workers aged 55 or older remains approximately 2 percentage points below its pre-pandemic level and has changed little since late 2021 (fi gure B). This shortfall is wholly attributable to decreases in labor force participation stemming from increased retirements concentrated among workers aged 60 or older.8 In addition to narrowing many employment gaps, historically tight labor market conditions over the past 6. See Claudia Goldin (2022), “Understanding the Economic Impact of COvID-19 on Women,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, pp. 65–110, https://www. brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2022/03/16265-BPEA- Sp22_Goldin_WEB-Appendix.pdf; and Stefania Albanesi and Jiyeon Kim (2021), “Effects of the COvID-19 Recession on the US Labor Market: Occupation, Family, and Gender,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 35 (Summer), pp. 3–24. 7. On the role of caregiving, see Joshua Montes, Christopher Smith, and Isabel Leigh (2021), “Caregiving for Children and Parental Labor Force Participation during the Pandemic,” FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November 5), https://www. federalreserve.gov/econres/notes/feds-notes/caregiving-for- children-and-parental-labor-force-participation-during-the- pandemic-20211105.html. 8. For an analysis on the increase in retirements following B. Employment-to-population ratios relative to 2019 NOTE: The data extend through December 2023. Data before January 2023 are estimated by Federal Reserve Board staff in order to eliminate discontinuities in the published history. two years have also led to strong nominal wage growth, especially for groups at the lower end of the earnings distribution. As shown in the top-left panel of fi gure C, real wage growth—as measured by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta’s Wage Growth Tracker and defl ated by the personal consumption expenditures price index— has been consistently stronger for workers in lower wage quartiles.9 Stronger wage growth at the bottom of the income distribution is refl ected in the experiences of different education and demographic groups. In the fi rst two years of the recovery, real wage growth was stronger for workers with a high school diploma or less relative to workers with a bachelor’s degree or more (fi gure C, top-right panel) and, in the past two years, has also been stronger for nonwhite workers relative to white workers (fi gure C, bottom-left panel). Wages for men and women, by contrast, have largely grown in tandem (fi gure C, bottom-right panel).10 In addition to the infl uence of a tight labor market, differences in wage (continued on next page) 9. To reduce noise due to sampling variation, which can be pronounced when considering disaggregated groups’ wage changes, the series shown in fi gure C are the 12-month moving averages of the groups’ median 12-month real wage changes. Thus, by construction, these series lag the actual real wage changes. 10. The measure of real earnings growth shown in the fi gure uses the same price index for all groups, but infl ation experiences can differ across demographic groups because of differences in what they purchase or where they shop. See Jacob Orchard (2021), “Cyclical Demand Shifts and Cost of Living Inequality,” working paper, February (revised September 2022). Employment and Earnings (continued) Associate’s degree Bachelor’s degree or more NOTE: The data extend through December 2023. Series show 12-month moving averages of the median percent change in the hourly wage of individuals observed 12 months apart, deflated by the 12-month moving average of the 12-month percent change in the personal consumption expenditures price index. In the top-left panel, workers are assigned to wage quartiles based on the average of their wage reports in both Current Population Survey outgoing rotation group interviews; workers in the lowest 25 percent of the average wage distribution are assigned to the 1st quartile, and those in the top 25 percent are assigned to the 4th quartile. growth across groups partially refl ect factors specifi c to the post-pandemic recovery, such as the sectoral composition of labor demand and supply. Wages, for instance, grew faster than average in the leisure and hospitality industry, a relatively low-wage sector that suffered disproportionate employment losses during the pandemic, followed by a surge in vacancies that employers struggled to fi ll as the economy reopened. Over the past year, real wages have been rising for growth across groups have narrowed considerably. While the labor market is still tight by historical standards, factors disproportionately boosting wage growth for the lowest earners have largely faded. In 2023, nominal wage growth slowed for workers with below-median earnings but stepped up for workers above the median. Even so, the gaps in relative wages between workers in the fi rst three quartiles and those in the highest quartile continue to close, albeit at a slower pace. all groups shown here, and differences in real wage Labor demand has been gradually cooling . . . Demand for labor continued to cool last year but remains robust. The Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey (JOLTS) indicated that there were nearly 9 million job openings at the end of 2023—down about 3 million from the all-time high recorded in March 2022 but still around 2 million above pre-pandemic levels. An alternative measure of job vacancies constructed by the Federal Reserve Board staff using job postings data from the large online job board Indeed also shows that vacancies continued to move gradually lower through mid-February but remained above pre-pandemic levels. In addition, measures of layoffs, such as initial claims for unemployment insurance and the rate of layoffs and discharges in the JOLTS, have remained very low by historical standards. . . . and labor supply has increased further . . . Meanwhile, the supply of labor has continued to increase on net. The labor force participation rate, which measures the share of people either working or actively seeking work, continued to trend higher for most of last year but has softened in recent months (figure 14). Importantly, labor force participation for prime-age workers increased notably through last September and, although it has edged down more recently, remains above its pre- pandemic level. Labor supply was also boosted last year by relatively strong population growth. The Census Bureau estimates that the resident population increased 1.7 million (0.5 percent) in 2023, with almost 70 percent of that increase coming from immigration.2 Last 2. A recent report from the Congressional Budget Office estimates that immigration has been considerably higher than in the Census Bureau’s estimates in recent years; see Congressional Budget Office (2024), The Demographic Outlook: 2024 to 2054 (Washington: CBO, January), https://www.cbo.gov/publication/59697. The labor force estimates published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics are based on the civilian noninstitutionalized population aged 16 or older, which constitutes about 80 percent of the resident population. 14. Labor force participation rate, by age NOTE: The labor force participation rate is a percentage of the relevant population. Data are monthly, and values before January 2023 are estimated by Federal Reserve Board staff in order to eliminate discontinuities in the published history. 15. Available jobs versus available workers NOTE: The data extend through December 2023. Available jobs are employment plus job openings as of the end of the previous month. Available workers are the labor force. Data for employment and labor force before January 2023 are estimated by Federal Reserve Board staff in order to eliminate discontinuities in the published history. year’s rate of population growth was slightly faster than in 2022 and about twice as fast as in 2020 and 2021, when growth was held down by COVID-19-related increases in mortality and restrictions on immigration. Although population growth has largely returned to its pace from the years preceding the pandemic, it remains well below its average from 1990 to 2015. . . . but the labor market remains relatively tight Even with easing labor demand and rising labor supply, the labor market remains relatively tight. Some indicators suggest that the labor market remains tighter than before the pandemic, while others have returned to their 2019 ranges, when the labor market was also relatively tight. The number of total available jobs (measured by employed workers plus job openings) still exceeds the number of available workers (measured by the labor force). This jobs–workers gap was around 2.8 million in December, down markedly from its peak of 6.0 million recorded in March 2022 but still above its 2019 average of 1.1 million (figure 15).3 In contrast, the percentage of workers quitting their jobs each month, an indicator of the availability of attractive job prospects, was 2.2 percent in December, close to its 2019 average. Surveys indicate that households’ and small businesses’ perceptions of labor market tightness have also come down from their recent peaks. In addition, business contacts in nearly all Federal Reserve Districts cited signs of a cooling labor market, such as larger applicant pools and lower turnover rates; however, some employers continued to report difficulty finding workers, particularly employers seeking specialized skills.4 3. The ratio of job openings to unemployment shows that there were 1.4 job openings per unemployed person in December 2023. For comparison, this ratio averaged 1.2 in 2019 and 0.6 over the 10-year period from 2010 to 2019. 4. See the January 2024 Beige Book, available on the Board’s website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/ monetarypolicy/publications/beige-book-default.htm. Wage growth has slowed but remains elevated Consistent with the easing in labor market tightness, nominal wage growth slowed in 2023 but remains elevated (figure 16). Total hourly compensation as measured by the employment cost index increased 4.2 percent over the 12 months ending in December, a noticeable slowing from the 5.1 percent increase in 2022. Other aggregate measures, such as average hourly earnings (a less comprehensive measure of compensation) and the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta’s Wage Growth Tracker, which reports the median 12-month wage growth of individuals responding to the Current Population Survey, have slowed as well. With PCE prices having risen 2.6 percent in 2023, these measures suggest that most workers saw increases in the purchasing power of their wages over the past year. Labor productivity strengthened last year The extent to which nominal wage gains raise firms’ costs and act as a source of inflation pressure depends importantly on the pace of productivity growth. Labor productivity in the business sector has been extremely variable since the pandemic began, increasing sharply in 2020 and then declining, on average, over 2021 and 2022 (figure 17). Productivity is reported to have risen a robust 2.7 percent last year. When averaged over the pandemic period, output per hour rose at a moderate average annual rate of 1½ percent, in line with the average rate of growth observed during the business cycle from the fourth quarter of 2007 to the fourth quarter of 2019. As always, the pace of future productivity growth remains highly uncertain. It is possible that productivity growth could remain at around this same moderate pace. However, it is also possible that the rapid adoption of new technologies like artificial intelligence and robotics—as well as the high rate of new business formation that the pandemic brought about—could boost productivity growth above that pace in coming years. 16. Measures of change in hourly compensation NOTE: For the private-sector employment cost index, change is over the 12 months ending in the last month of each quarter; for private-sector average hourly earnings, the data are 12-month percent changes; for the Atlanta Fed’s Wage Growth Tracker, the data are shown as a 3-month moving average of the 12-month percent change. SOURCE: Bureau of Labor Statistics; Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Wage Growth Tracker; all via Haver Analytics. 17. U.S. labor productivity NOTE: The data are output per hour in the business sector. SOURCE: Bureau of Labor Statistics via Haver Analytics. 18. Change in real gross domestic product and gross domestic income NOTE: The data for gross domestic income extend through 2023:H1. The key identifies bars in order from left to right. 19. Change in real personal consumption expenditures Gross domestic product rose at a solid pace last year Real gross domestic product (GDP) is reported to have increased at an annual rate of 4.0 percent in the second half of 2023, up from 2.2 percent in the first half. For 2023 as a whole, GDP increased 3.1 percent, notably faster than in 2022 despite restrictive financial conditions, including elevated longer- term interest rates (figure 18).5 Among the components of GDP, consumer spending rose solidly in the second half of last year, and residential investment started to turn back up following its earlier sharp declines, but growth of business investment slowed. In contrast to GDP, manufacturing output was little changed, on net, last year, a downshift following two years of robust post- pandemic gains. Motor vehicle production continued to rebound from supply chain disruptions in 2021 and 2022, although last year’s production was held down by strikes at several major automakers. Outside of motor vehicles, industrial production generally moved sideways last year, but it was down from its post-pandemic peak in early 2022, as inventories normalized and new orders fell back. Consumer spending growth was resilient even as household finances deteriorated Consumer spending adjusted for inflation grew at a solid rate of 3.0 percent in the second half of 2023 and 2.7 percent for last year as a whole (figure 19). Consumers’ resilience in the face 5. Real gross domestic income (GDI) has been notably weaker than GDP in recent quarters; both series measure the same economic concept, and any difference between the two figures reflects measurement error. GDI reportedly increased at a 0.8 percent pace in the first three quarters of last year after having been unchanged over the four quarters of 2022—well below the corresponding figures for GDP. As a result, productivity calculated from the income side of the national accounts would also be considerably weaker than the published figures over the past couple of years. of tight financial conditions was supported by the strong labor market and rising real incomes. Indeed, after declining, on average, in 2021 and 2022, real disposable personal income increased robustly last year. However, last year’s spending was also accompanied by households drawing down their liquid assets, such as checking accounts, and by relying more on credit. Indeed, the saving rate was 3.9 percent in the fourth quarter of 2023, well below pre-pandemic levels (figure 20). In addition, although household wealth relative to income remains high in the aggregate, it has declined, on net, since the end of 2021 and so is likely providing less support to consumer spending. Consumer spending since the pandemic has been more robust than measures of consumer sentiment would suggest. Although sentiment in the Michigan survey has improved markedly in recent months, it remains much further below its pre-pandemic level than does a similar measure from the Conference Board, which puts more weight on labor market conditions (figure 21). Consumer financing conditions tightened last year Credit remains available for most consumers, though interest rates on both credit cards and auto loans remain higher than the levels observed in 2018 at the peak of the previous monetary policy tightening cycle. Indeed, interest rates on credit cards have continued to increase since the first half of last year. In addition, banks reported continued tightening of lending standards across consumer credit products, in part reflecting lenders’ concerns about further deterioration in credit performance and higher funding costs. Delinquency rates for credit cards rose further over the second half of 2023, while those for auto loans flattened out; both rates are notably above levels observed just before the pandemic. Reflecting these and other factors, consumer credit expanded moderately during the second half of last year, driven by robust growth in credit card balances and modest growth in 20. Personal saving rate NOTE: The data extend through December 2023. SOURCE: Bureau of Economic Analysis via Haver Analytics. NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through February 2024. The February data for the Michigan survey are preliminary. 22. Consumer credit flows NOTE: Student loan balances were little changed in 2023:H1. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Board, Statistical Release G.19, “Consumer 23. Change in real business fixed investment NOTE: Business fixed investment is known as “private nonresidential fixed investment” in the national income and product accounts. The key identifies bars in order from left to right. Equipment and intangible capital investment was little changed in 2023:H2. auto loans (figure 22). In contrast, student loan balances fell in the second half of last year, in large part driven by the cancellation of debt for certain borrowers in income-driven repayment plans. Residential investment turned around and grew modestly in the second half of 2023 After declining steeply in 2022 on the heels of the substantial rise in mortgage interest rates, residential investment fell a bit further in the first half of 2023 but picked up in the second half of the year. The pickup in housing activity since mid-2023 masked some important differences across components of the market, with sales of existing homes much weaker than sales of new homes and with construction of single-family homes remaining relatively solid while multifamily construction declined. (The box “Recent Housing Market Developments” provides further discussion.) Capital spending growth softened amid tighter financial conditions and subdued sentiment Tighter financial conditions and downbeat business sentiment led to a slowdown in business investment spending growth in the second half of 2023 (figure 23). Equipment investment spending declined in the second half of the year, while investment in intellectual property products—which include software and research and development— continued to decelerate from its solid pace of growth over the previous few years. Investment in nonresidential structures, which had surged in early 2023 because of a boom in manufacturing construction—especially for factories that produce semiconductors or electric vehicle batteries—also decelerated in the second half of 2023, although the level of structures investment remained much higher than in previous years. Although indicators of business sentiment and profit expectations have improved in recent months, sentiment remains subdued. has reduced the overall demand for housing and slowed activity in the housing sector appreciably. The change in mortgage rates was unusually large and rapid, with 30-year fi xed rates rising from about 3.2 percent in January 2022 to almost 8 percent in October 2023, the highest level since 2000 (fi gure A). Although mortgage rates have declined somewhat since October, they still averaged around 7 percent in February 2024. The run-up in mortgage rates through late 2023, combined with a further rise in house prices, resulted in a sharp increase in typical mortgage payments and has reduced housing demand and home sales. The median monthly principal and interest payment on newly originated home-purchase mortgages for owner- occupied properties increased from below $1,400 in January 2022 to around $1,800 in early 2023 and has remained around that elevated level (fi gure B). As a result, home sales (including both new and existing properties) have fallen sharply over the past two years. Home purchases by low-income households have fallen disproportionately more, because mortgage lenders impose maximums on the ratio of a borrower’s debt service payments to the borrower’s income.1 NOTE: The data shown are median monthly scheduled principal and interest payments on home purchase mortgages for owner-occupied properties by month of rate lock. The Optimal Blue data are aggregated and anonymized. The data do not contain lender or customer identities or complete rate sheets. However, several other factors have supported underlying demand for housing, somewhat limiting the effect of higher mortgage rates. First, the labor market has remained strong, with historically low unemployment and real wage growth turning positive last year. Second, households may still be gradually adjusting to long-term remote or hybrid work fl exibility by seeking additional space. Third, a rising fraction of buyers have been able to purchase homes with cash rather than taking out mortgages. The share of homes purchased with cash was about 15 percent in 2020 and increased to about 25 percent in 2023, with the drop in home sales concentrated in mortgage borrowers. NOTE: The data are contract rates on 30-year, fixed-rate conventional home mortgage commitments and extend through February 22, 2024. Housing supply has also faced constraints, due to both short- and long-term factors. In the short term, higher interest rates and tighter underwriting by banks signifi cantly increased builders’ costs of fi nancing, discouraging new construction. In the long term, despite a surge in construction in late 2020 and 2021, it appears that a variety of factors—including zoning and other regulatory hurdles—have prevented construction from keeping up with underlying demand, resulting in a gross housing vacancy rate that is at a historical low.2 (continued on next page) 1. See Daniel Ringo (2022), “Declining Affordability and Home Purchase Borrowing by Lower Income Households,” FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July 8), https://doi.org/10.17016/2380- 7172.3160. 2. See Joseph Gyourko and Raven Molloy (2015), The recent performance of home prices refl ects this interplay between housing demand and supply. House price growth slowed rapidly from its historically high pace in response to the jump in interest rates, but it has bounced back recently on a year-over-year basis, leaving house price levels near record highs (fi gure C). The interplay between demand and supply has played out quite differently across segments of the housing market. In particular, the contrast between the evolution of new and existing home sales has been notable (fi gure D). Many households purchased homes or refi nanced when fi xed mortgage rates were at historically low levels in 2020 and 2021, and, as a result, the majority of outstanding mortgages SOURCE: CoreLogic, Inc., Home Price Index; Zillow, Inc., Real Estate Data; S&P/Case-Shiller U.S. National Home Price Index. The S&P/Case-Shiller index is a product of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. (For Dow Jones Indices licensing information, see the note on the Contents page.) have interest rates below 4 percent (fi gure E). If these homeowners with low mortgage rates want to move to a different home with a new mortgage, their new mortgage payment would be much higher. As a result, many homeowners who might otherwise have moved have instead opted to remain in their current home. The net effect has been an unusually thin market for existing homes, with a dramatic reduction in the number of people both selling and bidding on homes. The decline in the supply of existing homes for sale also makes it diffi cult for the remaining buyers in the market to fi nd their preferred home and may be driving some to the new home market even as overall sales are depressed. New homebuilders have also been able to offer buyers (continued) D. New and existing home sales Existing home sales NOTE: The data are monthly. New and existing home sales include SOURCE: For new home sales, U.S. Census Bureau; for existing home NOTE: The data extend through November 2023. The sample only includes outstanding mortgages current on their payments. signifi cant incentives while still maintaining positive profi t margins. The relative strength in the new home demand has encouraged builders to increase the rate of new construction after having sharply pulled back in 2022 when rates fi rst started to rise (fi gure F). The balance between supply and demand in the multifamily market—which is dominated by rental units—is fundamentally different from that in the single-family market. Initially, as the pandemic eased, market rents surged along with single-family home prices in response to the increased demand for living space, whether owned or rented. These higher rents encouraged a dramatic increase in multifamily starts from what were already quite strong historical levels, averaging 510,000 units per year in 2021 and 2022, compared with an average of 314,000 units per year from 2000 to 2020. Construction of multifamily Single-family starts Single-family permits Multifamily starts properties remained strong through 2022 even as single-family construction declined sharply. Unlike the cost of buying a home, rental demand is not directly harmed by higher mortgage rates and may even be supported, to some extent, by a shift away from home purchases as rates rise. Multifamily projects also take signifi cantly longer to plan and build than single-family projects and are slower to react to changing economic conditions. Over the past year, we have seen more new properties delivered to the market, which contributed to increases in multifamily vacancy rates and a signifi cant deceleration in market rents. These developments, combined with concerns about the effect of the large amount of new supply still scheduled to be delivered to market over the next year, have started to drive down prices of existing multifamily properties. As a result, the rate of new multifamily construction has come back down over the past year even as single-family construction has picked back up. 24. Change in real imports and exports of goods and services Business financing conditions were moderately restrictive overall, but credit remained generally available Credit remained generally available to most nonfinancial corporations but at elevated interest rates and amid moderately restrictive financial conditions overall. Banks continued to tighten lending standards for all loan types over the second half of last year, and business loan growth at banks continued to slow. In contrast, issuance of corporate bonds remained solid across credit categories, although well below the levels prevailing at the beginning of the tightening cycle. For small businesses, which are more reliant on bank financing than large businesses, credit conditions tightened further over the second half of last year. Surveys indicate that credit supply for small businesses has tightened further, and interest rates on loans to small businesses moved higher and now stand near the top of the range observed since 2008. Loan default and delinquency rates have also increased and now slightly exceed their pre- pandemic rates. Trade recovered in the second half of 2023 Real imports remained relatively unchanged for the year as a whole after declining in the first half of last year and then recovering over the second half as domestic demand picked up (figure 24). Despite lackluster foreign growth, exports picked up more strongly than imports over the second half of the year. As such, net exports added about 0.3 percentage point to GDP growth in the fourth quarter of 2023 after being neutral for growth in the previous two quarters. The current account deficit narrowed slightly in the third quarter of 2023 to 2.9 percent of GDP, remaining larger than before the pandemic. Federal fiscal policy actions were roughly neutral for GDP growth in 2023 Federal purchases grew modestly in 2023, and several recently enacted policies began to boost investment and consumption. This support to economic activity was about offset by the unwinding of the remaining pandemic-related fiscal policy support. All told, the contribution of discretionary changes in federal fiscal policy to real GDP growth was roughly neutral last year. The budget deficit and federal debt remain elevated After surging to 15 percent of GDP in fiscal year 2020, the budget deficit declined through 2022 as the imprint of the pandemic faded (figure 25). The budget deficit edged up to 6.3 percent of GDP in fiscal 2023 as tax receipts declined from their elevated level in 2022 and net interest outlays increased.6 As a result of the unprecedented fiscal support enacted early in the pandemic, federal debt held by the public jumped roughly 20 percentage points to 100 percent of GDP in fiscal 2020—the highest debt-to-GDP ratio since 1947 (figure 26). After falling slightly through 2022, the debt-to-GDP ratio edged up in 2023, as rising interest rates contributed to higher net interest outlays. The Congressional Budget Office projects that further increases in interest costs, along with positive primary deficits—that is, total deficits less interest payments—will produce a steady rise in the debt-to-GDP ratio in the years to come. Most state and local government budget positions remained strong . . . Federal policymakers provided a historically high level of fiscal support to state and local governments during the pandemic; this aid, together with robust state tax collections in 2021 and 2022, left the sector in a strong 6. The growth of the deficit between fiscal years 2022 and 2023 would have been larger had it not been for the Administration’s announced student debt relief program, which raised the fiscal 2022 deficit $380 billion, and the Supreme Court’s reversal of the policy, which lowered it $330 billion in fiscal 2023. 25. Federal receipts and expenditures NOTE: The receipts and expenditures data are on a unified-budget basis and are for fiscal years (October through September); gross domestic product (GDP) data are on a 4-quarter basis ending in Q3. 26. Federal government debt and net interest outlays Debt held by the public NOTE: The data for net interest outlays are annual, begin in 1948, and extend through 2023. Net interest outlays are the cost of servicing the debt held by the public. Federal debt held by the public equals federal debt less Treasury securities held in federal employee defined-benefit retirement accounts, evaluated at the end of the quarter. The data for federal debt are annual from 1901 to 1951 and a 4-quarter moving average thereafter and extend through 2023:Q3. GDP is gross domestic product. 27. State and local tax receipts NOTE: Receipts shown are year-over-year percent changes of 4-quarter moving averages, begin in 2012:Q4, and extend through 2023:Q3. Property taxes are primarily collected by local governments. 28. State and local government payroll employment 29. Market-implied federal funds rate path NOTE: The federal funds rate path is implied by quotes on overnight index swaps—a derivative contract tied to the effective federal funds rate. The implied path as of June 1, 2023, is compared with that as of February 27, 2024. The path is estimated with a spline approach, assuming a term premium of 0 basis points. The June 1, 2023, path extends through 2027:Q2 and the February 27, 2024, path through 2028:Q1. budget position overall (figure 27). Although state tax revenues weakened in 2023—mainly reflecting a normalization of receipts from elevated levels in the previous year as well as the effects of recently enacted tax cuts in some states—taxes as a percentage of GDP remained above recent historical norms. Moreover, states’ total balances (that is, including rainy day fund balances and previous-year surplus funds) continued to be near all-time highs. Nevertheless, budget situations varied widely across the states, with some states—particularly those that depend heavily on capital gains tax collections—facing tighter budget conditions. At the local level, overall property tax receipts rose briskly in 2023. . . . contributing to brisk growth in employment and construction spending Employment in state and local governments rose strongly in 2023, as some pandemic- related headwinds, such as an increase in retirements, have abated and wages became more competitive relative to those in the private sector (figure 28). Similarly, real construction outlays grew rapidly, reflecting easing bottlenecks and support from federal grants. By the end of 2023, both employment and construction spending were roughly back to their pre-pandemic levels. The expected level of the federal funds rate over the next few years is now higher than it was last June on net Market-based measures of the expected federal funds rate rose considerably over the summer and early fall before moving down toward the end of 2023. On net, the market-implied policy rate path rose notably for year-end 2024, and somewhat more modestly for year-end 2025 and 2026 (figure 29).7 Financial market prices imply that the federal funds rate will decline 7. These measures are based on market prices for overnight index swaps for the effective federal funds rate and are not adjusted for term premiums. from current levels following the March 2024 FOMC meeting, reaching about 4.6 percent and about 3.7 percent by year-end 2024 and year-end 2025, respectively. Consistent with these market-implied measures, survey respondents in the Blue Chip Financial Forecasts published at the beginning of February expect the policy rate to begin to decrease in the second quarter of 2024 and reach 4.4 percent by year-end 2024. On net, respondents have significantly revised upward their expectations of the federal funds rate path since last June’s survey. Yields on long-term U.S. nominal Treasury securities fluctuated considerably Yields on long-term nominal Treasury securities began to increase in the spring of 2023 and rose markedly through mid-October before reversing course sharply, with the 10-year Treasury yield reaching a peak of about 5 percent before falling to just below 4 percent by the end of last year (figure 30). So far this year, long-term nominal Treasury yields have increased, with the 10-year Treasury yield rising to about 4.4 percent by late February. In contrast, short-term Treasury yields have been little changed, on net, since early June. Yields on other long-term debt fluctuated with Treasury yields Corporate bond yields declined across credit categories since June, on net, amid sizable fluctuations that accompanied the observed large movements in long-term Treasury yields (figure 31). Spreads on corporate bonds over comparable-maturity Treasury securities narrowed notably, on net, especially for speculative-grade bonds, to levels in the lower range of their historical distributions. Similarly, municipal bond spreads over comparable-maturity Treasury securities narrowed substantially since June and are now fairly low relative to their historical distributions across credit ratings. Overall, corporate and municipal credit quality remained solid, with a low volume of defaults in both markets despite some increase in corporate bond defaults. 30. Yields on nominal Treasury securities 31. Corporate bond yields, by securities rating, and municipal bond yield NOTE: Investment-grade corporate reflects the effective yield of the ICE Bank of America Merrill Lynch (BofAML) triple-B U.S. Corporate Index (C0A4). High-yield corporate reflects the effective yield of the ICE BofAML High Yield Index (H0A0). Municipal reflects the yield to worst of the ICE BofAML U.S. Municipal Securities Index (U0A0). SOURCE: ICE Data Indices, LLC, used with permission. 32. Yield and spread on agency mortgage-backed securities is for the uniform mortgage-backed securities 30-year current coupon, the coupon rate at which new mortgage-backed securities would be priced at par, or face, value for dates after May 31, 2019; for earlier dates, the yield shown is for the Fannie Mae 30-year current coupon. Spread shown is to the average of the 5-year and 10-year nominal Treasury yields. NOTE: The data are daily. Yield shown SOURCE: Department of the Treasury; J.P. Morgan. Courtesy of J.P. 33. Equity prices SOURCE: S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC via Bloomberg. (For Dow Jones Indices licensing information, see the note on the Contents page.) Yields on agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS)—an important pricing factor for home mortgage interest rates—rose notably over the summer before falling back down toward the end of last year (figure 32). So far this year, yields on agency MBS have increased, standing in late February at levels notably above those in June 2023. The MBS spread decreased slightly since June, on net, but remained elevated relative to pre-pandemic levels, at least partly due to high interest rate volatility, which reduces the value of holding MBS. Broad equity price indexes increased The S&P 500 index increased significantly since June, on net, above the record-high levels seen at the end of 2021 (figure 33). Following a substantial decline over late summer and early fall, the S&P 500 index recovered toward the end of the year, as long-term interest rates declined, and continued to rise over the start of 2024. Meanwhile, small-cap firms, whose equity prices have significantly underperformed broad equity indexes, experienced substantial increases in their equity valuations in recent months amid better economic prospects, including expectations of a less restrictive monetary policy. Bank equity prices rose, on net, retracing some of the declines that had occurred over the first half of 2023 and that had been associated with strains in the banking sector. In the case of the largest banks, equity prices rose above their early-2023 levels; regional bank equity prices had only a partial retracement. One-month option- implied volatility on the S&P 500 index— the VIX—increased moderately until late October but subsequently declined to reach levels somewhat lower than those prevailing in early June. (For a discussion of financial stability issues, see the box “Developments Related to Financial Stability.”) This discussion reviews vulnerabilities in the U.S. fi nancial system. The framework used by the Federal Reserve Board for assessing the resilience of the U.S. fi nancial system focuses on fi nancial vulnerabilities in four broad areas: asset valuations, business and household debt, leverage in the fi nancial sector, and funding risks. Acute stress in the banking system has receded since last spring, and banks’ regulatory risk- based capital ratios remained solid and increased broadly, as bank profi ts were robust and banks reduced capital distributions. Nonetheless, declines in the fair value of fi xed-rate assets at some banks have been sizable relative to regulatory capital. valuation pressures increased modestly, with equity markets close to all-time highs in real terms and real estate prices still high relative to fundamentals. Credit to nonfi nancial businesses and households continued to decrease relative to gross domestic product (GDP), and this ratio now sits close to its 20-year low. However, funding vulnerabilities remain notable. Hedge fund leverage is elevated, partly due to elevated activity in the cash– futures basis trade. nonfi nancial businesses by private credit funds and other private investors has been growing rapidly. While risks from leverage and investor redemption appear limited, the sector remains opaque, making it diffi cult to assess vulnerabilities. notable, as losses in the fair value of long-dated bank assets remain signifi cant. Risk-based capital ratios increased broadly across all bank categories and sit well above regulatory minimums, driven both by robust bank profi tability and by a decrease in shareholder payouts at the largest banks. Credit quality at banks remained strong, although the quality of CRE loans backed by offi ce, retail, and multifamily buildings continued its decline, a result of the lower demand for downtown real estate prompted by the shift toward telework. Some smaller regional and community banks with high concentrations of CRE loans are also highly reliant on uninsured deposits, potentially compounding vulnerabilities. Leverage at hedge funds stabilized at a high level as the Treasury cash–futures basis Broad equity prices are now at levels close to historical highs, driven mostly by performance of the largest companies. Nominal long-term Treasury yields rose to a 15-year peak in October but have now fallen to levels close to those from a year ago. Commercial real estate (CRE) prices continued to decline, especially in the offi ce, retail, and multifamily sectors, and low levels of transactions in the offi ce sector likely indicated that prices had not yet fully refl ected the sector’s weaker fundamentals. Prices of single-family residential properties, which held steady through the fi rst quarter of 2023, have started rising again, albeit modestly, and remain high relative to market rents. vulnerabilities arising from household and (continued on next page) nonfi nancial business leverage remain moderate. The combined debt of both sectors as a share of GDP sat close to its lowest level in 20 years and continues to decrease (fi gure A). In the household sector, balance sheets remain strong, and homeowners’ equity shares of houses are now at their highest levels in at least 30 years. Nonfi nancial businesses’ ability to service debt also remains adequate, as the pass-through of higher policy rates has so far been muted by the large share of long-term fi xed-rate debt. Direct lending to NOTE: Data extend through 2023:Q3. The shaded bars with top caps indicate periods of business recession as defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research: July 1981 to November 1982, July 1990 to March 1991, March 2001 to November 2001, December 2007 to June 2009, and February 2020 to April 2020. GDP is gross domestic product. trade continued to grow, suggesting a risk of sudden deleveraging if volatility in Treasury markets increases unexpectedly. Leverage at life insurers also increased, although to levels near the middle of its historical distribution. In terms of funding risks, liquidity remains ample, and deposits have stabilized recently. The number of banks with large declines in fair value relative to their regulatory capital and heavy reliance on uninsured deposits has declined signifi cantly since March 2023. Overall, banks’ reliance on short-term wholesale funding remained much lower than the typical range before the banking reforms of the previous decade. Money market funds continued to grow throughout the shocks to fi nancial stability highlights several important risks. Adverse developments in longer-term interest rates could potentially strain credit supply in vulnerable sectors. A related risk, the reemergence of banking- sector stress at some institutions, might further constrain the supply of credit, particularly at banks with large CRE concentration and a high fraction of uninsured deposits. Geopolitical risks remain salient, including Russia’s war against Ukraine and potential spillovers of the Israel–Hamas war, and could cause strains in parts of the U.S. fi nancial system. Major asset markets functioned in an orderly way, but liquidity has remained low Treasury securities market functioning has continued to be orderly, but liquidity remained low by historical standards. The persistence of low liquidity is broadly in line with enduring high interest rate volatility, as future economic conditions and the policy rate path remain particularly uncertain. Market depth—a measure of the availability of contracts at the best quoted prices—for Treasury securities remains near historically low levels, particularly in the case of short- term Treasury securities. With regard to liquidity in the equity market, market depth based on S&P 500 futures was little changed and remained somewhat low compared with pre-COVID levels. Corporate and municipal secondary bond markets continued to function well; transaction costs in these markets were fairly low by historical standards. Short-term funding market conditions remained stable Conditions in overnight bank funding and repurchase agreement (repo) markets remained stable. Since June, the effective federal funds rate and other unsecured overnight rates have been a few basis points below the interest rate on reserve balances, while the Secured Overnight Financing Rate has been at or slightly above the offering rate on the overnight reverse repurchase agreement (ON RRP) facility. Take-up at the ON RRP facility has declined substantially since June. This decline reflects a significant increase in the net supply of Treasury bills and relatively more attractive rates on alternative short-term investments such as private repo. Money market funds (MMFs), the largest investors in the ON RRP facility, accounted for much of the decline in ON RRP take-up as they made a substantial reallocation of their investments toward Treasury bills and private repo. Both prime and government MMFs have seen a notable increase in assets under management since June, as relatively favorable 34. Ratio of total commercial bank credit to nominal gross domestic product 35. Profitability of bank holding companies NOTE: The data are quarterly. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Board, Form FR Y-9C, Consolidated yields continue to attract funds previously held on deposit in the banking sector. Weighted average maturities at both prime and government MMFs increased in anticipation of fewer policy rate increases. Bank credit growth continued to slow over the second half of 2023 The slowdown in bank credit growth was broad based, with growth in outstanding balances for all major loan categories slowing from earlier in the year, likely reflecting the effects of higher interest rates, tighter credit availability, and economic uncertainty (figure 34). Banks in the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices reported tighter standards and weaker demand over the third and fourth quarters, continuing trends for standards and demand that have been reported since the middle of 2022. Delinquency rates on bank loans generally rose in the second half of 2023—with the largest increases for commercial real estate and consumer loans—but remained around ranges observed before the pandemic except for consumer loans. Bank profitability moved down in the second half of 2023 to levels below those that prevailed before the pandemic (figure 35). Foreign economic growth slowed in the second half of 2023 Following a rebound in early 2023, foreign activity was subdued overall in the second half of last year, although with some variation across countries. In advanced foreign economies (AFEs), several factors restrained growth, including the tightening of monetary policy over the past two years—which weighed on credit growth and investment—and an erosion of real household incomes amid high inflation rates. In Europe, ongoing structural adjustment to higher energy prices also continued to hinder the performance of energy-intensive sectors. Economic indicators point to continued weakness in AFE growth in early 2024. In China, a post-pandemic boost to economic growth early in 2023 faded by the second quarter, and property-sector weakness and sluggish domestic demand have remained a constraint on economic activity. Policy stimulus targeting infrastructure and manufacturing investment bolstered Chinese growth in the second half of the year, enabling the government to meet its 2023 growth target. In emerging market economies (EMEs) other than China, economic activity slowed in the second half of last year but was more resilient overall than in the AFEs. Industrial production in emerging Asia excluding China began recovering, supported by a rebound in global demand for high-tech products that was driven in part by the artificial intelligence and electric vehicle sectors. Inflation abroad has continued to ease but remains elevated Foreign headline inflation has continued to decline since the middle of last year, reflecting lower core and food inflation (figure 36). Both the subsiding effects of past global supply bottlenecks and the drag on demand from monetary policy tightening have eased 36. Components of foreign consumer price inflation Emerging market economies NOTE: The advanced foreign economy aggregate is the average of Canada, the euro area, and the U.K., weighted by shares of U.S. non-oil goods imports. The emerging market economy aggregate is the average of Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, the Philippines, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan, Thailand, and Vietnam, weighted by shares of U.S. non-oil goods imports, and begins in 2017:Q2. The inflation measure is the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices for the euro area and the consumer price index for other economies. The data show percent changes from year-ago levels. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Board staff calculations; Haver Analytics. 37. Consumer price inflation in foreign economies NOTE: The advanced foreign economy (AFE) aggregate is the average of Canada, the euro area, and the U.K., weighted by shares of U.S. non-oil goods imports. The emerging market economy (EME) aggregate is the average of Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, the Philippines, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan, Thailand, and Vietnam, weighted by shares of U.S. non-oil goods imports. The inflation measure is the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices for the euro area and the consumer price index for other economies. 38. Nominal 10-year government bond yields in selected advanced foreign economies NOTE: The data are weekly averages of daily benchmark yields and inflationary pressures (figure 37). However, the pace of disinflation has varied across sectors and countries. The deceleration in goods prices abroad has generally outpaced that in services prices, as in the U.S. Inflation remains above target in Europe but has been running near zero in China. Although the flare-up in geopolitical tensions in the Middle East and accompanying disruptions to shipping through the Red Sea have had only limited effects on consumer prices in general and on global energy prices in particular, further escalation in tensions could disrupt global momentum toward restoring lower inflation. Foreign central banks are maintaining a restrictive monetary policy stance Most foreign central banks paused their interest rate hikes in the second half of last year and have since held policy rates steady, acknowledging the cumulative tightening of policy and progress in lowering inflation. Policy rate paths implied by financial market pricing suggest that many AFE central banks are expected to begin reducing interest rates in 2024. Several EME central banks have already begun easing monetary policy. However, foreign central banks have generally continued to emphasize in their communications that progress toward achieving their inflation goals could slow or even reverse, including from resilience in labor markets, wage growth, or geopolitical developments leading to higher commodity prices and trade costs. Financial conditions abroad have been volatile but have eased, on balance, since mid-2023 Near-dated AFE sovereign yields declined toward the end of last year as central banks signaled they had reached or neared the end of policy rate tightening. Longer-term sovereign yields unwound most of the increase registered earlier in 2023 (figure 38). One exception was Japan, where the central bank widened the band around its yield curve control target, allowing yields on 10-year government securities to increase, on net, in 2023. Since mid-2023, the broad dollar index—a measure of the exchange value of the dollar against a trade-weighted basket of foreign currencies—increased slightly on net (figure 39). The dollar index was volatile, increasing significantly as U.S. yields rose from July to October and then reversing most of these increases as U.S. yields declined. Many major foreign equity indexes rose across AFEs and EMEs, although gains were near zero in the U.K., consistent with stagnant economic activity (figure 40). Chinese equity prices were an exception, with declines amid pessimism about growth prospects and a pullback by foreign investors from Chinese markets. Flows to EME-focused investment funds turned negative in mid-2023, as yields on advanced-economy bonds rose more than those in emerging economies. These outflows eased toward the end of the year as AFE yields fell. EME sovereign spreads narrowed moderately last year. 39. U.S. dollar exchange rate index NOTE: The data, which are in foreign currency units per dollar, are weekly averages of daily values of the broad dollar index and extend through February 23, 2024. As indicated by the arrow, increases in the data reflect U.S. dollar appreciation and decreases reflect U.S. dollar depreciation. 40. Equity indexes for selected foreign economies NOTE: The data are weekly averages of daily data and extend through SOURCE: For the euro area, Dow Jones Euro Stoxx Index; for Japan, Tokyo Stock Price Index; for China, Shanghai Composite Index; for the U.K., FTSE 100 Index; all via Bloomberg. (For Dow Jones Indices licensing information, see the note on the Contents page.) After one additional increase in July, the Federal Open Market Committee has held the federal funds rate steady . . . The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has maintained the target range for the federal funds rate at 5¼ to 5½ percent since its July 2023 meeting (figure 41). The Committee views the policy rate as likely at its peak for this tightening cycle; since early 2022, the FOMC raised the target range a total of 525 basis points. The FOMC’s policy tightening actions have reflected its commitment to return inflation to its 2 percent objective. Restoring price stability is essential to achieve a sustained period of strong labor market conditions that benefit all. As labor market tightness has eased and progress on inflation has continued, the risks to achieving the Committee’s employment and inflation goals have been moving into better balance. Even so, the Committee remains highly attentive to inflation risks and is acutely aware that high inflation imposes significant hardship, especially on those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials, like food, housing, and transportation. In considering any adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will carefully assess incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks. The Committee does not expect it will be appropriate to reduce the target range until it has gained greater confidence that inflation is moving sustainably toward 2 percent. . . . and has continued the process of significantly reducing its holdings of Treasury and agency securities The FOMC began reducing its securities holdings in June 2022 and, since then, has continued to implement its plan for significantly reducing the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet in a predictable manner.8 Since September 2022, principal payments from securities held in the System 8. See the May 4, 2022, press release regarding the Plans for Reducing the Size of the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet, available on the Board’s website at https:// www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/ monetary20220504b.htm. 41. Selected interest rates NOTE: The 2-year and 10-year Treasury rates are the constant-maturity yields based on the most actively traded securities. SOURCE: Department of the Treasury; Federal Reserve Board. Open Market Account (SOMA) have been reinvested only to the extent that they exceeded monthly caps of $60 billion per month for Treasury securities and $35 billion per month for agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities. As a result of these actions, the SOMA holdings of Treasury and agency securities have declined about $1.4 trillion since the start of balance sheet reduction to around $7.1 trillion, a level equivalent to about 25 percent of U.S. nominal gross domestic product as compared with a peak of 35 percent reached at the end of 2021 (figure 42). Despite this decline in SOMA holdings, reserve balances increased $217 billion, to a level of around $3.5 trillion, as the corresponding decline in the Federal Reserve’s liabilities was concentrated in usage of the overnight reverse repurchase agreement facility. (See the box “Developments in the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet and Money Markets.”) The FOMC has stated that it intends to maintain securities holdings at amounts consistent with implementing monetary policy efficiently and effectively in its ample- reserves regime. To ensure a smooth transition, the FOMC intends to slow and then stop reductions in its securities holdings when reserve balances are somewhat above the level that the FOMC judges to be consistent with ample reserves. Once balance sheet runoff has ceased, reserve balances will likely continue to decline at a slower pace—reflecting growth in other Federal Reserve liabilities—until the FOMC judges that reserve balances are at an ample level. Thereafter, the FOMC will manage securities holdings as needed to maintain ample reserves over time. The FOMC will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook As already indicated, the FOMC is strongly committed to returning inflation to its 2 percent objective, and, in considering any adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will carefully assess incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks. Its assessments will take into account a wide range of information, including readings on labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, 42. Federal Reserve assets and liabilities Other assets Credit and liquidity facilities Agency debt and mortgage-backed securities holdings Treasury securities held outright NOTE: “Other assets” includes repurchase agreements, FIMA (Foreign and International Monetary Authorities) repurchase agreements, and unamortized premiums and discounts on securities held outright. “Credit and liquidity facilities” consists of primary, secondary, and seasonal credit; term auction credit; central bank liquidity swaps; support for Maiden Lane, Bear Stearns Companies, Inc., and AIG; and other credit and liquidity facilities, including the Primary Dealer Credit Facility, the Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility, the Commercial Paper Funding Facility, the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility, the Primary and Secondary Market Corporate Credit Facilities, the Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility, the Municipal Liquidity Facility, and the Main Street Lending Program. “Agency debt and mortgage-backed securities holdings” includes agency residential mortgage-backed securities and agency commercial mortgage-backed securities. “Capital and other liabilities” includes the U.S. Treasury General Account and the U.S. Treasury Supplementary Financing Account. The key identifies shaded areas in order from top to bottom. The data extend through February 21, 2024. and financial and international developments. The Committee has noted that it is also prepared to adjust its approach to reducing the size of the balance sheet in light of economic and financial developments. In addition to considering a wide range of economic and financial data, the FOMC gathers information from business contacts and other informed parties around the country, as summarized in the Beige Book. The Federal Reserve has regular arrangements under which it hears from a broad range of participants in the U.S. economy about how monetary policy affects people’s daily lives and livelihoods. In particular, the Federal Reserve has continued to gather insights into these matters through the Fed Listens initiative and the Federal Reserve System’s community development outreach. Policymakers also routinely consult prescriptions for the policy interest rate provided by various monetary policy rules. These rule prescriptions can provide useful benchmarks for the FOMC. However, simple rules cannot capture all of the complex considerations that go into the formation of appropriate monetary policy, and many practical considerations make it undesirable for the FOMC to adhere strictly to the prescriptions of any specific rule. Nevertheless, some principles of good monetary policy can be brought out by examining these simple rules. (See the box “Monetary Policy Rules in the Current Environment.”) The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) continued to reduce the size of the Federal Reserve’s System Open Market Account (SOMA) portfolio, consistent with its plans for reducing the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. Since the time of the June 2023 report, total Federal Reserve assets have decreased $806 billion, leaving the total size of the balance sheet at $7.6 trillion, $1.3 trillion smaller since the reduction in the size of the SOMA portfolio began in June 2022 (fi gures A and B). This discussion reviews recent developments in the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet and money market conditions. has continued as planned, amid the banking-sector developments of spring 2023, the Federal Reserve provided liquidity to help ensure the stability of the banking system and the ongoing provision of money (continued) Change (since Fed’s balance sheet reduction began on June 1, 2022) Net unamortized premiums Reserves held by depository institutions Foreign offi cial and international accounts Note: MBS is mortgage-backed securities. PPPLF is Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility. BTFP is Bank Term Funding Program. Components may not sum to Other assets Loans Central bank liquidity swaps Repurchase agreements Agency debt and MBS Treasury securities held outright NOTE: MBS is mortgage-backed securities. The key identifies shaded areas in order from top to bottom. The data extend through February 21, 2024. and credit to the economy.1 Loans under the Bank Term Funding Program—which made additional funding and liquidity available to eligible depository institutions to support American businesses and households and which will cease making new loans as scheduled on March 11, 2024—have increased $62 billion since June 2023 (fi gure A).2 1. The loans that were extended to depository institutions (DIs) placed into Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) receivership in March 2023 have been fully repaid. The Federal Reserve Banks’ loans to these DIs are secured by pledged collateral, and the FDIC provides repayment guarantees. For additional information, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2024), “Additional Information on Other Credit Extensions,” webpage, January 4, https://www. federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/additional-information-on- other-credit-extensions.htm. 2. The Bank Term Funding Program (BTFP) was established under section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act with the approval of the Secretary of the Treasury. The BTFP offers loans of up to one year to banks, savings associations, credit unions, and other eligible DIs against collateral such as U.S. Treasury securities, U.S. agency securities, and U.S. agency mortgage- backed securities. For more details, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2024), “Bank Term Funding Program,” webpage, February 13, https://www.federalreserve. gov/financial-stability/bank-term-funding-program.htm. The interest rate applicable to new BTFP loans has been adjusted such that the rate on new loans extended from January 25, 2024, through program expiration will be no lower than the interest rate on reserve balances in effect on the day the loan is made. This rate adjustment ensures that the BTFP continues to support the goals of the program in NOTE: “Capital and other liabilities” includes Treasury contributions and is negative on February 21, 2024, because of the deferred asset that the Federal Reserve reports. The key identifies shaded areas in order from top to bottom. The data extend through February 21, 2024. Despite the ongoing reduction in the Federal Reserve’s securities holdings, reserve balances—the largest liability item on the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet—have increased $217 billion since June 2023, given other changes in the composition of the Federal Reserve’s liabilities over this period.3 Since June 2023, usage of the overnight reverse repurchase agreement (ON RRP) facility has declined $1.5 trillion, while balances in the Treasury General Account have increased $654 billion (fi gures A and C). On net, changes in these and other nonreserve liabilities have resulted in an increase in reserve balances. After remaining above $2 trillion during the fi rst half of 2023, usage of the ON RRP facility has declined to (continued on next page) the current interest rate environment. After March 11, 2024, banks and other DIs will continue to have ready access to the discount window to meet liquidity needs. For additional information, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2024), “Federal Reserve Board Announces the Bank Term Funding Program (BTFP) Will Cease Making New Loans as Scheduled on March 11,” press release, January 24, https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/ monetary20240124a.htm. 3. Reserve balances consist of deposits held at the Federal Reserve Banks by DIs, such as commercial banks, savings banks, credit unions, thrift institutions, and U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks. Reserve balances allow DIs to facilitate daily payment fl ows, both in ordinary times and in stress scenarios, without borrowing funds or selling assets. about $575 billion amid the ongoing reduction in the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet and the substantial increase in net supply of Treasury securities. Reduced usage of the ON RRP facility largely refl ects money market funds shifting their portfolio toward higher- yielding investments, including Treasury bills and private-market repurchase agreements. Reserve’s deferred asset increased $82 billion since last June to a level of $152 billion.4 Negative net income and the associated deferred asset do not affect the Federal Reserve’s conduct of monetary policy or its ability to meet its fi nancial obligations.5 The ON RRP facility is intended to help keep the effective federal funds rate within the target range. The facility continued to serve this intended purpose, and the Federal Reserve’s administered rates—the interest rate on reserve balances and the ON RRP offering rate—were highly effective at maintaining the effective federal funds rate within the target range as the FOMC tightened the stance of monetary policy. The Federal Reserve’s expenses have continued to exceed its income over recent months. The Federal 4. The deferred asset is equal to the cumulative shortfall of net income and represents the amount of future net income that will need to be realized before remittances to the Treasury resume. Although remittances are suspended at the time of this report, over the past decade and a half, the Federal Reserve has remitted over $1 trillion to the Treasury. 5. Net income is expected to turn positive again as interest expenses fall, and remittances will resume once the temporary deferred asset falls to zero. As a result of the ongoing reduction in the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet, it is expected that interest expenses will fall over time in line with the decline in the Federal Reserve’s liabilities. As part of their monetary policy deliberations, policymakers regularly consult the prescriptions of a variety of simple interest rate rules without mechanically following the prescriptions of any particular rule. Simple interest rate rules relate a policy interest rate, such as the federal funds rate, to a small number of other economic variables—typically including the current deviation of infl ation from its target value and a measure of resource slack in the economy. these rules, along with a “balanced approach (shortfalls)” rule, which responds to the unemployment rate only when it is higher than its estimated longer- run level.2 All of the simple rules shown embody key design principles of good monetary policy, including the requirement that the policy rate should be adjusted by enough over time to ensure a return of infl ation to the central bank’s longer-run objective and to anchor longer-term infl ation expectations at levels consistent with that objective. Since 2021, infl ation has run above the Federal Open Market Committee’s (FOMC) 2 percent longer- run objective, and labor market conditions have been tight. Although infl ation remains elevated, it has eased considerably over the past year, and labor supply and demand have come into better balance. Against this backdrop, the simple monetary policy rules considered in this discussion have called for elevated levels of the federal funds rate over 2021, 2022, and the fi rst half of 2023, but the rates prescribed by these rules have now declined to values close to the current target range for the federal funds rate at 5¼ to 5½ percent. In support of its goals of maximum employment and infl ation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run, the FOMC has maintained the federal funds rate at 5¼ to 5½ percent since July while continuing to reduce its holdings of Treasury securities and agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities. All fi ve rules feature the difference between infl ation and the FOMC’s longer-run objective of 2 percent. The fi ve rules use the unemployment rate gap, measured as the difference between an estimate of the rate of LR) and the current unemployment in the longer run (ut unemployment rate; the fi rst-difference rule includes the change in the unemployment rate gap rather than its level.3 All but the fi rst-difference rule include an estimate of the neutral real interest rate in the longer run (rt (continued on next page) rule is based on a rule suggested by Athanasios Orphanides (2003), “Historical Monetary Policy Analysis and the Taylor Rule,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 50 (July), pp. 983– 1022. A review of policy rules is provided in John B. Taylor and John C. Williams (2011), “Simple and Robust Rules for Monetary Policy,” in Benjamin M. Friedman and Michael Woodford, eds., Handbook of Monetary Economics, vol. 3B (Amsterdam: North-Holland), pp. 829–59. The same volume of the Handbook of Monetary Economics also discusses approaches to deriving policy rate prescriptions other than through the use of simple rules. 2. The balanced-approach (shortfalls) rule responds outcomes can be achieved over time if monetary policy responds to changes in economic conditions in a manner that is predictable and adheres to some key design principles. In recognition of this idea, economists have analyzed many monetary policy rules, including the well-known Taylor (1993) rule, the “balanced approach” rule, the “adjusted Taylor (1993)” rule, and the “fi rst difference” rule.1 Figure A shows asymmetrically to unemployment rates above or below their estimated longer-run value: When unemployment is above that value, the policy rates are identical to those prescribed by the balanced-approach rule, whereas when unemployment is below that value, policy rates do not rise because of further declines in the unemployment rate. As a result, the prescription of the balanced-approach (shortfalls) rule has been less restrictive than that of the balanced-approach rule since 2022:Q1. 1. The Taylor (1993) rule was introduced in John B. Taylor (1993), “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie- Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 39 (December), pp. 195–214. The balanced-approach rule was analyzed in John B. Taylor (1999), “A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules,” in John B. Taylor, ed., Monetary Policy Rules (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), pp. 319–41. The adjusted Taylor (1993) rule was studied in David Reifschneider and John C. Williams (2000), “Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low-Infl ation Era,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 32 (November), pp. 936–66. The fi rst-difference 3. Implementations of simple rules often use the output gap as a measure of resource slack in the economy. The rules described in fi gure A instead use the unemployment rate gap because that gap better captures the FOMC’s statutory goal to promote maximum employment. Movements in these alternative measures of resource utilization tend to be highly correlated. For more information, see the note below fi gure A. 4. The neutral real interest rate in the longer run (rt LR) is the level of the real federal funds rate that is expected to be consistent, in the longer run, with maximum employment and stable infl ation. Like ut LR, rt LR is determined largely by nonmonetary factors. The fi rst-difference rule shown in fi gure A does not require an estimate of rt touted by proponents of such rules as providing an element of LR, a feature that is LR + πt + 0.5(πt − πLR) + (ut LR + πt + 0.5(πt − πLR) + 2(ut LR + πt + 0.5(πt − πLR) + 2min{(ut T93adj = max{Rt Note: Rt balanced-approach, balanced-approach (shortfalls), adjusted Taylor (1993), and first-difference rules, respectively. Rt−1 denotes the realized nominal federal funds rate for quarter t−1, πt is the 4-quarter price inflation for quarter t, ut is the unemployment rate in quarter t, and rt maximum employment and inflation at the Federal Open Market Committee’s 2 percent longer-run objective, πLR. In addition, ut LR is the rate of unemployment expected in the longer run. Zt is the cumulative sum of past deviations of the federal funds rate from the prescriptions of the Taylor (1993) rule when that rule prescribes setting the federal funds rate below an effective lower bound (ELB) of 12.5 basis points. The Taylor (1993) rule and other policy rules are generally written in terms of the deviation of real output from its full capacity level. In these equations, the output gap has been replaced with the gap between the rate of unemployment in the longer run and its actual level (using a relationship known as Okun’s law) to represent the rules in terms of the unemployment rate. The rules are implemented as responding to core personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation rather than to headline PCE inflation because current and near-term core inflation rates tend to outperform headline inflation rates as predictors of the medium-term behavior of headline inflation. Box note 1 provides references for the policy rules. FD represent the values of the nominal federal funds rate prescribed by the Taylor (1993), LR is the level of the neutral real federal funds rate in the longer run that is expected to be consistent with sustaining Unlike the other simple rules featured here, the adjusted Taylor (1993) rule recognizes that the federal funds rate cannot be reduced materially below the effective lower bound (ELB). By contrast, during the pandemic-induced recession, the standard Taylor (1993) rule prescribed policy rates that were far below zero. To make up for the cumulative shortfall in policy accommodation following a recession during which the federal funds rate is constrained by its ELB, the adjusted Taylor (1993) rule prescribes delaying the return of the policy rate to the (positive) levels robustness. However, this rule has its own shortcomings. For example, research suggests that this sort of rule often results in greater volatility in employment and infl ation than what would be obtained under the Taylor (1993) and balanced- approach rules. prescribed by the standard Taylor (1993) rule until after the economy begins to recover. policy rules have important limitations. One of these limitations is that the simple policy rules mechanically respond to only a small set of economic variables and thus necessarily abstract from many of the factors that the FOMC considers when it assesses the appropriate setting of the policy rate. In addition, the structure of the economy and current economic conditions differ in important respects from those prevailing when the simple policy rules were originally devised and proposed. As a result, most simple policy rules do not (continued) take into account the ELB on interest rates, which limits the extent to which the policy rate can be lowered to support the economy. This constraint was particularly evident during the pandemic-driven recession, when the lower bound on the policy rate motivated the FOMC’s other policy actions to support the economy. Relatedly, another limitation is that simple policy rules do not explicitly take into account other important tools of monetary policy, such as balance sheet policies. Finally, simple policy rules are not forward looking and do not allow for important risk-management considerations, associated with uncertainty about economic relationships and the evolution of the economy, that factor into FOMC decisions. considered. For each quarterly period, the fi gure reports the policy rates prescribed by the rules, taking as given the prevailing economic conditions and survey-based estimates of ut considered called for a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy in response to the pandemic-driven recession, followed by positive values as infl ation picked up and labor market conditions strengthened. In 2022 and during the fi rst half of 2023, the prescriptions of the simple rules for the federal funds rate were between 4 and 8 percent; these values are well above the levels observed before the pandemic and refl ect, in large part, elevated infl ation readings. Because infl ation has eased recently, the policy rates prescribed by these rules have now declined to values that are close to the federal funds rate. LR and rt LR at the time. All of the rules Figure B shows historical prescriptions for the federal funds rate under the fi ve simple rules Federal funds rate Taylor (1993) rule Adjusted Taylor (1993) rule Balanced-approach rule Balanced-approach (shortfalls) rule First-difference rule NOTE: The rules use historical values of core personal consumption expenditures inflation, the unemployment rate, and, where applicable, historical values of the midpoint of the target range for the federal funds rate. Quarterly projections of longer-run values for the federal funds rate, the unemployment rate, and inflation used in the computation of the rules’ prescriptions are interpolations to quarterly values of projections from the Survey of Primary Dealers. The rules’ prescriptions are quarterly, and the federal funds rate data are the monthly average of the daily midpoint of the target range for the federal funds rate and extend through February 2024. The following material was released after the conclusion of the December 12–13, 2023, meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee. In conjunction with the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting held on December 12–13, 2023, meeting participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real gross domestic product (GDP) growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for each year from 2023 to 2026 and over the longer run. Each participant’s projections were based on information available at the time of the meeting, together with her or his assessment of appropriate monetary policy—including a path for the federal funds rate and its longer-run value— and assumptions about other factors likely to affect economic outcomes. The longer- run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the value to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. “Appropriate monetary policy” is defined as the future path of policy that each participant deems most likely to foster outcomes for economic activity and inflation that best satisfy his or her individual interpretation of the statutory mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability. Table 1. Economic projections of Federal Reserve Board members and Federal Reserve Bank presidents, under their individual assumptions of projected appropriate monetary policy, December 2023 Percent Longer run Longer run Longer run Memo: Projected appropriate policy path Note: Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP) and projections for both measures of inflation are percent changes from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. PCE inflation and core PCE inflation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) and the price index for PCE excluding food and energy. Projections for the unemployment rate are for the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. Each participant’s projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy. Longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. The projections for the federal funds rate are the value of the midpoint of the projected appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the projected appropriate target level for the federal funds rate at the end of the spec- ified calendar year or over the longer run. The September projections were made in conjunction with the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on September 19–20, 2023. One participant did not submit longer-run projections for the change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, or the federal funds rate in conjunction with the September 19–20, 2023, meeting, and one participant did not submit such projections in conjunction with the December 12–13, 2023, meeting. 1. For each period, the median is the middle projection when the projections are arranged from lowest to highest. When the number of projections is even, the median is the average 2. The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each year. 3. The range for a variable in a given year includes all participants’ projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year. 4. Longer-run projections for core PCE inflation are not collected. Figure 1. Medians, central tendencies, and ranges of economic projections, 2023–26 and over the longer run Longer run Longer run Longer run Longer run Longer run Note: Each shaded circle indicates the value (rounded to the nearest 1/8 percentage point) of an individual participant’s judgment of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the appropriate target level for the federal funds rate at the end of the specified calendar year or over the longer run. One participant did not submit longer-run projections for the federal funds rate. Figure 3.A. Distribution of participants’ projections for the change in real GDP, 2023–26 and over the longer run Longer run Note: Definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Figure 3.B. Distribution of participants’ projections for the unemployment rate, 2023–26 and over the longer run Longer run Note: Definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Figure 3.C. Distribution of participants’ projections for PCE inflation, 2023–26 and over the longer run Longer run Note: Definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Note: Definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Figure 3.E. Distribution of participants’ judgments of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the appropriate target level for the federal funds rate, 2023–26 and over the longer run Longer run Note: Definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the percent change in real gross domestic product (GDP) from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The confidence interval around the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the confidence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reflect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections; these current assessments are summarized in the lower panels. Generally speaking, participants who judge the uncertainty about their projections as “broadly similar” to the average levels of the past 20 years would view the width of the confidence interval shown in the historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise, participants who judge the risks to their projections as “broadly balanced” would view the confidence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For definitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The confidence interval around the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the confidence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reflect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections; these current assessments are summarized in the lower panels. Generally speaking, participants who judge the uncertainty about their projections as “broadly similar” to the average levels of the past 20 years would view the width of the confidence interval shown in the historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise, participants who judge the risks to their projections as “broadly balanced” would view the confidence interval around their projections as approxi- mately symmetric. For definitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Risks to core PCE inflation Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the percent change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The confidence interval around the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the confidence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reflect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections; these current assessments are summarized in the lower panels. Generally speaking, participants who judge the uncertainty about their projections as “broadly similar” to the average levels of the past 20 years would view the width of the confidence interval shown in the historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise, participants who judge the risks to their projections as “broadly balanced” would view the confidence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For definitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” Note: For each SEP, participants provided responses to the question “Please indicate your judgment of the uncertainty attached to your projections relative to the levels of uncertainty over the past 20 years.” Each point in the diffusion indexes represents the number of participants who responded “Higher” minus the number who responded “Lower,” divided by the total number of participants. Figure excludes March 2020 when no projections were submitted. Note: For each SEP, participants provided responses to the question “Please indicate your judgment of the risk weighting around your projections.” Each point in the diffusion indexes represents the number of participants who responded “Weighted to the Upside” minus the number who responded “Weighted to the Downside,” divided by the total number of participants. Figure excludes March 2020 when no projections were submitted. Note: The blue and red lines are based on actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the Committee’s target for the federal funds rate at the end of the year indicated. The actual values are the midpoint of the target range; the median projected values are based on either the midpoint of the target range or the target level. The confidence interval around the median projected values is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years. The confidence interval is not strictly consistent with the projections for the federal funds rate, primarily because these projections are not forecasts of the likeliest outcomes for the federal funds rate, but rather projections of participants’ individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy. Still, historical forecast errors provide a broad sense of the uncertainty around the future path of the federal funds rate generated by the uncertainty about the macroeconomic variables as well as additional adjustments to monetary policy that may be appropriate to offset the effects of shocks to the economy. The confidence interval is assumed to be symmetric except when it is truncated at zero - the bottom of the lowest target range for the federal funds rate that has been adopted in the past by the Committee. This truncation would not be intended to indicate the likelihood of the use of negative interest rates to provide additional monetary policy accommodation if doing so was judged appropriate. In such situations, the Committee could also employ other tools, including forward guidance and large-scale asset purchases, to provide additional accommodation. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the confidence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reflect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections. * The confidence interval is derived from forecasts of the average level of short-term interest rates in the fourth quarter of the year indicated; more information about these data is available in table 2. The shaded area encompasses less than a 70 percent confidence interval if the confidence interval has been truncated at zero. Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges Percentage points Note: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root mean squared error of projections for 2003 through 2022 that were released in the winter by various private and government forecasters. As described in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain assumptions, there is about a 70 percent probability that actual outcomes for real GDP, unemployment, consumer prices, and the federal funds rate will be in ranges implied by the average size of projection errors made in the past. For more information, see David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip (2017), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook Using Historical Forecasting Errors: The Federal Reserve’s Approach,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-020 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February), https:// dx.doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2017.020. 1. Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure that has been most widely used in government and private economic forecasts. Projections are percent changes on a fourth quarter to fourth quarter basis. 3. For Federal Reserve staff forecasts, measure is the federal funds rate. For other forecasts, measure is the rate on 3-month Treasury bills. Projection errors are cal cu- lated using average levels, in percent, in the fourth quarter. The economic projections provided by the members of the Board of Governors and the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks inform discussions of monetary policy among policymakers and can aid public understanding of the basis for policy actions. Considerable uncertainty attends these projections, however. The economic and statistical models and relationships used to help produce economic forecasts are necessarily imperfect descriptions of the real world, and the future path of the economy can be affected by myriad unforeseen developments and events. Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, participants consider not only what appears to be the most likely economic outcome as embodied in their projections, but also the range of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of their occurring, and the potential costs to the economy should they occur. Table 2 summarizes the average historical accuracy of a range of forecasts, including those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports and those prepared by the Federal Reserve Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). The projection error ranges shown in the table illustrate the considerable uncertainty associated with economic forecasts. For example, suppose a participant projects that real gross domestic product (GDP) and total consumer prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty attending those projections is similar to that experienced in the past and the risks around the projections are broadly balanced, the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a probability of about 70 percent that actual GDP would expand within a range of 2.2 to 3.8 percent in the current year, 1.3 to 4.7 percent in the second year, 0.9 to 5.1 percent in the third year, and 0.8 to 5.2 percent in the fourth year. The corresponding 70 percent confi dence intervals for overall infl ation would be 1.7 to 2.3 percent in the current year, 0.4 to 3.6 percent in the second and third years, and 0.3 to 3.7 percent in the fourth year. Figures 4.A through 4.C illustrate these confi dence bounds in “fan charts” that are symmetric and centered on the medians of FOMC participants’ projections for GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and infl ation. However, in some instances, the risks around the projections may not be symmetric. In particular, the unemployment rate cannot be negative; furthermore, the risks around a particular projection might be tilted to either the upside or the downside, in which case the corresponding fan chart would be asymmetrically positioned around the median projection. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over history, participants provide judgments as to whether the uncertainty attached to their projections of each economic variable is greater than, smaller than, or broadly similar to typical levels of forecast uncertainty seen in the past 20 years, as presented in table 2 and refl ected in the widths of the confi dence intervals shown in the top panels of fi gures 4.A through 4.C. Participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty surrounding their projections are summarized in the bottom-left panels (continued) of those fi gures. Participants also provide judgments as to whether the risks to their projections are weighted to the upside, are weighted to the downside, or are broadly balanced. That is, while the symmetric historical fan charts shown in the top panels of fi gures 4.A through 4.C imply that the risks to participants’ projections are balanced, participants may judge that there is a greater risk that a given variable will be above rather than below their projections. These judgments are summarized in the lower-right panels of fi gures 4.A through 4.C. As with real activity and infl ation, the outlook for the future path of the federal funds rate is subject to considerable uncertainty. This uncertainty arises primarily because each participant’s assessment of the appropriate stance of monetary policy depends importantly on the evolution of real activity and infl ation over time. If economic conditions evolve in an unexpected manner, then assessments of the appropriate setting of the federal funds rate would change from that point forward. The fi nal line in table 2 shows the error ranges for forecasts of short- term interest rates. They suggest that the historical confi dence intervals associated with projections of the federal funds rate are quite wide. It should be noted, however, that these confi dence intervals are not strictly consistent with the projections for the federal funds rate, as these projections are not forecasts of the most likely quarterly outcomes but rather are projections of participants’ individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy and are on an end-of-year basis. However, the forecast errors should provide a sense of the uncertainty around the future path of the federal funds rate generated by the uncertainty about the macroeconomic variables as well as additional adjustments to monetary policy that would be appropriate to offset the effects of shocks to the economy. around the federal funds rate were to extend below zero, it would be truncated at zero for purposes of the fan chart shown in fi gure 5; zero is the bottom of the lowest target range for the federal funds rate that has been adopted by the Committee in the past. This approach to the construction of the federal funds rate fan chart would be merely a convention; it would not have any implications for possible future policy decisions regarding the use of negative interest rates to provide additional monetary policy accommodation if doing so were appropriate. In such situations, the Committee could also employ other tools, including forward guidance and asset purchases, to provide additional accommodation. While fi gures 4.A through 4.C provide information on the uncertainty around the economic projections, fi gure 1 provides information on the range of views across FOMC participants. A comparison of fi gure 1 with fi gures 4.A through 4.C shows that the dispersion of the projections across participants is much smaller than the average forecast errors over the past 20 years. emerging market economy implied volatility for the S&P 500 index The Board of Governors is pleased to submit its Monetary Policy Report pursuant to section 2B of the Federal Reserve Act. statement on Longer-run goaLs and monetary PoLicy strategy Adopted effective January 24, 2012; as reaffirmed effective January 30, 2024 The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) is firmly committed to fulfilling its statutory mandate from the Congress of promoting maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates. The Committee seeks to explain its monetary policy decisions to the public as clearly as possible. Such clarity facilitates well-informed decisionmaking by households and businesses, reduces economic and financial uncertainty, increases the effectiveness of monetary policy, and enhances transparency and accountability, which are essential in a democratic society. Employment, inflation, and long-term interest rates fluctuate over time in response to economic and financial disturbances. Monetary policy plays an important role in stabilizing the economy in response to these disturbances. The Committee’s primary means of adjusting the stance of monetary policy is through changes in the target range for the federal funds rate. The Committee judges that the level of the federal funds rate consistent with maximum employment and price stability over the longer run has declined relative to its historical average. Therefore, the federal funds rate is likely to be constrained by its effective lower bound more frequently than in the past. Owing in part to the proximity of interest rates to the effective lower bound, the Committee judges that downward risks to employment and inflation have increased. The Committee is prepared to use its full range of tools to achieve its maximum employment and price stability goals. The maximum level of employment is a broad-based and inclusive goal that is not directly measurable and changes over time owing largely to nonmonetary factors that affect the structure and dynamics of the labor market. Consequently, it would not be appropriate to specify a fixed goal for employment; rather, the Committee’s policy decisions must be informed by assessments of the shortfalls of employment from its maximum level, recognizing that such assessments are necessarily uncertain and subject to revision. The Committee considers a wide range of indicators in making these assessments. The inflation rate over the longer run is primarily determined by monetary policy, and hence the Committee has the ability to specify a longer-run goal for inflation. The Committee reaffirms its judgment that inflation at the rate of 2 percent, as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, is most consistent over the longer run with the Federal Reserve’s statutory mandate. The Committee judges that longer-term inflation expectations that are well anchored at 2 percent foster price stability and moderate long-term interest rates and enhance the Committee’s ability to promote maximum employment in the face of significant economic disturbances. In order to anchor longer-term inflation expectations at this level, the Committee seeks to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time, and therefore judges that, following periods when inflation has been running persistently below 2 percent, appropriate monetary policy will likely aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time. Monetary policy actions tend to influence economic activity, employment, and prices with a lag. In setting monetary policy, the Committee seeks over time to mitigate shortfalls of employment from the Committee’s assessment of its maximum level and deviations of inflation from its longer-run goal. Moreover, sustainably achieving maximum employment and price stability depends on a stable financial system. Therefore, the Committee’s policy decisions reflect its longer-run goals, its medium-term outlook, and its assessments of the balance of risks, including risks to the financial system that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. The Committee’s employment and inflation objectives are generally complementary. However, under circumstances in which the Committee judges that the objectives are not complementary, it takes into account the employment shortfalls and inflation deviations and the potentially different time horizons over which employment and inflation are projected to return to levels judged consistent with its mandate. The Committee intends to review these principles and to make adjustments as appropriate at its annual organizational meeting each January, and to undertake roughly every 5 years a thorough public review of its monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices. Housing Services Inflation and Market Rent Measures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9 Employment and Earnings across Demographic Groups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 Developments Related to Financial Stability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33 Monetary Policy Independence, Transparency, and Accountability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42 Developments in the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet and Money Markets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47 Monetary Policy Rules in the Current Environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50 Forecast Uncertainty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68 Note: This report reflects information that was publicly available as of noon EDT on July 2, 2024. Unless otherwise stated, the time series in the figures extend through, for daily data, June 28, 2024; for monthly data, May 2024; and, for quarterly data, 2024:Q1 . In bar charts, except as noted, the change for a given period is measured to its final quarter from the final quarter of the preceding period . For figures 26, 37, and 43, note that the S&P/Case-Shiller U .S . National Home Price Index, the S&P 500 Index, and the Dow Jones Bank Index are products of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates and have been licensed for use by the Board . Copyright © 2024 S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC, a division of S&P Global, and/or its affiliates . All rights reserved . Redistribution, reproduction, and/or photocopying in whole or in part are prohibited without written permission of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC . For more information on any of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC’s indices, please visit www .spdji .com . S&P® is a registered trademark of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC, and Dow Jones® is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC . Neither S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC, Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC, their affiliates, nor their third-party licensors make any representation or warranty, express or implied, as to the ability of any index to accurately represent the asset class or market sector that it purports to represent, and neither S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC, Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC, their affiliates, nor their third-party licensors shall have any liability for any errors, omis- sions, or interruptions of any index or the data included therein . Inflation eased notably last year and has shown modest further progress so far this year, but it remains above the Federal Open Market Committee’s (FOMC) objective of 2 percent. Job gains have been strong, and the unemployment rate is still low. Meanwhile, as job vacancies continued to decline and labor supply continued to increase, the labor market moved into better balance over the first half of the year. Real gross domestic product (GDP) growth was modest in the first quarter, while growth in private domestic demand remained robust, supported by slower but still-solid increases in consumer spending, moderate growth in capital spending, and a sharp pickup in residential investment. The FOMC has maintained the target range for the federal funds rate at 5¼ to 5½ percent since its July 2023 meeting. In addition, the Committee has continued to reduce its holdings of Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities. The Committee does not expect it will be appropriate to reduce the target range until it has gained greater confidence that inflation is moving sustainably toward 2 percent. Reducing policy restraint too soon or too much could result in a reversal of the progress on inflation. At the same time, reducing policy restraint too late or too little could unduly weaken economic activity and employment. In considering any adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will carefully assess incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks. The FOMC is strongly committed to returning inflation to its 2 percent objective. The Committee remains highly attentive to inflation risks and is acutely aware that high inflation imposes significant hardship, especially on those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials. Inflation. Although personal consumption expenditures (PCE) price inflation slowed notably last year and has shown modest further progress this year, it remains above the FOMC’s longer-run objective of 2 percent. The PCE price index rose 2.6 percent over the 12 months ending in May, down from the 4.0 percent pace over the preceding 12 months and a peak of 7.1 percent in June 2022. The core PCE price index—which excludes food and energy prices and is generally considered a better guide to the direction of future inflation—also rose 2.6 percent in the 12 months ending in May, down from 4.7 percent a year ago and slower than the 2.9 percent pace at the end of last year. On a 12-month basis, core goods price inflation and housing services price inflation continued to ease over the first part of the year, while core nonhousing services price inflation flattened out after slowing notably last year. Measures of longer-term inflation expectations are within the range of values seen in the decade before the pandemic and continue to be broadly consistent with the FOMC’s longer- run objective of 2 percent. The labor market. The labor market continued to rebalance over the first half of this year, and it remained strong. Job gains were solid, averaging 248,000 per month over the first five months of the year, and the unemployment rate remained low. Labor demand has eased, as job openings have declined in many sectors of the economy, and labor supply has continued to increase, supported by a strong pace of immigration. With cooling labor demand and rising labor supply, the unemployment rate edged up to 4.0 percent in May. The balance between labor demand and supply appears similar to that in the period immediately before the pandemic, when the labor market was relatively tight but not overheated. Nominal wage growth continued to slow in the first part of the year but remains above a pace consistent with 2 percent inflation over the longer term, given prevailing trends in productivity growth. Economic activity. Real GDP growth is reported to have moderated in the first quarter after having increased at a robust pace in the second half of last year. Much of the slowdown was due to sizable drags in the volatile categories of net exports and inventory investment; growth in private domestic final purchases—which includes consumer spending, business fixed investment, and residential investment—also moved a little lower in the first quarter but remained solid. Real consumption growth slowed in the first quarter from a strong pace in the second half of last year, reflecting a decline in goods spending. Real business fixed investment grew at a moderate pace in the first quarter despite high interest rates, supported by strong sales growth and improvements in business sentiment and profit expectations. Activity in the housing sector picked up sharply in the first quarter as a result of a jump in existing home sales and rising construction of single- family homes. Financial conditions. Financial conditions appear somewhat restrictive on balance. Treasury yields and the market-implied expected path of the federal funds rate have moved up, on net, since the beginning of the year, while broad equity prices have increased. Credit remains generally available to most households and businesses but at elevated interest rates, which have weighed on financing activity. The pace of bank lending to households and businesses increased in the first five months of the year but continues to be somewhat tepid. Delinquency rates on small business loans stayed slightly above pre-pandemic levels, and delinquency rates for credit cards, auto loans, and commercial real estate loans continued to increase in the first Financial stability. The financial system remains sound and resilient. The balance sheets of nonfinancial businesses and households stayed strong, with the combined credit-to-GDP ratio standing near its two- decade low. Business debt continued to decline in real terms, and debt-servicing capacity remained solid for most public firms, in large part due to strong earnings, large cash buffers, and low borrowing costs on existing debt. However, there were also signs of vulnerabilities building in the financial system. In asset markets, corporate bond spreads narrowed, equity prices rose faster than expected earnings, and residential property prices remained high relative to market rents. Moreover, in the banking sector, some banks’ fair value losses on fixed-rate assets remained sizable, despite most of them continuing to report solid capital levels. Additionally, parts of banks’ commercial real estate portfolios are facing stress. Some banks’ reliance on uninsured deposits remained high. Even so, liquidity at most domestic banks remained ample, with limited reliance on short-term wholesale funding. Bond mutual funds’ exposure to interest rate risk stayed elevated, and data through the third quarter of 2023 show that hedge fund leverage had grown to historical highs, driven primarily by borrowing by the largest hedge funds. (See the box “Developments Related to Financial Stability” in Part 1.) International developments. Foreign economic activity appears to have improved in the first quarter after a soft patch in the second half of last year. In advanced foreign economies, growth rates returned to moderate levels despite the effects of restrictive monetary policy as lower inflation improved real household incomes. In emerging market economies, growth was supported by a recovery in exports and rising global demand for high-tech products, with the rise in activity in China in the first quarter being particularly outsized. Nonetheless, other factors continued to weigh on economic growth: Data indicated ongoing weakness in China’s property sector, and in Europe, energy-intensive sectors continue to struggle, reflecting their ongoing adjustment to past increases in energy prices following Russia’s 2022 invasion of Ukraine. Foreign headline inflation has continued to decline since the middle of last year, but the pace of disinflation has been gradual and uneven across countries and economic sectors. Still, many foreign central banks have noted this progress in lowering inflation, and some have begun to cut their policy rates. A notable exception is Japan, which ended its negative interest rate policy and yield curve control in March amid persistently high inflation. The trade-weighted exchange value of the dollar rose significantly, consistent with widening gaps between U.S. and foreign interest rates. Interest rate policy. The FOMC has maintained the target range for the policy rate at 5¼ to 5½ percent since its July 2023 meeting. The Committee judges that the risks to achieving its employment and inflation goals have moved toward better balance over the past year. The Committee perceives the economic outlook to be uncertain and remains highly attentive to inflation risks. The Committee has indicated that it does not expect it will be appropriate to reduce the target range until it has gained greater confidence that inflation is moving sustainably toward 2 percent. Policy is well positioned to deal with the risks and uncertainties the Committee faces in pursuing both sides of its dual mandate. In considering any adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will carefully assess incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks. Balance sheet policy. The Federal Reserve has continued the process of significantly reducing its holdings of Treasury and agency securities in a predictable manner.1 Beginning in June 2022, principal payments from securities held in the System Open Market Account have been reinvested only to the extent that they exceeded monthly caps. Under this policy, the Federal Reserve has reduced its securities holdings about $1.7 trillion since the start of balance sheet reduction. The FOMC has stated that it intends to maintain securities holdings at amounts consistent with implementing monetary policy efficiently and effectively in its ample-reserves regime. To ensure a smooth transition from abundant to ample reserve balances, the FOMC slowed the pace of decline of its securities holdings at the beginning of June and intends to stop reductions when reserve balances are somewhat above the level that the Committee judges to be consistent with ample reserves. Housing services inflation. The PCE price index for housing services started accelerating in 2021, notably increasing its contribution to core PCE inflation. Because this index calculates average rent for all tenants—both new tenants and existing tenants—its changes tend to lag changes in market rent measures for new leases. Therefore, measures of market rent growth for new leases can help predict future changes in the PCE price index. Since mid-2022, market rents have decelerated and returned to a growth rate similar to or below their average pre-pandemic pace, while the PCE index continues to show elevated inflation, reflecting the gradual pass-through of market rates to existing tenants. As this process continues, PCE housing services inflation should gradually decline, though much uncertainty remains about the extent 1. See the May 4, 2022, press release regarding the Plans for Reducing the Size of the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet, available on the Board’s website at https:// www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/ monetary20220504b.htm. Employment and earnings across groups. A strong labor market over the past two years has been especially beneficial for historically disadvantaged groups of workers. As a result, many of the long-standing disparities in employment and wages by sex, race, ethnicity, and education have narrowed, and some gaps reached historical lows in 2023 and the first half of 2024. However, despite this narrowing, significant disparities in absolute levels across groups remain. (See the box “Employment and Earnings across Demographic Groups” in Part 1.) Monetary policy independence, transparency, and accountability. Congress has established a statutory framework that specifies the long-run objectives of monetary policy— maximum employment and stable prices— and gives the Federal Reserve operational independence in conducting monetary policy. In this framework, the Federal Reserve makes determinations about the monetary policy actions that are most appropriate for achieving the dual-mandate goals that Congress has assigned to it. The Federal Reserve recognizes that independence is a trust given to it by Congress and the American people and that with independence comes the need to be transparent about, and accountable for, its monetary policy decisions. Transparency also improves monetary policy’s effectiveness. The Federal Reserve promotes transparency by providing information about FOMC decisions through policy communications and a variety of publications. The means by which the Federal Reserve informs the American people about its monetary policy decisions include official FOMC statements, monetary policy reports, and Committee meeting minutes and transcripts, as well as speeches, press conferences, and congressional testimony given by Federal Reserve officials. (See the box “Monetary Policy Independence, Transparency, and Accountability” in Part 2.) Federal Reserve’s balance sheet and money markets. The size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet has continued to decrease since February as the FOMC has reduced its securities holdings. Reserve balances, the largest liability on the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet, and usage of the overnight reverse repurchase agreement facility—another Federal Reserve liability—both declined. (See the box “Developments in the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet and Money Markets” in Part 2.) Monetary policy rules. Simple monetary policy rules, which prescribe a setting for the policy interest rate in response to the behavior of a small number of economic variables, can provide useful guidance to policymakers. With inflation easing over the past year, the policy rate prescriptions of most simple monetary policy rules have decreased recently and now call for levels of the federal funds rate that are close to or below the current target range for the federal funds rate. (See the box “Monetary Policy Rules in the Current Environment” in Part 2.) Inflation eased notably last year and has shown modest further progress in recent months 1. Personal consumption expenditures price indexes Inflation stepped down markedly last year and has shown modest further progress so far this year. Inflation remains elevated, though, and is still above the Federal Open Market Committee’s (FOMC) longer-run objective of 2 percent. The price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) rose 2.6 percent over the 12 months ending in May, down from the 4.0 percent pace a year ago but little changed since the end of last year (figure 1). After having slowed markedly in the second half of 2023, monthly core PCE price inflation—which excludes food and energy prices and is generally considered a better guide to the direction of future inflation— firmed in the first quarter of this year and then eased somewhat in April and May. As a result, the 12-month change in core PCE prices declined from the 4.7 percent pace in May of last year to 2.9 percent in December and moved down further this year, to 2.6 percent in May (figure 2). A similar message is evident from the trimmed mean measure of PCE prices constructed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, which provides an alternative approach to reducing the influence of idiosyncratic price movements. The index increased 2.8 percent over the 12 months ending in May, a pace that is somewhat slower than at the end of last year (as shown in figure 1). Trimmed mean Total Excluding food and energy 2. Core personal consumption expenditures price index Consumer energy prices have increased, while food price inflation has flattened out PCE energy prices increased 4.8 percent in the 12 months ending in May after having declined 12.3 percent over the preceding 12 months 3. Subcomponents of personal consumption expenditures price indexes NOTE: The data are monthly. SOURCE: Bureau of Economic Analysis via Haver Analytics. 4. Spot and futures prices for crude oil (figure 3, left panel). Oil prices increased, on net, in the first half of this year (figure 4). Prices rose amid concerns about escalation of the conflict in the Middle East, additional costs of rerouting some oil shipping away from the Red Sea, and ongoing production cuts by OPEC (Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries) and its allies. Continuing geopolitical tensions, including tensions emanating from the conflicts in the Middle East and Ukraine, pose an upside risk to energy prices. NOTE: The data are weekly averages of daily data and extend through 5. Spot prices for commodities Prices of agricultural commodities and livestock edged up, on net, over the first half of this year after having come down markedly in 2022 and 2023 from the highs reached at the start of Russia’s war on Ukraine in early 2022 (figure 5). As a result of these movements, the 12-month change in PCE food prices slowed substantially from its peak of 12.2 percent in August 2022 to just 1.2 percent in May (as shown in figure 3, left panel). NOTE: The data are weekly averages of daily data and extend through Prices of both energy and food products are of particular importance for lower-income households, for which such necessities account for a large share of expenditures. Reflecting the sharp increases seen in 2021 and 2022, these price indexes are 25 percent and 32 percent higher than in 2019, for food and energy, respectively. Core goods prices increased modestly this year after having declined sharply in the second half of 2023 In assessing the outlook for inflation, it is helpful to consider three separate components of core prices: core goods, housing services, and core nonhousing services. After posting notable declines in the second half of last year, core goods prices increased modestly, on net, over the first months of this year. This development likely reflects, in part, movements in nonfuel import prices, which turned up in recent months after having declined, on net, over 2023 (figure 6). Smoothing through these monthly movements, prices for core goods over the 12 months ending in May moved down 1.1 percent, similar to their pre-pandemic rate of decline, after having increased 2.5 percent over the previous 12-month period (figure 3, right panel). The progress on inflation for core goods reflects improvements in supply– demand imbalances. Indeed, the supply chain issues and other capacity constraints that had earlier boosted inflation so much continued to ease, though at a more gradual pace this year than over the past two years, and supply– demand conditions in goods markets appear to be relatively balanced. For example, the shares of respondents to the Quarterly Survey of Plant Capacity Utilization citing insufficient supply of labor or materials as reasons for producing below capacity, which had increased considerably during the pandemic, have continued to fall and are now near pre- pandemic levels (figure 7). Housing services price inflation continued to slow gradually but remains elevated . . . The 12-month change in housing services prices moved down from more than 8 percent in May 2023 to 5.5 percent in May of this year but is still well above its pre-pandemic level (as shown in figure 3, right panel). Market rent inflation, which measures increases in rents for new housing leases to new tenants, has fallen markedly since late 2022 to near pre-pandemic rates, and this slowdown points to continued easing of housing services inflation over the 6. Nonfuel import price index 7. Reasons for operating below full capacity NOTE: The series are the share of firms selecting each reason for 8. Measures of inflation expectations NOTE: The data for the Michigan survey are monthly and extend through June 2024. The Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF) data are quarterly and extend through 2024:Q2. year ahead. (The box “Housing Services Inflation and Market Rent Measures” provides further details.) . . . while core nonhousing services price inflation flattened out so far this year Finally, price inflation for core nonhousing services—a broad group that includes services such as travel and dining, financial services, and car repair—slowed last year but flattened out, on net, in the first five months of this year. Core nonhousing services prices rose 3.4 percent in the 12 months ending in May, down from 4.7 percent a year ago but little changed since the end of last year (as shown in figure 3, right panel). The lack of further progress this year is due in large part to price increases in volatile categories—for example, portfolio management services, which can be influenced by idiosyncratic factors, such as swings in the stock market, more than supply and demand conditions. Because labor is a significant input to these service sectors, the ongoing deceleration in labor costs—supported by softening labor demand and improvements in labor supply—suggests that disinflation will eventually resume for this category. Measures of longer-term inflation expectations have been stable; shorter- term expectations have been volatile but are generally lower than a year earlier The generally held view among economists and policymakers is that inflation expectations influence actual inflation by affecting wage- and price-setting decisions. Survey-based measures of expected inflation over a longer horizon have generally been moving sideways over the past year, within the range seen during the decade before the pandemic, and they appear broadly consistent with the FOMC’s longer-run 2 percent inflation objective. This development is seen for surveys of households, such as the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers, and for surveys of professional forecasters (figure 8). For example, the median forecaster in the Survey of Professional The price index for housing services includes rents explicitly paid by renters as well as implicit rents that homeowners would have to pay if they were renting their homes known as owners’ equivalent rent (OER) . This index is an important component of the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), composing about 15 .5 percent of the total PCE price index . Housing services prices started accelerating in 2021, and, as fi gure A illustrates, the contribution of these prices to the 12-month change in the core PCE price index increased notably, reaching a peak of 1 .4 percentage points in 2023 . In May 2024, the contribution of this component stood at 1 .0 percentage point, down from its peak but still well above the 0 .5 percentage point that was typical before the COvID-19 pandemic . Core goods Core services ex. housing Housing services The PCE price index for housing services is derived from two components of the consumer price index (CPI): rent of primary residence and OER .1 The rent of primary residence index measures the average rent paid by tenants . OER estimates the rent that homeowners would pay if they were renting their homes without furnishings or utilities and is derived from rental data for units in the same neighborhood, with an adjustment for structure type .2 Because the price index for housing services measures average rent for all tenants—both new tenants and existing tenants—its changes are more subdued and tend to lag changes in rent measures for new leases, described later . Because rental agreements typically last for 12 months, most renters will not see an immediate increase in their rent even if the rent for new leases increases sharply . Additionally, the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the agency responsible for computing the CPI, reports that when rent increases occur for units, they are typically smaller for continuing tenants renewing their lease than they are for new tenants .3 This lag implies that measures of rent growth for new leases can help predict future changes in the PCE price index for housing services . Over the past few decades, private fi rms have started publishing various “market rent” measures that track the average rent for new leases by new tenants .4 For example, the (continued on next page) 3 . See Ben Houck (2022), “Housing Leases in the U .S . Rental Market,” Spotlight on Statistics (Washington: Bureau of Labor Statistics, September), https://www .bls .gov/ spotlight/2022/housing-leases-in-the-u-s-rental-market/ home .htm . 4 . PCE prices for housing services differ from these market 1 . The sum of the weights of these two components in the total CPI is 34 .4 percent, considerably higher than their weight in the total PCE price index . 2 . The typical structure type varies signifi cantly across owner- and tenant-occupied units: Owner-occupied homes are mostly single-family units, while renter-occupied homes are roughly evenly divided between single-family and multifamily units . Constructing the OER measure involves reweighting the sample of rent quotes for a given area to refl ect the relative importance of owner-occupied housing in that area . See slide 13 of Robert Cage (2019), “Measurement of Owner Occupied Housing in the U .S . Consumer Price Index” (Washington: Bureau of Labor Statistics, November 15), https://www .bea .gov/system/files/2019-11/bea_tac_nov2019_ cage .pdf . rent measures for reasons beyond the fact that market rent measures are limited to new leases to new tenants . In addition, the discrepancy arises from the methodology used for index construction (for example, the rent measures used in the PCE price index sample a given residence only once every six months), the representativeness of the sample, and the way in which the measure controls for quality adjustments . Moreover, market rent measures capture the “asking” prices posted by landlords, while the rent measures used in the PCE price index gauge the rent that tenants actually pay . Among these factors, whether all leases are used (as opposed to only new leases) appears to be the main contributor to this discrepancy . See Brian Adams, Lara Loewenstein, Hugh Montag, and Randal verbrugge (2024), “Disentangling Rent Index Differences: Data, Methods, and Scope,” American Economic Review: Insights, vol . 6 (June), pp . 230–45 . CoreLogic Single-Family Rent Index measures changes in average market rents for single-family homes . Other measures include the Zillow, Apartment List, and RealPage indexes, which vary in terms of the type of unit they cover (single-family versus multifamily), their methodologies, and the representativeness of the national rental market .5 residences, available beginning in 2015, focuses on changes in asking rents for single-family units . The RealPage Rent Index, available beginning in 1996, measures changes in average market rents across professionally managed Figure B illustrates that, historically, the year-over- year change in market rents is an informative leading indicator for the year-over-year change in PCE housing (continued) multifamily apartment buildings . The Apartment List National Rent Index, available beginning in 2017, measures changes in median market rents across the entire rental market for both single-family and multifamily units . To calculate unit-level rent growth, all these measures, including the CoreLogic index, use the repeat-rent methodology to control for differences in property characteristics among the units listed for rent in different periods . PCE housing services Apartment List single-family and multifamily units Zillow single-family units RealPage multifamily units CoreLogic single-family detached units NOTE: CoreLogic data extend through April 2024, Zillow data start in January 2016, and Apartment List data start in January 2018 and extend through June 2024. Zillow, CoreLogic, Apartment List, and RealPage measure market-rate rents—that is, rents for a new lease by a new tenant. PCE is personal consumption expenditures. services prices, with the market rent measure typically leading the PCE measure by one year .6 This relationship is particularly evident in the periods following the Great Recession and the COvID-19 pandemic . For example, PCE housing services infl ation reached a peak of 8 .3 percent in April 2023, exactly one year after the 12-month change for the CoreLogic index reached its peak of 13 .8 percent . rents has decelerated and returned to a growth rate similar to or below its average pre-pandemic pace .7 While the PCE price index for housing services also began decelerating in mid-2023, its current rate of increase remains well above the average rate seen in the years before the pandemic . As noted earlier, changes in the PCE price index for housing services tend to lag changes in market rents because rental 6 . Several studies use market rent measures to predict housing services infl ation . See, for instance, Marijn A . Bolhuis, Judd N .L . Cramer, and Lawrence H . Summers (2022), “The Coming Rise in Residential Infl ation,” Review of Finance, vol . 26 (September), pp . 1051–72; and Kevin J . Lansing, Luiz E . Oliveira, and Adam Hale Shapiro (2022), “Will Rising Rents Push Up Future Infl ation?” FRBSF Economic Letter 2022-03 (San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, February), https://www .frbsf .org/wp-content/ uploads/sites/4/el2022-03 .pdf . 7 . In addition, the Bureau of Labor Statistics has recently started publishing a quarterly rent index for new tenants (the New Tenant Rent Index) . While the New Tenant Rent Index is subject to revision with each release, the year-over-year growth of this index declined from its peak of 12 .9 percent in the second quarter of 2022 to 0 .4 percent in the fi rst quarter of 2024, the lowest reading since the second quarter of 2010 . See Bureau of Labor Statistics (n .d .), “New Tenant Rent Index,” webpage, https://www .bls .gov/pir/new-tenant-rent .htm . contracts typically last for a year and rents for existing tenants take some time to catch up to the rents charged to new tenants . In particular, the rise in measures of market rents, including the CoreLogic Single-Family Rent Index and the Zillow Observed Rent Index, from the onset of the pandemic until now has been larger than the corresponding increase in the PCE price index for housing services, suggesting that the PCE price measure has not yet fully caught up with the current state of the rental market .8 However, as long as market rents continue to increase moderately, PCE housing services infl ation should gradually decline and eventually return to its pre-pandemic pace as well . However, signifi cant uncertainty remains regarding the timing of this decline and whether market rent infl ation will, in fact, remain moderate . 8 . Between January 2020 and April 2024, the CoreLogic Single-Family Rent Index and the Zillow Observed Rent Index have increased 32 percent and 38 percent, respectively, while PCE prices for housing services have increased 23 percent . See Christopher D . Cotton (2024), “A Faster Convergence of Shelter Prices and Market Rent: Implications for Infl ation,” Current Policy Perspectives 2024-4 (Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, June), https://www .bostonfed .org/-/media/ Documents/Workingpapers/PDF/2024/cpp20240617 .pdf . Inflation compensation implied by Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities NOTE: The data are at a business-day frequency and are estimated from smoothed nominal and inflation-indexed Treasury yield curves. 10. Nonfarm payroll employment NOTE: The data shown are a 3-month moving average of the change in Forecasters, conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, continued to expect PCE price inflation to average 2 percent over the five years beginning five years from now. Inflation expectations over a shorter horizon— which tend to follow observed inflation more closely and tend to be more volatile—have moved down, on net, since the middle of 2022 to near the range seen during the decade before the pandemic. In recent months, the median value for inflation expectations over the next year as measured in the Michigan survey has been generally lower than readings from a year earlier. Similarly, expected inflation for the next year as measured in the Survey of Consumer Expectations, conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, has also declined, on average, from a year earlier. Market-based measures of longer-term inflation compensation, which are based on financial instruments linked to inflation such as Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities, are also broadly in line with readings seen in the years before the pandemic and consistent with PCE inflation returning to 2 percent. These measures have been little changed, on net, since the beginning of the year (figure 9). The labor market remains strong Payroll employment gains have been strong, averaging 248,000 per month over the first five months of the year. Job gains slowed from the first half to the second half of last year but appear to have picked up, on net, so far this year (figure 10). Recent job gains have been broad based, with over 60 percent of industries expanding their employment, on net, over the three months ending in May. That said, gains have been particularly strong in health care and in state and local governments, where employment remains below the levels implied by pre-pandemic trends.2 2. Administrative data from the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW) suggest that job growth last year was solid, but not as strong as reported in the Current Employment Statistics (CES). The CES The unemployment rate has edged up since the middle of 2023 but was still at a historically low level of 4.0 percent in May. Through May, the unemployment rate has remained at or below 4 percent for over two years (figure 11). Unemployment rates among most age, educational attainment, sex, and ethnic and racial groups remain near their respective historical lows (figure 12). Labor demand has been gradually cooling . . . 11. Civilian unemployment rate Demand for labor remained strong in the first half of 2024 but has continued to cool gradually, on net, from its very elevated levels of early 2022. Job openings, as measured in the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey (JOLTS), have continued to fall from their all- time high recorded in March 2022 but are payroll data will be revised in early 2025, when the Bureau of Labor Statistics benchmarks these data to employment counts from the QCEW as part of its annual benchmarking process. 12. Unemployment rate, by race and ethnicity NOTE: Unemployment rate measures total unemployed as a percentage of the labor force. Persons whose ethnicity is identified as Hispanic or Latino may be of any race. Small sample sizes preclude reliable estimates for Native Americans and other groups for which monthly data are not reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. still slightly above pre-pandemic levels.3 An alternative measure of job vacancies using job postings data from the large online job board Indeed also shows that while vacancies have proceeded to move gradually lower through the first half of 2024, they have remained above pre-pandemic levels.4 Consistent with the decline in job vacancies, the National Federation of Independent Business (NFIB) survey indicated that on net, in May, fewer firms planned to add workers over the next three months than was the case at the end of 2023; firms’ hiring plans reported in the NFIB survey have been trending down since the middle of 2021. The cooling in labor demand has been mostly due to reductions in firm hiring, as indicators of layoffs, such as initial claims for unemployment insurance and the rate of layoffs and discharges in the JOLTS report, have remained at historically low levels. . . . and labor supply has increased further . . . Meanwhile, the supply of labor has continued to increase on net. While labor force participation has leveled off over the past year, the U.S. population increased strongly because of high levels of immigration. The labor force participation rate (LFPR)— which measures the share of people either working or actively seeking work—increased solidly from the beginning of 2021 through the middle of 2023 but appears to have 3. Some analysts have noted that the vacancy-posting behavior of firms may have changed since 2019 in ways that lift the number of vacancies. For example, multi- establishment firms may be posting vacancies for a single job opening at several or all of its establishments if the new job allows workers to work remotely from any establishment. These multiple job postings may result in overcounting of job vacancies in establishment- level measures, such as those from JOLTS and Indeed. Alternatively, after having experienced an exceptionally strong labor market in 2022, firms may now be more willing to post vacancies for positions that they are unlikely to fill immediately. 4. Indeed job postings data are available on the flattened out at a relatively high level since then. The LFPR was 62.5 percent in May, a touch below its average level over the past 12 months (figure 13). Notably, the post- pandemic recovery in the LFPR has differed widely across demographic groups, with the participation rate for women aged 25 to 54 reaching all-time highs in recent months and the participation rate for individuals older than 55 exhibiting no signs of recovery. (The box “Employment and Earnings across Demographic Groups” provides further details.) Labor supply has also been boosted in recent years by relatively strong population growth due to a notable expansion in immigration. Though official estimates by the Census Bureau show a robust increase in population growth in 2022 and 2023, recent estimates by the Congressional Budget Office indicate that actual population growth may have been considerably higher. The most recent data suggest that immigration is somewhat slower than the strong rates seen late last year.5 . . . resulting in a normalization of labor market conditions With cooling labor demand and rising labor supply, the labor market became gradually less tight over the first half of this year, although it nevertheless remains strong. The balance between demand and supply in the labor market appears similar to that during the period immediately before the pandemic. 5. A recent report from the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) estimates that immigration in 2022 and 2023 was considerably higher than in the Census Bureau’s estimates. See Congressional Budget Office (2024), The Demographic Outlook: 2024 to 2054 (Washington: CBO, January), https://www.cbo.gov/publication/59697. Recent studies have put more weight on the CBO estimates, in part because the Census Bureau is using lagged estimates of immigration from the American Community Survey, while the CBO is using more recent, high-frequency data. See Wendy Edelberg and Tara Watson (2024), “New Immigration Estimates Help Make Sense of the Pace of Employment,” Hamilton Project (Washington: Brookings Institution, March), https://www.brookings.edu/ wp-content/uploads/2024/03/20240307_Immigration Employment_Paper.pdf. 13. Labor force participation rate NOTE: Data are monthly, and values before January 2024 are in order to eliminate estimated by Federal Reserve Board staff discontinuities in the published history. At the aggregate level, solid labor demand and improved labor supply, together with ongoing gains in productivity and falling infl ation, have resulted in high rates of employment and rising real wages over the past year . This solid labor market performance has been broadly shared and has been especially benefi cial for historically disadvantaged groups of workers . As a result, many of the long-standing disparities in employment and wages by sex, race, ethnicity, and education have narrowed, and some gaps reached historical lows in 2023 and the fi rst half of 2024 . However, despite this narrowing, signifi cant disparities in absolute levels across groups remain . Among prime-age people (aged 25 to 54), the employment-to-population (EPOP) ratio for Black or African American workers remained near its historical peak in the fi rst half of 2024, and the gap in the EPOP ratio between prime-age Black and white workers fell to its lowest point in almost 50 years . Similarly, prime-age Hispanic or Latino workers’ EPOP ratio has increased notably over the fi rst part of 2024 and is now more than 1 percentage point above its 2019 level (fi gure A, top-left panel) . That improvement has further reduced the EPOP ratio gap between Hispanic or Latino workers and white workers from already (continued) A. Prime-age employment-to-population ratios compared with the 2019 average ratio, by group NOTE: Prime age is 25 to 54. All series are seasonally adjusted by the Federal Reserve Board staff. SOURCE: Bureau of Labor Statistics; U.S. Census Bureau, Current Population Survey; Federal Reserve Board staff calculations. historically low levels . Although the EPOP ratio for prime-age Asian workers has moved somewhat lower over the past year, it remains historically high and above its 2019 level .1 The EPOP ratio for prime-age women has continued to increase steadily, reaching another record high in the fi rst few months of 2024, whereas the EPOP ratio for prime-age men has been mostly fl at over the past year, near its level in the year before the pandemic (fi gure A, top-right panel) . As a result, the EPOP ratio gap between prime-age men and women fell to a record low this year . The increase in the female EPOP ratio relative to the pre-pandemic period is (almost) entirely attributable to rising labor force participation, which had also been increasing briskly before the pandemic, consistent with a growing share of women with a college degree .2 Other factors, including strong labor market conditions and greater availability of remote- work options, may have also contributed to rising prime-age female labor force participation .3 Among prime-age persons with a disability, the EPOP ratio has surged well above its 2019 level during the past few years (fi gure A, bottom panel) . Some of this increase is likely due to the unique labor market circumstances of the past few years . With tight labor market conditions, employers may have been relatively more likely to hire persons with a disability than in other times . Additionally, the rise of remote work may have enabled persons with a disability to work without the challenges of on-site work . However, some of the increase could stem from a change in the composition of this group, as the number of persons with a disability rose following the pandemic, which may have raised 1 . As monthly series have greater sampling variability for smaller groups, we do not plot EPOP ratio estimates for American Indians or Alaska Natives . 2 . For a discussion of the contribution of educational attainment to prime-age female labor force participation before the pandemic, see Didem Tüzemen and Thao Tran (2019), “The Uneven Recovery in Prime-Age Labor Force Participation,” Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Economic Review, vol . 104 (Third Quarter), pp . 21–41, https://www . kansascityfed .org/Economic%20Review/documents/652/2019- The%20Uneven%20Recovery%20in%20Prime-Age%20 Labor%20Force%20Participation .pdf . 3 . For a discussion on access to remote work and participation rates, see Maria D . Tito (2024), “Does the Ability to Work Remotely Alter Labor Force Attachment? An Analysis of Female Labor Force Participation,” FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January 19), https://doi .org/10 .17016/2380- 7172 .3433 . B. Employment-to-population ratios relative to 2019 NOTE: Data before January 2023 are estimated by Federal Reserve Board staff in order to eliminate discontinuities in the published history. SOURCE: Bureau of Labor Statistics; U.S. Census Bureau, Current the average employment rate for this group .4 For persons without a disability, the EPOP ratio is little changed from its 2019 level . Although most groups have shown robust employment gains over the past few years, the EPOP ratio for people aged 55 or older remains approximately 2 percentage points below its 2019 level and has changed little since late 2021 (fi gure B) . This shortfall is attributable to a persistent increase in the rate of retirement among this group . Most of the increase in retirement relative to 2019 is due to the continued aging of the baby-boom generation, a trend that was expected to have occurred even without the pandemic .5 However, retirements have also been (continued on next page) may be linked to cases of long COvID, which, while debilitating, might not limit work as much as other types of disabilities . As a result, an infl ux of relatively higher- employment individuals into the disabled category could have raised employment rates for this group even if no individual’s employment changed . 5 . For example, as baby boomers have continued to age, the median age of the population aged 55 or older increased from 66 in 2019 to 67 in the fi rst half of 2024, and the median age of that group is expected to continue increasing into the future . This shift in the composition of the 55-or-older population has naturally lowered the observed EPOP ratio for this group nearly 0 .5 percentage point per year, as EPOP ratios are lower at older ages . Employment and Earnings (continued) elevated above the level expected from aging alone, mostly for individuals aged 65 or older .6 demographic groups are now within historically narrow ranges, substantial gender, racial, and ethnic gaps remain, underscoring long-standing structural factors . Currently, prime-age women are employed at a rate 10 percentage points less than men, while prime-age Black and Hispanic workers are employed at a rate 3 to 4 percentage points less than white workers . Similar to employment, a continued strong labor market has supported strong nominal wage growth, and as infl ation has come down, that strong nominal wage growth has translated into higher real wage growth . Real wage growth has been comparatively robust for historically disadvantaged groups . As shown in the top- left panel of fi gure C, real wage growth—as measured 6 . For an analysis on the increase in retirements following by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta’s Wage Growth Tracker and defl ated by the personal consumption expenditures price index—was consistently stronger for workers in lower wage quartiles compared with the top quartiles during the pandemic and early recovery, but now all quartiles are experiencing similar growth .7 Strong wage growth across the income distribution is refl ected in the experiences of different demographic groups . Wage growth for nonwhite workers has been a bit stronger than that for white workers for much of the past year (fi gure C, top-right panel) . Wages for women and men have grown essentially in tandem over the past year (fi gure C, bottom-left panel) .8 Real wage growth for workers with a high school diploma or less remains strong and has been rising a bit faster than for workers with more education, on average, over the past few years (fi gure C, bottom-right panel) . (continued) 7 . To reduce noise due to sampling variation, which can be pronounced when considering disaggregated groups’ wage changes, the series shown in fi gure C are the 12-month moving averages of the groups’ median 12-month real wage changes . Thus, by construction, these series lag the actual real wage changes . Wage data extend through March 2024 only to avoid complications stemming from changes in the underlying data source . 8 . The measure of real wage growth shown in the fi gure uses the same price index for all groups, but infl ation experiences can differ across demographic groups because of differences in what they purchase or where they shop . See Jacob Orchard (2021), “Cyclical Demand Shifts and Cost of Living Inequality,” working paper, February (revised September 2022) . Associate’s degree Bachelor’s degree or more NOTE: The data extend through March 2024. Series show 12-month moving averages of the median percent change in the hourly wage of individuals observed 12 months apart, deflated by the 12-month moving average of the 12-month percent change in the personal consumption expenditures price index. In the top-left panel, workers are assigned to wage quartiles based on the average of their wage reports in both Current Population Survey outgoing rotation group interviews; workers in the lowest 25 percent of the average wage distribution are assigned to the 1st quartile, and those in the top 25 percent are assigned to the 4th quartile. Associate’s degree Bachelor’s degree or more NOTE: The data extend through March 2024. Series show 12-month moving averages of the median percent change in the hourly wage of individuals observed 12 months apart, deflated by the 12-month moving average of the 12-month percent change in the personal consumption expenditures price index. In the top-left panel, workers are assigned to wage quartiles based on the average of their wage reports in both Current Population Survey outgoing rotation group interviews; workers in the lowest 25 percent of the average wage distribution are assigned to the 1st quartile, and those in the top 25 percent are assigned to the 4th quartile. 14. Available jobs versus available workers NOTE: Available jobs are employment plus job openings as of the end of the previous month. Available workers are the labor force. Data for employment and labor force before January 2024 are estimated by Federal Reserve Board staff in order to eliminate discontinuities in the published history. 15. Measures of change in hourly compensation NOTE: For the private-sector employment cost index, change is over the 12 months ending in the last month of each quarter; for private- sector average hourly earnings, the data are 12-month percent changes; for the Atlanta Fed’s Wage Growth Tracker, the data are shown as a 3-month moving average of the 12-month percent change and extend through March 2024. SourCe: Bureau of Labor Statistics; Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Wage Growth Tracker; all via Haver Analytics. A variety of labor market indicators support this assessment. The ratio of job openings to unemployment has fallen notably from its peak of about 2.0 in spring 2022 to 1.2 in May, the same as its average in 2019. Similarly, the gap between the number of total available jobs (measured by employed workers plus job openings) and the number of available workers (measured by the size of the labor force) has also moved down markedly from its peak of 6.1 million in spring 2022 to 1.4 million in May and is only a bit above its 2019 average of 1.2 million (figure 14). The unemployment rate has continued to edge up this year and reached 4.0 percent in May, modestly higher than in 2019. In addition, the percentage of workers quitting their jobs each month, an indicator of the availability of attractive job prospects, has continued to move down this year and, though still elevated, is now modestly below its pre-pandemic level. Similarly, the share of respondents to the Conference Board Consumer Confidence Survey reporting that jobs are plentiful has continued to move down and is somewhat lower than its level in 2019. Furthermore, the NFIB survey indicates that firms’ perceptions of labor market tightness have come down from their recent peaks and returned to their pre-pandemic range. Finally, business contacts surveyed for the Federal Reserve’s May 2024 Beige Book reported signs of a cooling labor market—including easing in hiring plans, better labor availability, and modest wage growth—and, similar to 2019, cited some difficulty finding workers in selected industries or areas.6 Wage growth remains elevated but has slowed Consistent with the easing in labor market tightness, nominal wage growth continued to slow so far this year, though it remains above its pre-pandemic pace and likely too high, given productivity trends, to be consistent with 2 percent inflation over time (figure 15). Total hourly compensation, as measured by the 6. See the May 2024 Beige Book, available on the employment cost index, increased 4.1 percent over the 12 months ending in March, a noticeable slowing from the peak increase of 5.5 percent in mid-2022. Other aggregate measures of labor compensation, such as average hourly earnings (a less comprehensive measure of compensation) and the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta’s Wage Growth Tracker (which reports the median 12-month wage growth of individuals responding to the Current Population Survey), have also continued to slow from their recent peaks in 2022 but remain well above their pre-pandemic growth rates. Wage growth has not normalized to the same extent as the measures of labor market tightness cited earlier, suggesting that there is some persistence in the adjustment process to past shocks. With PCE prices having risen 2.6 percent over the 12 months through May, these nominal wage measures suggest that most workers saw increases in the purchasing power of their wages over the past year. Labor productivity has increased at a moderate pace with significant volatility The extent to which nominal wage gains raise firms’ costs and act as a source of inflation pressure depends importantly on the pace of productivity growth. Labor productivity in the business sector—the ratio of output to hours worked—has been extremely volatile since the pandemic began. It increased sharply in 2020, moved roughly sideways in 2021, declined strongly in 2022, and then rebounded solidly in 2023 (figure 16). Averaging through these large swings, business-sector productivity has increased at a moderate annual average rate of 1½ percent since the onset of the pandemic, in line with the average rate of growth observed during the previous business cycle (from the fourth quarter of 2007 to the fourth quarter of 2019). The pace of future productivity growth is highly uncertain. It is possible that productivity growth could remain at around its current moderate pace. However, it is also possible that the rapid adoption of new technologies like artificial intelligence (AI) 16. U.S. labor productivity NOTE: The data are output per hour in the business sector. SOURCE: Bureau of Labor Statistics via Haver Analytics. 17. Change in real gross domestic product and gross domestic income NOTE: The key identifies bars in order from left to right. SOURCE: Bureau of Economic Analysis via Haver Analytics. and robotics, as well as the high rate of new business formation brought about by the pandemic, could boost productivity growth above that pace in coming years. Growth in gross domestic product moderated in the first quarter, but private domestic demand remained solid After expanding at a robust pace in the second half of last year despite restrictive financial conditions, real gross domestic product (GDP) decelerated to a moderate annual growth rate of 1.4 percent in the first quarter of this year (figure 17). The step-down was due in large part to sizable drags from net exports and inventory investment; these categories of expenditures tend to be volatile even in normal times and have been even more so since the pandemic. Growth in private domestic final purchases—that is, consumer spending, business fixed investment, and residential investment—also moderated in the first quarter but remained solid.7 Among these components of GDP, consumer spending rose strongly in the second half of last year and decelerated in the first quarter as goods spending declined while services spending continued to rise solidly. Business fixed investment increased at a moderate pace in the first quarter as a result of strength in nontransportation equipment spending and intellectual property investment, while nonresidential structures slowed after surging in 2023. Residential investment grew rapidly in the first quarter, reflecting, for the most part, increases in existing home sales and construction of single-family homes. 7. Real gross domestic income (GDI) has been notably weaker than GDP in recent years; both series measure the same economic concept, and any difference between the two figures reflects measurement error in one or both series. GDI is reported to have increased at a pace only slightly slower than GDP in the first quarter but had risen notably less than GDP over the previous three years. As a result, productivity calculated from the income side of the national accounts would be considerably weaker than the published figures over the past three years. After having returned to pre-pandemic levels in late 2021, manufacturing output has been little changed, on net, since then. While motor vehicle production has continued to rebound from earlier disruptions, factory production outside of motor vehicles has drifted down somewhat. The diffusion indexes of new orders from various national and regional surveys of manufacturers remained mostly soft in June, suggesting continued modest weakness in coming months. Consumer spending growth has been resilient but eased this year Consumer spending adjusted for inflation grew at a solid rate of 2.7 percent in 2023 but slowed in the first quarter to a moderate 1.5 percent pace (figure 18). The resilience in consumer spending last year in the face of high interest rates likely reflected strong job gains and rising real wages. Indeed, real disposable personal income increased at a robust 3.8 percent rate in 2023. In addition, last year’s spending was bolstered by households drawing down their liquid assets, such as checking accounts, and relying more on credit. More recently, the easing in consumer spending growth in the first quarter was accompanied by a softening in some household spending fundamentals along with somewhat restrictive financial conditions. Disposable personal income growth moderated in the first quarter after a robust pace last year. While household finances appear healthy in the aggregate, credit card and auto loan delinquencies continued to rise in the first quarter, suggesting that a growing share of households are experiencing some financial stress. Despite the recent easing in consumer spending growth, households continue to spend more of their income than is typical. The saving rate—the difference between current income and spending, as a share of income—was 3.8 percent in the first quarter and has been well below its pre-pandemic average of over 6 percent for nine consecutive 18. Change in real personal consumption expenditures 19. Personal saving rate NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through June 2024. SOURCE: University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers; Conference 21. Consumer credit flows NOTE: Credit card balances were little changed in 2011 and 2012. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Board, Statistical Release G.19, “Consumer quarters (figure 19). This low saving rate likely reflects in large part the effects of high wealth and still-strong balance sheets of higher- income households. Consumer spending since the pandemic has been more robust than measures of consumer sentiment would suggest. The indexes of consumer sentiment published by both the University of Michigan and the Conference Board remain well below their pre-pandemic levels. Although the Michigan survey index has improved markedly since spring 2022, it is further below its pre-pandemic level than the Conference Board index, which puts more weight on labor market conditions (figure 20). Consumer financing conditions remain somewhat restrictive Consumer financing conditions have been somewhat restrictive, reflecting high borrowing costs and tight bank lending standards. Interest rates for consumer credit products such as new credit cards and auto loans edged down in recent months but remained elevated. In the April Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS), conducted by the Federal Reserve Board, banks reported continued tightening of lending standards for consumer loans in the first quarter, likely reflecting increases in delinquency rates. Indeed, credit card and auto loan delinquency rates—measured as the fraction of balances that are at least 30 days past due—have increased from their 2021 lows and are above the levels observed just before the pandemic. Even so, financing has been generally available to support consumer spending. Consumer credit expanded moderately, on net, during the first four months of the year, driven by still-solid growth in credit card balances and modest growth in auto loans and student loans (figure 21). Residential investment turned around and has increased since mid-2023 After rising sharply between early 2022 and late 2023, mortgage interest rates have fallen back some since last fall but, at around 7 percent, remain well above their pre- pandemic peak in 2018 (figure 22). Following the sharp rise in mortgage rates, residential investment declined steeply in 2022 and fell further in the first half of last year but has picked up since mid-2023. Solid income growth and the declines in interest rates late last year have provided support for residential investment demand so far this year. Indeed, residential investment rose sharply in the first quarter. Sales of existing homes have moved up a touch this year but remain at very low levels. Relatively high mortgage interest rates and house prices have reduced affordability and depressed homebuying sentiment. Moreover, though new listings of existing homes have increased modestly this year, the supply of existing homes for sale remains quite low, as many homeowners are reportedly “rate locked”—unwilling to move and take out a new mortgage while mortgage rates are relatively high. Many households purchased homes or refinanced when fixed mortgage rates were at historically low levels in 2020 and 2021, and, as a result, the majority of outstanding mortgages have interest rates below 4 percent (figure 23). In contrast to existing home sales, sales of new homes declined when mortgage rates first increased, but they bounced back fairly quickly and have remained around their pre- pandemic levels. The new home market has likely been supported by demand from buyers who are unable to find homes in the existing home market and by homebuilder interest rate incentives (figure 24). 22. Mortgage interest rates NOTE: The data are contract rates on 30-year, fixed-rate conventional home mortgage commitments and extend through June 27, 2024. 23. Distribution of interest rates on outstanding mortgages NOTE: The sample only includes outstanding mortgages current on 24. New and existing home sales Existing home sales NOTE: The data are monthly. New and existing home sales include SOURCE: For new home sales, U.S. Census Bureau; for existing home 25. Private housing starts and permits Single-family starts Single-family permits Multifamily starts 26. Growth rate in house prices NOTE: S&P/Case-Shiller data extend through April 2024. SOURCE: CoreLogic, Inc., Home Price Index; Zillow, Inc., Real Estate Data; S&P/Case-Shiller U.S. National Home Price Index. The S&P/Case-Shiller index is a product of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. (For Dow Jones Indices licensing information, see the note on the Contents page.) 27. Change in real business fixed investment NOTE: Business fixed investment is known as “private nonresidential fixed investment” in the national income and product accounts. The key identifies bars in order from left to right. The relative strength in new home demand encouraged builders to increase housing construction last year, boosting starts and permits for single-family housing (figure 25). In recent months, though, single-family housing starts and permits have drifted back down, likely because of high builder inventories and some easing in new home demand. Reflecting these demand and supply factors, house price growth slowed rapidly in 2022 from a historically high pace and has remained moderate since then (figure 26). The balance of demand and supply in the multifamily housing market is fundamentally different from that in the single-family housing market, as it is dominated by rental units. Sharp increases in rents in 2021 and 2022 encouraged a dramatic increase in multifamily starts in those years, creating large amounts of new supply. With many units still under construction and weak rental growth since 2022, multifamily starts have been declining since last year (as shown in figure 25).8 Capital spending increased at a moderate pace Business investment spending rose moderately in 2023 and in the first quarter of this year, supported by strong sales growth and improvements in business sentiment and profit expectations—and despite high interest rates (figure 27). However, the sources of strength in business investment shifted recently. Investment in structures—which had surged in early 2023 because of a boom in manufacturing construction, especially for factories that produce semiconductors or electric vehicle batteries—decelerated in the second half of 2023 and has slowed further so far this year, although the level of structures investment remains much higher than in 8. For additional discussion, see the box “Recent Housing Market Developments” in Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2024), Monetary Policy Report (Washington: Board of Governors, March), pp. 19–21, https://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/ files/20240301_mprfullreport.pdf. previous years. Starting late last year, growth in business investment in nontransportation equipment and intellectual property stepped up, supported by gains in high-technology equipment spending and software investment. Business financing conditions are somewhat restrictive, but credit remains generally available Although businesses face somewhat restrictive financing conditions, as interest rates are still elevated, credit remains generally available to most nonfinancial corporations. Banks continued to tighten lending standards for all business loan types over the first quarter of this year, and even though business loan growth at banks increased in the first five months of the year, it stayed tepid. In contrast, issuance of corporate bonds remained strong so far this year, although well below the levels that prevailed at the beginning of the tightening cycle. For small businesses, which are more reliant on bank financing than large businesses, credit conditions remained tight but stable over the first half of this year. Surveys indicate that credit supply for small businesses tightened modestly, while interest rates on loans to small businesses were little changed, staying near the top of the range observed since 2008. In addition, while loan default rates have continued to increase, delinquency rates stabilized in the first part of the year at levels that slightly exceeded their pre-pandemic rates. Finally, loan originations have remained stable over the past year and above the range observed before the pandemic, suggesting that credit continues to be available for small businesses. Net exports were a drag on GDP growth On balance, net exports subtracted 0.7 percentage point from U.S. GDP growth in the first quarter of this year after having contributed about one-tenth to annualized GDP growth in the second half of last year. After moderate growth in the second half of 28. Change in real imports and exports of goods and services 29. Federal receipts and expenditures NOTE: Through 2023, the receipts and expenditures data are on a unified-budget basis and are for fiscal years (October to September); gross domestic product (GDP) is for the 4 quarters ending in Q3. For 2024, receipts and expenditures are for the 12 months ending in May; GDP is the average of 2023:Q4 and 2024:Q1. last year, real imports of goods and services have stepped up further this year despite some deceleration in U.S. GDP growth. By contrast, real export growth has slowed significantly, as some categories with especially strong growth in the second half of last year declined this year, particularly industrial supplies and materials (figure 28). The current account deficit as a share of GDP widened slightly in the first quarter of 2024 and remains wider than before the pandemic. Federal fiscal policy actions were roughly neutral for GDP growth last year and so far this year Federal purchases grew modestly in 2023 and moved sideways in the first quarter of the year. The overall contribution of discretionary federal fiscal policy to real GDP growth appears to have been roughly neutral last year and in the first quarter of this year, as the unwinding of pandemic-related policies offset the boost to consumption and investment from policies enacted after the pandemic. The budget deficit and federal debt remain elevated After surging to about 15 percent of GDP in fiscal year 2020, the budget deficit declined through fiscal 2022 as the imprint of the pandemic faded (figure 29). The budget deficit moved up to 6.3 percent of GDP in fiscal 2023 as net interest outlays increased, while tax receipts declined from their elevated level in 2022. Debt service costs have moved up sharply in recent years—as a result of higher interest rates and a higher level of debt—and are at their highest level in over two decades. The primary deficit—the difference between noninterest outlays and receipts—has moved down, on net, since fiscal 2020 and moved sideways in 2022 to 2023, as the effects of a decline in noninterest outlays as a share of GDP were offset by a decline in receipts as a share of GDP. As a result of the unprecedented fiscal support enacted early in the pandemic, federal debt held by the public jumped roughly 20 percentage points to close to 100 percent of GDP in 2020—the highest debt-to-GDP ratio since 1947 (figure 30). The debt-to-GDP ratio has moved roughly sideways since then, as upward pressure from large primary deficits has been offset by strong nominal GDP growth. Most state and local government budget positions remained strong . . . Federal policymakers provided a historically high level of fiscal support to state and local governments during the pandemic; this aid, together with robust state tax collections in 2021 and 2022, left the sector in a strong budget position overall (figure 31). Although state tax revenues weakened in 2023 and early this year—mainly reflecting a normalization of receipts from elevated levels in 2022, as well as the effects of recently enacted tax cuts in some states—taxes as a percentage of GDP remained near recent historical norms. Moreover, states’ total balances—that is, including rainy day fund balances and previous-year surplus funds—continued to be near all-time highs. Nevertheless, budget situations varied widely across states, with some states—particularly those that depend heavily on capital gains tax collections—facing tighter budget conditions. At the local level, overall property tax receipts rose briskly in 2023 and continued to increase at an elevated rate in the first quarter. . . . contributing to brisk growth in employment and construction spending Employment in state and local governments rose strongly in 2023 and early this year and has now recovered from the drop during the pandemic, though it is still below the level implied by the pre-pandemic trend (figure 32). This surge in state and local employment reflects the waning of pandemic-related headwinds such as a big increase in retirements early in the pandemic and slower wage growth relative to that in the private sector. Similarly, real construction outlays grew at a historically high rate last year, reflecting easing bottlenecks and support from federal grants, and are now somewhat above their pre-pandemic levels. 30. Federal government debt and net interest outlays Debt held by the public NOTE: The data for net interest outlays are annual, begin in 1948, and extend through 2023. Net interest outlays are the cost of servicing the debt held by the public, offset by certain types of interest income the government receives. Federal debt held by the public equals federal debt excluding most intragovernmental debt, evaluated at the end of the quarter. The data for federal debt are annual from 1901 to 1951 and a 4-quarter moving average thereafter. GDP is gross domestic product. 31. State and local tax receipts NOTE: Receipts shown are year-over-year percent changes of 4-quarter moving averages and begin in 2012:Q4. Property taxes are primarily collected by local governments. 32. State and local government payroll employment 33. Market-implied federal funds rate path NOTE: The federal funds rate path is implied by quotes on overnight index swaps—a derivative contract tied to the effective federal funds rate. The implied path as of December 29, 2023, is compared with that as of June 28, 2024. The path is estimated with a spline approach, assuming a term premium of 0 basis points. The December 29, 2023, path extends through 2027:Q4 and the June 28, 2024, path through 2028:Q2. SOURCE: Bloomberg; Federal Reserve Board staff estimates. 34. Yields on nominal Treasury securities The expected level of the federal funds rate over the next few years is higher since the beginning of the year Over the late winter and early spring, the market-implied federal funds rate path moved up, boosted by above-expectations inflation data that prompted market participants to reassess the monetary policy restraint required to return inflation to 2 percent. The rise in the path was partially reversed since late April amid mixed but generally softer-than- expected data on real activity and inflation. Since the beginning of the year, on net, the market-implied federal funds rate path rose substantially (figure 33). Financial market prices currently suggest that investors expect the federal funds rate to decline to about 4.9 percent and 4.0 percent by year-ends 2024 and 2025, respectively. Roughly consistent with market-implied measures, respondents to the Blue Chip Financial Forecasts survey have significantly revised upward their expectations for the path of the federal funds rate, with the average respondent in the July survey expecting the federal funds rate to decline to 5.0 percent in the fourth quarter of 2024— 0.6 percentage point higher than anticipated at the end of last year. Yields on U.S. nominal Treasury securities are higher on net Consistent with the upward revision in the market-implied federal funds rate path, yields on shorter-term Treasury securities rose notably between mid-February and late April before retracing some of the increase afterward. Yields on longer-term nominal Treasury securities moved similarly with yields on shorter-term nominal Treasury securities. On balance, nominal Treasury yields are moderately higher than at the beginning of the year across the maturity spectrum (figure 34). An increase in real yields—as measured by yields on Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities—accounted for a large portion of the rise in nominal Treasury yields, especially at longer maturities. Yields on other long-term debt fluctuated with Treasury yields Yields on corporate bonds generally followed the movements in longer-term Treasury yields and increased since the beginning of the year for both the investment- and speculative-grade segments of the market (figure 35). Both yield spreads on investment- and speculative-grade corporate bonds over comparable-maturity Treasury securities remain near the low end of their respective historical distributions as corporate bond investors appeared to be pricing in a generally optimistic outlook. Yields on municipal bonds remain at elevated levels relative to rates prevailing before the recent tightening cycle, having increased moderately since January. Meanwhile, spreads of municipal bond yields to yields on comparable-maturity Treasury securities were relatively little changed, on net, and are at compressed levels relative to their historical distribution. Yields on agency mortgage- backed securities (MBS)—an important influence on home mortgage interest rates— increased since the start of the year (figure 36). Agency MBS spreads to Treasury securities remain elevated relative to pre-pandemic levels, due in part to elevated interest rate volatility, which increases the risk of holding MBS. Broad equity price indexes increased Broad equity price indexes rose substantially since the start of the year, on net, led by large technology firms (figure 37). While equity prices remained sensitive to inflation news, equity investors appeared to be generally sanguine about the prospect of inflation coming down without a sharp downturn in activity. First-quarter corporate earnings releases, which were generally solid, also supported equity valuations. Meanwhile, equity prices for small-cap firms were little changed. Equity prices for large banks increased, on net, while equity prices for regional banks declined, reflecting lingering concerns about the health of these banks related in part to the quality of their commercial real estate loans. One-month option-implied volatility on the S&P 500 35. Corporate bond yields, by securities rating, and municipal bond yield NOTE: Investment-grade corporate reflects the effective yield of the ICE Bank of America Merrill Lynch (BofAML) triple-B U.S. Corporate Index (C0A4). High-yield corporate reflects the effective yield of the ICE BofAML High Yield Index (H0A0). Municipal reflects the yield to worst of the ICE BofAML U.S. Municipal Securities Index (U0A0). SOURCE: ICE Data Indices, LLC, used with permission. 36. Yield and spread on agency mortgage-backed securities is for the uniform mortgage-backed securities 30-year current coupon, the coupon rate at which new mortgage-backed securities would be priced at par, or face, value for dates after May 31, 2019; for earlier dates, the yield shown is for the Fannie Mae 30-year current coupon. Spread shown is to the average of the 5-year and 10-year nominal Treasury yields. NOTE: The data are daily. Yield shown SOURCE: Department of the Treasury; J.P. Morgan. Courtesy of J.P. 37. Equity prices SOURCE: S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC via Bloomberg. (For Dow Jones Indices licensing information, see the note on the Contents page.) 38. S&P 500 volatility Expected volatility NOTE: The VIX is an option-implied volatility measure that represents the expected annualized variability of the S&P 500 index over the following 30 days. The expected volatility series shows a forecast of 1-month realized volatility, using a heterogeneous autoregressive model based on 5-minute S&P 500 returns. index—the VIX—fluctuated somewhat, reaching its peak so far this year in early April amid increased inflation concerns and geopolitical tensions, but quickly retraced and ended the period little changed (figure 38). Currently, the VIX stands close to its typical historical level that was observed before the pandemic. (For a discussion of financial stability issues, see the box “Developments Related to Financial Stability.”) Major asset markets functioned in an orderly manner, despite some indicators pointing to low liquidity Functioning of the Treasury securities market has continued to be orderly. While a number of measures of Treasury market liquidity remain low by historical standards, some of these measures—such as on-the-run securities market depth, a measure of the availability of securities to transact at the best quoted prices—improved modestly since January. Liquidity in the equity market remained low compared with pre-pandemic levels, and liquidity conditions deteriorated slightly since the beginning of the year. The depth of the S&P 500 futures market decreased a bit, and the price impact increased slightly. Corporate and municipal bond markets continued to function well, and trading conditions remained stable; transaction costs in these markets continued to be fairly low by historical standards. Short-term funding market conditions remained stable Conditions in overnight money markets remained stable, with spreads of money market rates to the Federal Reserve’s administered rates roughly unchanged outside of month-end dates. Since the beginning of the year, the effective federal funds rate has stayed 7 basis points below the interest rate on reserve balances, and other unsecured overnight rates have been around similar levels with limited volatility. The Secured Overnight Financing Rate has remained 1 or 2 basis points above the offering rate on the overnight This discussion reviews vulnerabilities in the U .S . fi nancial system . The framework used by the Federal Reserve Board for assessing the resilience of the U .S . fi nancial system focuses on fi nancial vulnerabilities in four broad areas: asset valuations, business and household debt, leverage in the fi nancial sector, and funding risks . All told, the fi nancial system remains sound and resilient . valuations increased to levels that were high relative to fundamentals across major asset classes, with equity prices growing faster than expected earnings and residential property prices remaining high relative to market rents . Credit to nonfi nancial businesses and households relative to gross domestic product (GDP) continued to decline, falling to nearly a two-decade low . Most banks continued to report solid capital levels, but fair value losses on fi xed-rate assets remained sizable . In addition, some banks continued to rely signifi cantly on uninsured deposits . Hedge fund leverage grew to historical highs, driven primarily by borrowing by the largest hedge funds . valuations rose further to levels that were high relative to fundamentals across major asset classes . Equity prices grew faster than expected earnings, pushing the compensation for equity risk—computed as the difference between the inverse of the forward price-to-earnings ratio and expected real yields on 10-year Treasury securities—to its lowest level since 2007 . Corporate bond spreads narrowed and currently stand at levels close to historical lows . Amid limited supply of homes available for sale, residential property prices remained high relative to market rents, standing near their peaks . Conditions in commercial real estate (CRE) markets continued to deteriorate, with declining transaction prices in most segments refl ecting weak demand . Nominal long-term Treasury yields increased moderately since the beginning of the year and stayed close to their highest levels over the past decade and a half . NOTE: The shaded bars with top caps indicate periods of business recession as defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research: January 1980 to July 1980, July 1981 to November 1982, July 1990 to March 1991, March 2001 to November 2001, December 2007 to June 2009, and February 2020 to April 2020. GDP is gross domestic product. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Board, Statistical Release Z.1, “Financial Accounts of the United States”; Bureau of Economic Analysis, national income and product accounts; Federal Reserve Board staff calculations. households remained strong . The combined debt of both sectors as a share of GDP continued to decline and sat close to its lowest level in two decades (fi gure A) . The decline is due to decreases in both business- and household-sector debt relative to GDP (fi gure B) . Furthermore, business debt continued to decline in real terms, and debt-servicing capacity (continued on next page) NOTE: The data are quarterly. The shaded bars with top caps indicate periods of business recession as defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research: July 1981 to November 1982, July 1990 to March 1991, March 2001 to November 2001, December 2007 to June 2009, and February 2020 to April 2020. GDP is gross domestic product. stayed solid for most public fi rms—in large part due to strong earnings, large cash buffers, and low borrowing costs on existing debt . In addition, the pass-through of higher interest rates into debt-servicing costs continues to be muted because the share of long-term, fi xed-rate liabilities remained sizable . Corporate bond default rates have returned to their average levels, rising from their low points in 2021 but declining from their peaks in the second half of 2023, suggesting that credit quality is stabilizing with pockets of stress continuing for the riskiest borrowers . Expectations of year-ahead defaults stayed somewhat elevated relative to their history . Household balance sheets are still sound, as most homeowners have ample home equity cushions and strong credit histories . Borrowers with prime credit scores—for whom delinquency rates remained low and stable across credit markets—correspond to more than 60 percent of all borrowers and continued to account for most of household debt outstanding . Regarding vulnerabilities in the fi nancial sector, most banks continued to report capital levels well above regulatory requirements . However, fair value losses on fi xed-rate assets remained sizable for some banks, while parts of banks’ CRE portfolios are facing stress . Despite a moderation in deposit outfl ows, higher funding costs— together with expected increases in loss provisions for CRE and consumer loans—could put downward pressure on banks’ profi ts and their ability to build capital through retained earnings . Outside the banking sector, hedge fund leverage stayed near historical highs, partly due to funds’ substantial positions in the Treasury futures basis trade . Leverage at broker-dealers continued to be near historically low levels, but limited capacity or willingness of broker-dealers to intermediate in Treasury markets during market stress remained a structural vulnerability . Life insurers’ leverage increased and stood around its median . Liquidity at most domestic banks remained ample, with limited reliance on short-term wholesale funding . However, some banks’ reliance on uninsured deposits remained high, and bond mutual funds’ exposure to interest rate risk continued to be signifi cant . Structural vulnerabilities remained in other short-term funding markets . Prime and tax-exempt money market funds, as well as other cash-investment vehicles and stablecoins, continued to be vulnerable to runs . Bond and loan funds remain susceptible to redemptions during periods of stress, with more severe pressures possible if assets become more illiquid or redemptions become unusually large . In addition, life insurers continued to rely on a higher-than-average share of nontraditional liabilities . reverse repurchase agreement (ON RRP) facility, except for short-lived upward pressure around month-ends. Take-up at the ON RRP facility declined in the first quarter, reflecting an increase in the net supply of Treasury bills and the associated upward pressure on bill yields relative to the offered rate on ON RRP investments as well as relatively more attractive rates on other short-term investments such as private repurchase agreements. However, the pace of decline in take-up slowed somewhat in the second quarter, primarily because of a decline in net bill supply. (See the box “Developments in the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet and Money Markets” in Part 2.) Assets under management of prime and government money market funds (MMFs), the largest investors in the ON RRP facility, trended up as they continued to offer favorable yields relative to most bank deposits. Prime MMFs increased liquid asset holdings and decreased weighted average maturities to satisfy the Securities and Exchange Commission’s reform requirements that became effective in April. Several institutional prime funds announced conversions to government funds, while a handful announced closures, citing the reform’s liquidity fees starting in October as the main driver behind the decision. However, these announced conversions and closures are unlikely to materially affect the funds’ usage of the ON RRP facility, because only minor additional portfolio changes will be required for conversions and because the decline in money fund assets due to funds closing is likely too small relative to total investments in the facility. Bank credit continued to expand at a slow pace Banks’ total loan holdings grew at about a 2 percent annualized rate in the first five months of the year, modestly up from a 1.3 percent rate in the fourth quarter of 2023. The still-tepid loan growth likely reflects the effects of higher interest rates, tighter credit standards, and economic uncertainty 39. Ratio of total commercial bank credit to nominal gross domestic product 40. Profitability of bank holding companies NOTE: The data are quarterly. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Board, Form FR Y-9C, Consolidated (figure 39). Banks in the SLOOS reported generally tighter standards and weaker demand over the first quarter of 2024, extending trends for standards and demand that have been reported since the middle of 2022. Delinquency rates continued to climb to above their longer-run average for commercial real estate and consumer loans in the first quarter of 2024 but remained in ranges observed before the pandemic across most other credit segments. Bank profitability picked up in the first quarter—reversing the dip in the fourth quarter of 2023—mainly driven by recent rising noninterest income and reduced loan loss provisions. Bank profitability levels are still below those that prevailed before the pandemic, reflecting rising funding costs and subdued loan demand (figure 40). Foreign economic growth rose after a soft patch in the second half of 2023 After a soft patch in the second half of 2023, foreign activity appears to have improved in both advanced foreign economies (AFEs) and emerging market economies (EMEs). In AFEs, growth rates returned to moderate levels despite the effects of restrictive monetary policy as lower inflation improved real household incomes. In Europe, energy- intensive sectors continue to struggle amid ongoing structural adjustment to past increases in energy prices following Russia’s 2022 invasion of Ukraine. In EMEs, economic growth was supported by a rebound in exports. In addition, industrial production in emerging Asia was supported by rising global demand for high-tech products, driven in part by the AI and electric vehicle sectors. China was a significant contributor to the pickup in foreign aggregate growth, boosted by both strong exports and fiscal policy support, even though household spending expanded only moderately. Notably, activity in China’s property sector remained extremely weak and house prices fell sharply, prompting the authorities to introduce new policy support measures. 41. Consumer price inflation in foreign economies Inflation abroad continued to ease but remains above central bank targets in most regions Foreign headline inflation has continued to stabilize overall since the middle of last year, primarily reflecting disinflation in AFE food and energy prices (figures 41 and 42). That said, the pace of disinflation has proved to be slower than expected and uneven across countries and economic sectors. As in the U.S., the deceleration in goods prices abroad has generally outpaced that in services prices. Inflation remains above target in Europe but has been near zero in China. In many economies, the main risks to continued disinflation include both domestic factors, such as sustained wage pressures, and external geopolitical factors, such as Russia’s war against Ukraine and developments in the Middle East, which pose risks for supply chain disruptions, increased trade costs, and higher energy prices. NOTE: The advanced foreign economy (AFE) aggregate is the average of Canada, the euro area, and the U.K., weighted by shares of U.S. non-oil goods imports. The emerging market economy (EME) aggregate is the average of Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, the Philippines, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan, Thailand, and Vietnam, weighted by shares of U.S. non-oil goods imports. The foreign aggregate is the import-weighted average of all aforementioned countries. The inflation measure is the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices for the euro area and the consumer price index for other economies. 42. Components of foreign consumer price inflation Emerging market economies NOTE: The advanced foreign economy aggregate is the average of Canada, the euro area, and the U.K., weighted by shares of U.S. non-oil goods imports. The emerging market economy aggregate is the average of Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, the Philippines, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan, Thailand, and Vietnam, weighted by shares of U.S. non-oil goods imports, and begins in 2017:Q2. The inflation measure is the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices for the euro area and the consumer price index for other economies. The data show percent changes from year-ago levels. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Board staff calculations; Haver Analytics. 43. Equity indexes for selected foreign economies NOTE: The data are weekly averages of daily data and extend through SOURCE: For the euro area, Dow Jones Euro Stoxx Index; for Japan, Tokyo Stock Price Index; for China, Shanghai Composite Index; for the U.K., FTSE 100 Index; all via Bloomberg. (For Dow Jones Indices licensing information, see the note on the Contents page.) 44. Nominal 10-year government bond yields in selected advanced foreign economies NOTE: The data are weekly averages of daily benchmark yields and Foreign central banks cut policy rates but remain cautious Many foreign central banks have noted progress in lowering inflation and easing resource tightness and have indicated that they expect further progress. Some have begun to cut their policy rates while continuing to stress a data-dependent approach. In EMEs, several central banks began easing monetary policy late in 2023. AFE central banks began to cut rates in the second quarter. The Swiss National Bank, Sweden’s Riksbank, the Bank of Canada, and the European Central Bank all cut their policy rates amid easing inflation. Policy rate paths implied by financial market pricing indicate that markets expect other AFE central banks to begin reducing interest rates later this year. Still, most foreign central bank communications have also emphasized upside risks to inflation from persistent core services inflation, currency depreciation, and geopolitical tensions. Japan has been a notable exception: Amid persistently high Japanese inflation, the Bank of Japan (BOJ) ended its negative interest rate policy and yield curve control in March. Equity prices rose even as sovereign bond yields in advanced foreign economies increased Foreign equity indexes rose significantly across AFEs and EMEs, consistent with above-expectations economic data and strong corporate earnings in many economies (figure 43). Nevertheless, investors withdrew from EME-focused investment funds as higher advanced-economy yields weighed on their demand for EME assets. In addition, some recent elections abroad contributed to notable movements in equities and other asset prices. AFE sovereign bond yields increased significantly in early 2024 and are up notably since the start of the year in Germany, Japan, and the U.K. (figure 44). These increases were driven by stronger-than-expected global activity data and spillovers from higher U.S. yields. Relative to late 2023, market-implied paths for policy rates now indicate a later start to easing and fewer rate cuts by many central banks. In Japan, yields were further supported by three BOJ tightening actions: raising policy rates from negative 0.1 percent to a band of 0 to 0.1 percent, discontinuing the yield curve control framework, and issuing guidance pointing to a potential reduction in sovereign bond purchases. The exchange value of the dollar rose notably Since year-end 2023, the broad dollar index—a measure of the exchange value of the dollar against a trade-weighted basket of foreign currencies—increased significantly, on net, reflecting dollar appreciation against both AFE and EME currencies (figure 45). The increase in the dollar index was consistent with a widening of interest rate differentials between the U.S. and the rest of the world. 45. U.S. dollar exchange rate index NOTE: The data, which are in foreign currency units per dollar, are weekly averages of daily values of the broad dollar index and extend through June 28, 2024. As indicated by the arrow, increases in the data reflect U.S. dollar appreciation and decreases reflect U.S. dollar depreciation. The Federal Open Market Committee has held the federal funds rate steady . . . The Federal Reserve conducts monetary policy to promote its statutory goals of maximum employment and price stability. (See the box “Monetary Policy Independence, Transparency, and Accountability.”) Inflation has eased over the past year but has remained elevated while the economy has continued to expand at a solid pace. Job gains have been strong, and the unemployment rate has remained low. Against this backdrop, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has maintained a restrictive stance of policy at recent meetings to keep demand in line with supply and reduce inflationary pressures. Since its July 2023 meeting, the Committee has maintained the target range for the federal funds rate at 5¼ to 5½ percent, after having raised the target range a total of 525 basis points starting in early 2022 (figure 46). The FOMC’s policy tightening actions and current policy stance reflect the Committee’s strong commitment to return inflation to its 2 percent objective. Restoring price stability is essential to achieving maximum employment and stable prices over the long run that benefit all Americans. With labor market tightness continuing to ease gradually and inflation easing over the past year, the risks to achieving the Committee’s employment and inflation goals have moved toward better balance. The Committee remains highly attentive to inflation risks and is acutely aware that high inflation imposes significant hardship, especially on those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials, like food, housing, and transportation. In considering any adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will carefully assess incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks. The Committee does not expect it will be appropriate to reduce the target range until it has gained greater confidence that inflation is moving sustainably toward 2 percent. 46. Selected interest rates NOTE: The 2-year and 10-year Treasury rates are the constant-maturity yields based on the most actively traded securities. SOURCE: Department of the Treasury; Federal Reserve Board. Monetary policy is carried out by the Federal Reserve in pursuit of maximum employment and price stability—the dual-mandate goals assigned to it by Congress . Congress has also given the Federal Reserve operational independence . Under this arrangement, the Federal Reserve, rather than other parts of the government, makes determinations about the monetary policy actions that are most appropriate for achieving the dual-mandate goals . This arrangement allows monetary policy decisions to be insulated from short- term political infl uences . monetary policy has become an international norm, and economic research indicates that economic performance has tended to be better when central banks have such independence .2 Because the Federal Reserve is accountable to Congress and has been granted independence in (continued) There is broad support for the principles underlying independent monetary policy . It is widely understood that the monetary policy actions that deliver maximum employment and price stability in the longer run may involve restraining measures that entail short-run economic costs, while actions that raise output and employment to unsustainable levels have no long-run real benefi ts and may lead to elevated infl ation rates . These considerations highlight the value of monetary policy being carried out by an independent agency whose decisions are based on the congressionally assigned dual mandate .1 Operational independence of 1 . The same basic case for independence has been sketched by successive Federal Reserve Chairs . For example, Paul volcker noted in congressional testimony in February 1982 that “Congress deliberately set us up with an insulation from that kind of political pressure, and that that is a trust that you have given us and that we mean to discharge,” and he elaborated in July 1987: “[Not] responding to all the short- term political considerations that exist to produce easier money than the basic situation warrants and the long-term health of the currency and the economy warrants . . . [is] the basic justifi cation for the independence of the Federal Reserve .” Alan Greenspan testifi ed in October 1993 that there was “an awareness that independence of the central bank is an element in keeping infl ation down .” Ben Bernanke remarked in May 2010: “It is important that we maintain and protect . . . the ability of central banks to make monetary policy decisions based on what is good for the economy in the longer run, independent of short-term political considerations .” Also in 2010, Janet yellen (who was at the time vice Chair of the Federal Reserve Board and who later served as Federal Reserve Chair) observed: “The principle of central bank independence in the conduct of monetary policy is widely accepted as vital to achieving maximum employment and price stability .” Chair Jerome Powell likewise stated in January 2023 that “the case for monetary policy independence lies in the benefi ts of insulating monetary policy decisions from short-term political considerations .” See Paul A . volcker (1982), “Panel Discussion,” in Federal Reserve’s First Monetary Policy Report for 1982, hearings before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U .S . Senate, February 11 and 25, Senate Hearing 97-48, 97th Cong . (Washington: U .S . Government Printing Offi ce), quoted text on p . 28, https://fraser .stlouisfed .org/title/monetary- policy-oversight-671/federal-reserve-s-fi rst-monetary-policy- report-1982-22312; Paul A . volcker (1987), remarks in Federal Reserve’s Second Monetary Policy Report for 1987, hearing before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U .S . Senate, July 23, 100th Cong . (Washington: U .S . Government Printing Offi ce), quoted text on p . 45, https:// fraser .stlouisfed .org/title/monetary-policy-oversight-671/ federal-reserve-s-second-monetary-policy-report-1987-22373; Alan Greenspan (1994), remarks in The Federal Reserve Accountability Act of 1993, hearing before the Committee on Banking, Finance, and Urban Affairs, U .S . House of Representatives, October 13, 1993, 103rd Cong . (Washington: U .S . Government Printing Offi ce), quoted text on p . 40, https://fraser .stlouisfed .org/title/federal-reserve-accountability- act-1993-1154; Ben S . Bernanke (2010), “Central Bank Independence, Transparency, and Accountability,” speech delivered at the Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies International Conference, Bank of Japan, Tokyo, May 25, quoted text in paragraph 2, https://www .federalreserve .gov/ newsevents/speech/bernanke20100525a .htm; Janet L . yellen (2010), “Macroprudential Supervision and Monetary Policy in the Post-crisis World,” speech delivered at the Annual Meeting of the National Association for Business Economics, Denver, Colo ., October 11, quoted text in paragraph 44, https://www . federalreserve .gov/newsevents/speech/yellen20101011a . htm; and Jerome H . Powell (2023), “Panel on ‘Central Bank Independence and the Mandate—Evolving views,’ ” speech delivered at the Symposium on Central Bank Independence, Sveriges Riksbank, Stockholm, Sweden, January 10, quoted text in paragraph 2, https://www .federalreserve . gov/newsevents/speech/powell20230110a .htm . A detailed discussion of the issues involved is provided by Paul Tucker (2018), Unelected Power: The Quest for Legitimacy in Central Banking and the Regulatory State (Princeton, N .J .: Princeton University Press) . (2008), “Central Bank Independence and Transparency: Evolution and Effectiveness,” European Journal of Political Economy, vol . 24 (December), pp . 763–77 . the setting of monetary policy, it is vitally important that the Federal Reserve be transparent to Congress and the American people about its monetary policy actions . Transparency requires that the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) explain the reasons for its monetary policy decisions, including how these decisions relate to its statutory goals . This feature of transparency underlies the FOMC’s assessment that “transparency and accountability . . . are essential in a democratic society .”3 Specifi cally, monetary policy transparency consists of the process in which the Federal Reserve provides to the American people and their elected representatives information about the objectives and strategy of monetary policy, announces its decisions regarding the setting of its policy instruments, explains the reasoning behind those decisions, and provides detailed records of monetary policy committee meetings . The Federal Reserve promotes monetary policy transparency in multiple ways, including through testimony given by Federal Reserve policymakers at congressional hearings, speeches by the Chair and other FOMC meeting participants on economic and policy developments, the FOMC’s postmeeting statements, the published minutes and transcripts of each FOMC meeting, the quarterly Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), the Chair’s press conferences, and dialogues between FOMC participants and community representatives across the country . A strong emphasis on transparency has characterized the past 30 years of U .S . monetary policy . Previously, Federal Reserve offi cials from the 1950s to 3 . See the FOMC’s Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy (quoted text in paragraph 1), available on the Board’s website at https://www .federalreserve . gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomc_longerrungoals .pdf . More specifi cally, paragraph 1 of this statement indicates that “the Committee seeks to explain its monetary policy decisions to the public as clearly as possible” and that “such clarity facilitates . . . transparency and accountability, which are essential in a democratic society .” In the same spirit, a major contribution to the research literature on the practice of monetary policy—the 1999 book Infl ation Targeting—earlier observed: “Transparency and communication together enhance accountability .” See Ben S . Bernanke, Thomas Laubach, Frederic S . Mishkin, and Adam S . Posen (1999), Infl ation Targeting: Lessons from the International Experience (Princeton N .J .: Princeton University Press), quoted text on p . 296 . the 1980s regularly gave congressional testimony and speeches on monetary policy . Nevertheless, important aspects of transparency were missing . The FOMC in these decades did not provide, in a systematic and timely manner, information on its monetary policy decisions .4 In particular, it did not follow a regular practice of issuing, after policy meetings, an announcement of Committee policy actions and the rationale for those actions . The situation changed starting in the mid-1990s . Refl ecting on this change, in 2023 Chair Powell noted: “Over the past several decades we have steadily broadened our efforts to provide meaningful transparency about the basis for, and consequences of, the decisions we make .”5 The shift to greater transparency has refl ected not only the fact that transparency supports the Federal Reserve’s accountability, but also widespread acceptance that transparency can contribute to the effectiveness of monetary policy . Explanations to the general public of the FOMC’s decisions, strategy, and plans tend to enhance the effects of monetary policy actions on fi nancial conditions, economic activity, and infl ation . For example, a numerical infl ation objective can be helpful in anchoring longer-run infl ation expectations, while forward guidance (which is at times provided in FOMC statements) about the federal funds rate can infl uence key longer-term interest rates by shaping the private sector’s assessment of the likely future course of the funds rate . Consequently, the FOMC has observed that clarity about monetary (continued on next page) 4 . See David E . Lindsey (2003), “A Modern History of FOMC Communication: 1975–2002,” memorandum to the Federal Open Market Committee, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Division of Monetary Affairs, June 24, https://www .federalreserve .gov/monetarypolicy/files/ FOMC20030624memo01 .pdf; and Ben S . Bernanke (2013), “A Century of US Central Banking: Goals, Frameworks, Accountability,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol . 27 (Fall), pp . 3–16 . in box note 1 (quoted text in paragraph 4) . See also Alan S . Blinder (2002), “Through the Looking Glass: Central Bank Transparency,” CEPS Working Paper 86 (Princeton, N .J .: Princeton University Department of Economics, December), https://gceps .princeton .edu/wp-content/ uploads/2017/01/86blinder .pdf . policy decisions “increases the effectiveness of monetary policy .”6 of, monetary policy transparency is refl ected in the large volume of material that the FOMC and the individual Committee participants provide about their decisions and thinking .7 A major step in the direction of greater transparency took place in 1994, when announcements of policy changes began to be issued after FOMC meetings . By the end of the decade, these releases had evolved into the now standard and key part of the Committee’s policy communications—a statement released by the Committee after each meeting that announces the decision on the federal funds rate target range and any other policy actions, puts that decision in the context of the Committee’s assessment of incoming data and the economic outlook, and gives the record of the vote on the action .8 Further information about Committee decisions is provided via FOMC meeting minutes, released three weeks after each FOMC meeting (a shorter lag than that prevailing until the mid-2000s) . After fi ve years, transcripts of the FOMC meetings are made public . 6 . See the FOMC’s Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, in box note 3 (quoted text in paragraph 1) . 7 . For further details, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2019), “Review of Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communications,” webpage, https://www . federalreserve .gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy- strategy-tools-and-communications-fed-listens-timelines .htm; and Jerome H . Powell (2024), “Opening Remarks,” speech delivered at the Stanford Business, Government, and Society Forum, Stanford Graduate School of Business, Stanford, Calif ., April 3, https://www .federalreserve .gov/newsevents/speech/ powell20240403a .htm . 8 . In the past 15 years, information about the Committee’s balance sheet policy has been an important part of the postmeeting statement and related FOMC statements . A detailed account of key communications on balance sheet policy that the Committee has issued in recent years is provided in Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2024), “FOMC Communications Related to Policy Normalization,” webpage, https://www .federalreserve .gov/ monetarypolicy/policy-normalization .htm . A longer-term chronology, covering developments over the past decade, is available at Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2024), “History of the FOMC’s Policy Normalization Discussions and Communications,” webpage, https://www . federalreserve .gov/monetarypolicy/policy-normalization- discussions-communications-history .htm . At the end of 2007, the FOMC began publishing, on a quarterly basis, the SEP, which distills information about individual meeting participants’ economic projections . Since then, numerous features have been added to the SEP, including longer-run projections in 2009 and federal funds rate projections in 2012 . In 2011, Chair Bernanke started holding regular postmeeting press conferences . In 2019, Chair Powell initiated the practice of holding press conferences after every FOMC meeting . With regard to its strategy, in January 2012 the FOMC issued a Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, or “consensus statement .” The consensus statement has been reaffi rmed in the years since 2012, and it has been revised several times . From its inception, the consensus statement made the price- stability component of the dual mandate numerically precise by indicating that Federal Reserve policymakers interpret it as corresponding to a 2 percent longer- run infl ation rate (in the personal consumption expenditures price index) . Also in the area of strategy, in 2018 the Federal Reserve launched the practice of having a review of monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices roughly every fi ve years . The fi rst such framework review took place from 2019 to 2020 . An innovation of this review was the holding, around the country, of Fed Listens events, consisting of a dialogue between Federal Reserve policymakers and community members on monetary policy and economic issues . The Federal Reserve has continued to hold Fed Listens events between the periods of framework review . The framework review process also included internal FOMC deliberations . These deliberations took place at Committee meetings and were detailed in the publicly released FOMC meeting minutes . The Federal Reserve staff memos that served as an input into these deliberations were released publicly after the completion of the 2019–20 review . The next framework review is scheduled to begin later this year . Along with the transparency-enhancing activities, documents, and statements described earlier, further information on monetary policy decisions is provided in the frequent speeches, interviews, and testimony given by FOMC meeting participants . . . . and has continued the process of significantly reducing its holdings of Treasury and agency securities The FOMC began reducing its securities holdings in June 2022 and, since then, has continued to implement its plan for significantly reducing the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet in a predictable manner.9 For some time, principal payments from securities held in the System Open Market Account (SOMA) had been reinvested only to the extent that they exceeded monthly caps of $60 billion per month for Treasury securities and $35 billion per month for agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS). On June 1, the Committee slowed the pace of decline of its securities holdings, consistent with its Plans for Reducing the Size of the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet. Specifically, the Committee reduced the redemption cap on Treasury securities to $25 billion per month and maintained the redemption cap on agency debt and agency MBS at $35 billion per month. Any proceeds 9. See the May 4, 2022, press release regarding the Plans for Reducing the Size of the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet, available on the Board’s website at https:// www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/ monetary20220504b.htm. in excess of the agency debt and agency MBS cap would be reinvested into Treasury securities, consistent with the Committee’s intention to hold primarily Treasury securities in the longer run. The decision to slow the pace of balance sheet runoff does not have implications for the stance of monetary policy and does not mean that the balance sheet will ultimately shrink by less than it would otherwise. Rather, a slower pace of balance sheet runoff helps facilitate a smooth transition from abundant to ample reserve balances and gives the Committee more time to assess market conditions as the balance sheet continues to shrink. It will also allow banks, and short-term funding markets more generally, additional time to adjust to the lower level of reserves, thus reducing the probability that money markets experience undue stress that could require an early end to runoff. The SOMA holdings of Treasury and agency securities have declined about $1.7 trillion since the start of the balance sheet reduction and about $260 billion since February 2024 to around $6.8 trillion, a level equivalent to 24 percent of U.S. nominal gross domestic product, down from its peak of 35 percent reached at the end of 2021 (figure 47). Also, since February 2024, reserve balances— 47. Federal Reserve assets and liabilities Other assets Credit and liquidity facilities Agency debt and mortgage-backed securities holdings Treasury securities held outright NOTE: “Other assets” includes repurchase agreements, FIMA (Foreign and International Monetary Authorities) repurchase agreements, and unamortized premiums and discounts on securities held outright. “Credit and liquidity facilities” consists of primary, secondary, and seasonal credit; term auction credit; central bank liquidity swaps; support for Maiden Lane, Bear Stearns Companies, Inc., and AIG; and other credit and liquidity facilities, including the Primary Dealer Credit Facility, the Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility, the Commercial Paper Funding Facility, the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility, the Primary and Secondary Market Corporate Credit Facilities, the Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility, the Municipal Liquidity Facility, and the Main Street Lending Program. “Agency debt and mortgage-backed securities holdings” includes agency residential mortgage-backed securities and agency commercial mortgage-backed securities. “Capital and other liabilities” includes the U.S. Treasury General Account and the U.S. Treasury Supplementary Financing Account. The key identifies shaded areas in order from top to bottom. The data extend through June 19, 2024. the largest liability item on the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet—have declined about $180 billion to a level of around $3.4 trillion. The smaller decline of reserve balances compared with the decline in SOMA holdings reflects decreases in nonreserve liabilities such as balances at the overnight reverse repurchase agreement facility. (See the box “Developments in the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet and Money Markets.”) The FOMC has stated that it intends to maintain securities holdings at amounts consistent with implementing monetary policy efficiently and effectively in its ample- reserves regime—that is, a regime in which an ample supply of reserves ensures that control over the level of the federal funds rate and other short-term interest rates is exercised primarily through the setting of the Federal Reserve’s administered rates and in which active management of the supply of reserves is not required. To ensure a smooth transition to ample reserve balances, the FOMC slowed the pace of decline of its securities holdings in June 2024 and intends to stop reductions in its securities holdings when reserve balances are somewhat above the level that the FOMC judges to be consistent with ample reserves. Once balance sheet runoff has ceased, reserve balances will likely continue to decline at a slower pace—reflecting growth in other Federal Reserve liabilities—until the FOMC judges that reserve balances are at an ample level. Thereafter, the FOMC will manage securities holdings as needed to maintain ample reserves over time. The FOMC will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook and the balance of risks As already indicated, the FOMC is strongly committed to returning inflation to its 2 percent objective, and, in considering any adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will carefully assess incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks. Its assessments will take into account a wide range of information, including readings on labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments. The Committee has noted that it is also prepared to adjust its approach to reducing the size of the balance sheet in light of economic and financial developments. In addition to considering a wide range of economic and financial data, the FOMC gathers information from business contacts and other informed parties around the country, as summarized in the Beige Book. The Federal Reserve has regular arrangements under which it hears from a broad range of participants in the U.S. economy about how monetary policy affects people’s daily lives and livelihoods. In particular, the Federal Reserve has continued to gather insights into these matters through the Fed Listens initiative and the Federal Reserve System’s community development outreach. Policymakers also routinely consult prescriptions for the policy interest rate provided by various monetary policy rules. These rule prescriptions can provide useful benchmarks for the conduct of monetary policy. However, simple rules cannot capture all of the complex considerations that go into the formation of appropriate monetary policy, and many practical considerations make it undesirable for the FOMC to adhere strictly to the prescriptions of any specific rule. Nevertheless, some principles of good monetary policy are embedded in these simple rules. (See the box “Monetary Policy Rules in the Current Environment.”) The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) continued to reduce the size of the Federal Reserve’s System Open Market Account (SOMA) portfolio . Since the previous report, total Federal Reserve assets have decreased $315 billion, leaving the total size of the balance sheet at $7 .3 trillion, $1 .7 trillion smaller since the reduction in the size of the SOMA portfolio began in June 2022 (fi gures A and B) .1 On May 1, the FOMC announced that beginning in June, the Committee would slow the pace of decline of its securities holdings, consistent with its Plans for Reducing the Size of the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet .2 (continued on next page) dated February 29, 2024 . As a result, this discussion refers to changes in the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet since late February . 2 . See the May 4, 2022, press release regarding the Plans for Reducing the Size of the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet, available on the Board’s website at https://www .federalreserve . gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20220504b .htm . Memo: Change (since Fed’s balance sheet reduction began on June 1, 2022) Unamortized premiums Reserves held by depository institutions Foreign offi cial and international accounts Note: MBS is mortgage-backed securities. PPPLF is Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility. BTFP is Bank Term Funding Program. Components may not sum to Other assets Loans Central bank liquidity swaps Repurchase agreements Agency debt and MBS Treasury securities held outright reserve-draining effect of balance sheet runoff was more than offset by a $1 .6 trillion decline in balances at the overnight reverse repurchase agreement (ON RRP) facility . Since February 2024, usage of the ON RRP facility has continued to decline, albeit at a slower pace than that seen over the second half of 2023 . Usage of the facility has averaged around $450 billion since the end of February (fi gure C) . Reduced usage of the ON RRP facility largely refl ects money market mutual funds shifting their portfolios toward higher-yielding investments, including Treasury bills and private-market repurchase agreements . Conditions in overnight money markets remained NOTE: MBS is mortgage-backed securities. The key identifies shaded areas in order from top to bottom. The data extend through June 19, 2024. stable . The ON RRP facility continued to serve its intended purpose of supporting the control of the effective federal funds rate (EFFR), and the Federal Reserve’s administered rates—the interest rate on reserve balances and the ON RRP offering rate— remained highly effective at maintaining the EFFR within the target range . Reserves, the largest liability item on the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet, have declined $175 billion since late February 2024 to a level of about $3 .4 trillion .3 Since the beginning of balance sheet runoff, reserves have been little changed because the The Federal Reserve’s expenses have continued to exceed its income over recent months . The Federal Reserve’s deferred asset has increased $23 billion since late February to a level of around $175 billion .4 Negative net income and the associated deferred asset (continued) 3 . Reserve balances consist of deposits held at the 4 . The deferred asset is equal to the cumulative shortfall of Federal Reserve Banks by depository institutions (DIs), such as commercial banks, savings banks, credit unions, thrift institutions, and U .S . branches and agencies of foreign banks . net income and represents the amount of future net income that will need to be realized before remittances to the Treasury resume . Although remittances are suspended at the time of this NOTE: “Capital and other liabilities” includes the liability for earnings remittances due to the U.S. Treasury and contributions from the U.S. Treasury. The current sum is negative on June 19, 2024, because of the deferred asset that the Federal Reserve reports. The key identifies shaded areas in order from top to bottom. The data extend through June 19, 2024. do not affect the Federal Reserve’s conduct of monetary policy or its ability to meet its fi nancial obligations .5 report, over the past decade and a half, the Federal Reserve has remitted over $1 trillion to the Treasury . 5 . Net income is expected to turn positive again as interest expenses fall, and remittances will resume once the temporary deferred asset falls to zero . As a result of the ongoing reduction in the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet, interest portfolio has continued as planned, amid the banking- sector developments of spring 2023, the Federal Reserve provided liquidity to help ensure the stability of the banking system and the ongoing provision of money and credit to the economy . Loans extended under the Bank Term Funding Program (BTFP)—which made longer-term funding and liquidity available to eligible depository institutions to support American households and businesses and ceased making new loans as scheduled on March 11, 2024—have decreased $56 billion to a level of $107 billion since February 2024 .6 expenses will fall over time in line with the decline in the Federal Reserve’s liabilities . 6 . The BTFP was established under section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act with the approval of the Secretary of the Treasury . The BTFP offered loans of up to one year to banks, savings associations, credit unions, and other eligible DIs against collateral such as U .S . Treasury securities, U .S . agency securities, and U .S . agency mortgage-backed securities . For more details, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2024), “Bank Term Funding Program,” webpage, June 11, https://www .federalreserve .gov/fi nancial-stability/ bank-term-funding-program .htm . As part of their monetary policy deliberations, policymakers regularly consult the prescriptions of a variety of simple interest rate rules without mechanically following the prescriptions of any particular rule . Simple interest rate rules relate a policy interest rate, such as the federal funds rate, to a small number of other economic variables—typically including the current deviation of infl ation from its target value and a measure of resource slack in the economy . Since 2021, infl ation has run above the Federal Open Market Committee’s (FOMC) 2 percent longer- run objective, and labor market conditions have been tight . Although infl ation remains elevated, it has eased over the past year, and labor supply and demand have come into better balance . Against this backdrop, the simple monetary policy rules considered in this discussion have called for levels of the policy interest rate over 2021, 2022, and the fi rst half of 2023 that were elevated relative to the FOMC’s target range for the federal funds rate . However, the rates prescribed by these rules for the fi rst quarter of 2024, the most recent quarter for which data are available, are close to or below the current target range for the federal funds rate at 5¼ to 5½ percent . In support of its goals of maximum employment and infl ation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run, the FOMC has maintained the target range for the federal funds rate at 5¼ to 5½ percent since last July while continuing to reduce its holdings of Treasury securities and agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities . outcomes can be achieved over time if monetary policy responds to changes in economic conditions in a manner that is predictable and adheres to some key design principles . In recognition of this idea, economists have analyzed many monetary policy rules, including the well-known Taylor (1993) rule, the “balanced approach” rule, the “adjusted Taylor (1993)” rule, and the “fi rst difference” rule .1 Figure A shows these rules, along with a “balanced approach (continued) 1 . The Taylor (1993) rule was introduced in John B . Taylor (1993), “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol . 39 (December), pp . 195–214 . The balanced-approach rule was analyzed in John B . Taylor (1999), “A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules,” in John B . Taylor, ed ., Monetary Policy Rules (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), pp . 319–41 . The adjusted Taylor (1993) rule was studied in David Reifschneider and John C . Williams (2000), “Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low-Infl ation Era,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol . 32 (November), pp . 936–66 . The fi rst-difference rule is based on a rule suggested by Athanasios Orphanides (2003), “Historical Monetary Policy Analysis and the Taylor Rule,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol . 50 (July), LR + πt + 0.5(πt − πLR) + (ut LR + πt + 0.5(πt − πLR) + 2(ut LR + πt + 0.5(πt − πLR) + 2min{(ut T93adj = max{Rt Note: Rt balanced-approach, balanced-approach (shortfalls), adjusted Taylor (1993), and first-difference rules, respectively. LR is the Rt−1 denotes the midpoint of the target range for the federal funds rate for quarter t−1, ut is the unemployment rate in quarter t, and rt level of the neutral real federal funds rate in the longer run that is expected to be consistent with sustaining maximum employment and keeping inflation at the Federal Open Market Committee’s 2 percent longer-run objective, represented by πLR. πt denotes the realized 4-quarter price LR is the rate of unemployment expected in the longer run. Zt is the cumulative sum of past deviations of inflation for quarter t. In addition, ut the federal funds rate from the prescriptions of the Taylor (1993) rule when that rule prescribes setting the federal funds rate below an effective lower bound (ELB) of 12.5 basis points. The Taylor (1993) rule and other policy rules generally respond to the deviation of real output from its full capacity level. In these equations, the output gap has been replaced with the gap between the rate of unemployment in the longer run and its actual level (using a relationship known as Okun’s law) to represent the rules in terms of the unemployment rate. The rules are implemented as responding to core personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation rather than to headline PCE inflation because current and near-term core inflation rates tend to outperform headline inflation rates as predictors of the medium-term behavior of headline inflation. Box note 1 provides references for the policy rules. FD represent the values of the nominal federal funds rate prescribed by the Taylor (1993), (shortfalls)” rule, which responds to the unemployment rate only when it is higher than its estimated longer- run level .2 All of the simple rules shown embody key design principles of good monetary policy, including the requirement that the policy rate should be adjusted by enough over time to ensure a return of infl ation to the central bank’s longer-run objective and to anchor longer-term infl ation expectations at levels consistent with that objective . All fi ve rules feature the difference between infl ation and the FOMC’s longer-run objective of 2 percent . The fi ve rules use the unemployment rate gap, measured as the difference between an estimate of the rate of LR) and the current unemployment in the longer run (ut unemployment rate; the fi rst-difference rule includes the change in the unemployment rate gap rather than its level .3 All but the fi rst-difference rule include an estimate of the neutral real interest rate in the longer run (rt pp . 983–1022 . A review of policy rules is provided in John B . Taylor and John C . Williams (2011), “Simple and Robust Rules for Monetary Policy,” in Benjamin M . Friedman and Michael Woodford, eds ., Handbook of Monetary Economics, vol . 3B (Amsterdam: North-Holland), pp . 829–59 . The same volume of the Handbook of Monetary Economics also discusses approaches to deriving policy rate prescriptions other than through the use of simple rules . asymmetrically to unemployment rates above or below their estimated longer-run value: When unemployment is above that value, the policy rates are identical to those prescribed by the balanced-approach rule, whereas when unemployment is below that value, policy rates do not rise because of further declines in the unemployment rate . As a result, the prescription of the balanced-approach (shortfalls) rule has been less restrictive than that of the balanced-approach rule since the fi rst quarter of 2022 . 3 . Implementations of simple rules often use the output gap as a measure of resource slack in the economy . The rules described in fi gure A instead use the unemployment rate gap because that gap better captures the FOMC’s statutory goal to promote maximum employment . Movements in these alternative measures of resource utilization tend to be highly correlated . For more information, see the note associated with fi gure A . LR) is the level of the real federal funds rate that is expected to be consistent, in the longer run, with maximum employment LR, rt LR is determined largely by and stable infl ation . Like ut nonmonetary factors . The fi rst-difference rule shown in fi gure A does not require an estimate of rt touted by proponents of such rules as providing an element of robustness . However, this rule has its own shortcomings . For example, research suggests that this sort of rule often results in greater volatility in employment and infl ation than what would be obtained under the Taylor (1993) and balanced- approach rules . LR, a feature that is Unlike the other simple rules featured here, the adjusted Taylor (1993) rule recognizes that the federal funds rate cannot be reduced materially below the effective lower bound (ELB) . By contrast, the standard Taylor (1993) rule prescribed policy rates that, during the pandemic-induced recession, were far below zero . To make up for the cumulative shortfall in policy accommodation following a recession during which the federal funds rate is constrained by its ELB, the adjusted Taylor (1993) rule prescribes delaying the return of the policy rate to the (positive) levels prescribed by the standard Taylor (1993) rule . policy rules have important limitations . One of these limitations is that the simple policy rules mechanically respond to only a small set of economic variables and thus necessarily abstract from many of the factors that the FOMC considers when it assesses the appropriate setting of the policy rate . In addition, the structure of the economy and current economic conditions differ in important respects from those prevailing when the simple policy rules were originally devised and proposed . As a result, most simple policy rules do not take into account the ELB on interest rates, which limits the extent to which the policy rate can be lowered to support the economy . This constraint was particularly evident during the pandemic-driven recession, when the lower bound on the policy rate motivated the FOMC’s other policy actions to support the economy . Relatedly, another limitation is that simple policy rules do not explicitly take into account other important tools of monetary policy, such as balance sheet policies . Finally, simple policy rules are not forward looking and do not allow for important risk-management considerations, associated with uncertainty about economic relationships and the evolution of the economy, that factor into FOMC decisions . Figure B shows historical prescriptions for the federal funds rate under the fi ve simple rules considered . For each quarterly period, the fi gure reports the policy rates prescribed by the rules, taking as given the prevailing economic conditions and survey-based estimates of ut and rt a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy in response to the pandemic-driven recession, followed by (continued on next page) LR at the time . All of the rules considered called for Federal funds rate Taylor (1993) rule Adjusted Taylor (1993) rule Balanced-approach rule Balanced-approach (shortfalls) rule First-difference rule NOTE: The rules use historical values of core personal consumption expenditures inflation, the unemployment rate, and, where applicable, historical values of the midpoint of the target range for the federal funds rate. Quarterly projections of longer-run values for the federal funds rate, the unemployment rate, and inflation used in the computation of the rules’ prescriptions are interpolations to quarterly values of projections from the Survey of Primary Dealers. The rules’ prescriptions are quarterly, and the federal funds rate data are the monthly average of the daily midpoint of the target range for the federal funds rate and extend through June 2024. positive values as infl ation picked up and labor market conditions strengthened .5 In 2022 and during the fi rst half of 2023, the prescriptions of the simple rules for 5 . For the adjusted Taylor (1993) rule, zt—the cumulative sum of past deviations of the federal funds rate from the prescriptions of the Taylor (1993) rule when that rule prescribes setting the federal funds rate below an ELB of 12 .5 basis points—is positive in the third quarter of 2020, one quarter after the prescription of the Taylor (1993) rule falls below the ELB, through to the fi rst quarter of 2022 . This approach is a slight adjustment from previous editions of this the federal funds rate were well above the prescriptions observed before the pandemic, refl ecting, in large part, elevated infl ation readings . Because infl ation has recently run notably below levels observed at its peak in 2022, the policy rates prescribed by these rules have now declined . The current prescriptions from these rules are close to or below the current target range for the federal funds rate, though higher than survey- based estimates of the longer-run value of the federal funds rate . discussion in the Monetary Policy Report, where zt cumulated from the fourth quarter of 2020 . The following material was released after the conclusion of the June 11–12, 2024, meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee. In conjunction with the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting held on June 11–12, 2024, meeting participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real gross domestic product (GDP) growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for each year from 2024 to 2026 and over the longer run. Each participant’s projections were based on information available at the time of the meeting, together with her or his assessment of appropriate monetary policy—including a path for the federal funds rate and its longer-run value— and assumptions about other factors likely to affect economic outcomes. The longer- run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the value to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. “Appropriate monetary policy” is defined as the future path of policy that each participant deems most likely to foster outcomes for economic activity and inflation that best satisfy his or her individual interpretation of the statutory mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability. Table 1. Economic projections of Federal Reserve Board members and Federal Reserve Bank presidents, under their individual assumptions of projected appropriate monetary policy, June 2024 Percent Longer run Longer run Longer run Memo: Projected appropriate policy path Note: Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP) and projections for both measures of inflation are percent changes from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. PCE inflation and core PCE inflation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) and the price index for PCE excluding food and energy. Projections for the unemployment rate are for the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. Each participant’s projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy. Longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. The projections for the federal funds rate are the value of the midpoint of the projected appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the projected appropriate target level for the federal funds rate at the end of the specified calendar year or over the longer run. The March projections were made in conjunction with the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on March 19–20, 2024. One participant did not submit longer-run projections for the change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, or the federal funds rate in conjunction with the March 19–20, 2024, meeting. 1. For each period, the median is the middle projection when the projections are arranged from lowest to highest. When the number of projections is even, the median is the average 2. The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each year. 3. The range for a variable in a given year includes all participants’ projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year. 4. Longer-run projections for core PCE inflation are not collected. Figure 1. Medians, central tendencies, and ranges of economic projections, 2024–26 and over the longer run Longer run Longer run Longer run Longer run Longer run Note: Each shaded circle indicates the value (rounded to the nearest 1/8 percentage point) of an individual participant’s judgment of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the appropriate target level for the federal funds rate at the end of the specified calendar year or over the longer run. Figure 3.A. Distribution of participants’ projections for the change in real GDP, 2024–26 and over the longer run Longer run Note: Definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Figure 3.B. Distribution of participants’ projections for the unemployment rate, 2024–26 and over the longer run Longer run Note: Definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Figure 3.C. Distribution of participants’ projections for PCE inflation, 2024–26 and over the longer run Longer run Note: Definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Note: Definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Figure 3.E. Distribution of participants’ judgments of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the appropriate target level for the federal funds rate, 2024–26 and over the longer run Longer run Note: Definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the percent change in real gross domestic product (GDP) from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The confidence interval around the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the confidence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reflect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections; these current assessments are summarized in the lower panels. Generally speaking, participants who judge the uncertainty about their projections as “broadly similar” to the average levels of the past 20 years would view the width of the confidence interval shown in the historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise, participants who judge the risks to their projections as “broadly balanced” would view the confidence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For definitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The confidence interval around the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the confidence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reflect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections; these current assessments are summarized in the lower panels. Generally speaking, participants who judge the uncertainty about their projections as “broadly similar” to the average levels of the past 20 years would view the width of the confidence interval shown in the historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise, participants who judge the risks to their projections as “broadly balanced” would view the confidence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For definitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Risks to core PCE inflation Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the percent change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The confidence interval around the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the confidence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reflect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections; these current assessments are summarized in the lower panels. Generally speaking, participants who judge the uncertainty about their projections as “broadly similar” to the average levels of the past 20 years would view the width of the confidence interval shown in the historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise, participants who judge the risks to their projections as “broadly balanced” would view the confidence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For definitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” Note: For each SEP, participants provided responses to the question “Please indicate your judgment of the risk weighting around your projections.” Each point in the diffusion indexes represents the number of participants who responded “Weighted to the Upside” minus the number who responded “Weighted to the Downside,” divided by the total number of participants. Figure excludes March 2020 when no projections were submitted. Note: The blue and red lines are based on actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the Committee’s target for the federal funds rate at the end of the year indicated. The actual values are the midpoint of the target range; the median projected values are based on either the midpoint of the target range or the target level. The confidence interval around the median projected values is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years. The confidence interval is not strictly consistent with the projections for the federal funds rate, primarily because these projections are not forecasts of the likeliest outcomes for the federal funds rate, but rather projections of participants’ individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy. Still, historical forecast errors provide a broad sense of the uncertainty around the future path of the federal funds rate generated by the uncertainty about the macroeconomic variables as well as additional adjustments to monetary policy that may be appropriate to offset the effects of shocks to the economy. The confidence interval is assumed to be symmetric except when it is truncated at zero - the bottom of the lowest target range for the federal funds rate that has been adopted in the past by the Committee. This truncation would not be intended to indicate the likelihood of the use of negative interest rates to provide additional monetary policy accommodation if doing so was judged appropriate. In such situations, the Committee could also employ other tools, including forward guidance and large-scale asset purchases, to provide additional accommodation. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the confidence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reflect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections. * The confidence interval is derived from forecasts of the average level of short-term interest rates in the fourth quarter of the year indicated; more information about these data is available in table 2. The shaded area encompasses less than a 70 percent confidence interval if the confidence interval has been truncated at zero. Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges Percentage points Note: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root mean squared error of projections for 2004 through 2023 that were released in the summer by various private and government forecasters. As described in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain assumptions, there is about a 70 percent probability that actual outcomes for real GDP, unemployment, consumer prices, and the federal funds rate will be in ranges implied by the average size of projection errors made in the past. For more information, see David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip (2017), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook Using Historical Forecasting Errors: The Federal Reserve’s Approach,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-020 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February), https:// dx.doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2017.020. 1. Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure that has been most widely used in government and private economic forecasts. Projections are percent changes on a fourth quarter to fourth quarter basis. 3. For Federal Reserve staff forecasts, measure is the federal funds rate. For other forecasts, measure is the rate on 3-month Treasury bills. Projection errors are calculat- ed using average levels, in percent, in the fourth quarter. The economic projections provided by the members of the Board of Governors and the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks inform discussions of monetary policy among policymakers and can aid public understanding of the basis for policy actions . Considerable uncertainty attends these projections, however . The economic and statistical models and relationships used to help produce economic forecasts are necessarily imperfect descriptions of the real world, and the future path of the economy can be affected by myriad unforeseen developments and events . Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, participants consider not only what appears to be the most likely economic outcome as embodied in their projections, but also the range of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of their occurring, and the potential costs to the economy should they occur . Table 2 summarizes the average historical accuracy of a range of forecasts, including those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports and those prepared by the Federal Reserve Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) . The projection error ranges shown in the table illustrate the considerable uncertainty associated with economic forecasts . For example, suppose a participant projects that real gross domestic product (GDP) and total consumer prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, 3 percent and 2 percent . If the uncertainty attending those projections is similar to that experienced in the past and the risks around the projections are broadly balanced, the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a probability of about 70 percent that actual GDP would expand within a range of 1 .3 to 4 .7 percent in the current year, 1 .1 to 4 .9 percent in the second year, and 0 .8 to 5 .2 percent in the third year . The corresponding 70 percent confi dence intervals for overall infl ation would be 1 .0 to 3 .0 percent in the current year, 0 .3 to 3 .7 percent in the second year, and 0 .6 to 3 .4 percent in the third year . Figures 4 .A through 4 .C illustrate these confi dence bounds in “fan charts” that are symmetric and centered on the medians of FOMC participants’ projections for GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and infl ation . However, in some instances, the risks around the projections may not be symmetric . In particular, the unemployment rate cannot be negative; furthermore, the risks around a particular projection might be tilted to either the upside or the downside, in which case the corresponding fan chart would be asymmetrically positioned around the median projection . Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over history, participants provide judgments as to whether the uncertainty attached to their projections of each economic variable is greater than, smaller than, or broadly similar to typical levels of forecast uncertainty seen in the past 20 years, as presented in table 2 and refl ected in the widths of the confi dence intervals shown in the top panels of fi gures 4 .A through 4 .C . Participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty surrounding their projections are summarized in the bottom-left panels (continued) of those fi gures . Participants also provide judgments as to whether the risks to their projections are weighted to the upside, are weighted to the downside, or are broadly balanced . That is, while the symmetric historical fan charts shown in the top panels of fi gures 4 .A through 4 .C imply that the risks to participants’ projections are balanced, participants may judge that there is a greater risk that a given variable will be above rather than below their projections . These judgments are summarized in the lower-right panels of fi gures 4 .A through 4 .C . As with real activity and infl ation, the outlook for the future path of the federal funds rate is subject to considerable uncertainty . This uncertainty arises primarily because each participant’s assessment of the appropriate stance of monetary policy depends importantly on the evolution of real activity and infl ation over time . If economic conditions evolve in an unexpected manner, then assessments of the appropriate setting of the federal funds rate would change from that point forward . The fi nal line in table 2 shows the error ranges for forecasts of short- term interest rates . They suggest that the historical confi dence intervals associated with projections of the federal funds rate are quite wide . It should be noted, however, that these confi dence intervals are not strictly consistent with the projections for the federal funds rate, as these projections are not forecasts of the most likely quarterly outcomes but rather are projections of participants’ individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy and are on an end-of-year basis . However, the forecast errors should provide a sense of the uncertainty around the future path of the federal funds rate generated by the uncertainty about the macroeconomic variables as well as additional adjustments to monetary policy that would be appropriate to offset the effects of shocks to the economy . around the federal funds rate were to extend below zero, it would be truncated at zero for purposes of the fan chart shown in fi gure 5; zero is the bottom of the lowest target range for the federal funds rate that has been adopted by the Committee in the past . This approach to the construction of the federal funds rate fan chart would be merely a convention; it would not have any implications for possible future policy decisions regarding the use of negative interest rates to provide additional monetary policy accommodation if doing so were appropriate . In such situations, the Committee could also employ other tools, including forward guidance and asset purchases, to provide additional accommodation . While fi gures 4 .A through 4 .C provide information on the uncertainty around the economic projections, fi gure 1 provides information on the range of views across FOMC participants . A comparison of fi gure 1 with fi gures 4 .A through 4 .C shows that the dispersion of the projections across participants is much smaller than the average forecast errors over the past 20 years . emerging market economy owners’ equivalent rent implied volatility for the S&P 500 index The Board of Governors is pleased to submit its Monetary Policy Report pursuant to section 2B of the Federal Reserve Act. Statement on Longer-run goaLS and monetary PoLicy Strategy Adopted effective January 24, 2012; as amended effective January 29, 2019 The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) is firmly committed to fulfilling its statutory mandate from the Congress of promoting maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates. The Committee seeks to explain its monetary policy decisions to the public as clearly as possible. Such clarity facilitates well-informed decisionmaking by households and businesses, reduces economic and financial uncertainty, increases the effectiveness of monetary policy, and enhances transparency and accountability, which are essential in a democratic society. Inflation, employment, and long-term interest rates fluctuate over time in response to economic and financial disturbances. Moreover, monetary policy actions tend to influence economic activity and prices with a lag. Therefore, the Committee’s policy decisions reflect its longer-run goals, its medium- term outlook, and its assessments of the balance of risks, including risks to the financial system that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. The inflation rate over the longer run is primarily determined by monetary policy, and hence the Committee has the ability to specify a longer-run goal for inflation. The Committee reaffirms its judgment that inflation at the rate of 2 percent, as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, is most consistent over the longer run with the Federal Reserve’s statutory mandate. The Committee would be concerned if inflation were running persistently above or below this objective. Communicating this symmetric inflation goal clearly to the public helps keep longer-term inflation expectations firmly anchored, thereby fostering price stability and moderate long-term interest rates and enhancing the Committee’s ability to promote maximum employment in the face of significant economic disturbances. The maximum level of employment is largely determined by nonmonetary factors that affect the structure and dynamics of the labor market. These factors may change over time and may not be directly measurable. Consequently, it would not be appropriate to specify a fixed goal for employment; rather, the Committee’s policy decisions must be informed by assessments of the maximum level of employment, recognizing that such assessments are necessarily uncertain and subject to revision. The Committee considers a wide range of indicators in making these assessments. Information about Committee participants’ estimates of the longer-run normal rates of output growth and unemployment is published four times per year in the FOMC’s Summary of Economic Projections. For example, in the most recent projections, the median of FOMC participants’ estimates of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment was 4.4 percent. In setting monetary policy, the Committee seeks to mitigate deviations of inflation from its longer-run goal and deviations of employment from the Committee’s assessments of its maximum level. These objectives are generally complementary. However, under circumstances in which the Committee judges that the objectives are not complementary, it follows a balanced approach in promoting them, taking into account the magnitude of the deviations and the potentially different time horizons over which employment and inflation are projected to return to levels judged consistent with its mandate. The Committee intends to reaffirm these principles and to make adjustments as appropriate at its annual organizational meeting each January. Note: The Committee did not reaffirm this statement in January 2020 in light of its ongoing review of its monetary policy strategy, tools, and communications practices. This statement is a reprint of the statement affirmed in January 2019. Manufacturing and U.S. Business Cycles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 Developments Related to Financial Stability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24 Monetary Policy Rules and Uncertainty in Monetary Policy Settings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33 Federal Reserve Review of Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, note: This report reflects information that was publicly available as of noon EST on February 5, 2020. Unless otherwise stated, the time series in the figures extend through, for daily data, February 4, 2020; for monthly data, December 2019; and, for quarterly data, 2019:Q4. In bar charts, except as noted, the change for a given period is measured to its final quarter from the final quarter of the preceding period. For figures 16 and 34, note that the S&P 500 Index and the Dow Jones Bank Index are products of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates and have been licensed for use by the Board. Copyright © 2020 S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC, a division of S&P Global, and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Redistribution, reproduction, and/or photocopying in whole or in part are prohibited without written permission of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC. For more information on any of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC’s indices please visit www.spdji.com. S&P® is a registered trademark of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC, and Dow Jones® is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. Neither S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC, Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC, their affiliates nor their third party licensors make any representation or warranty, express or implied, as to the ability of any index to accurately represent the asset class or market sector that it purports to represent, and neither S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC, Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC, their affiliates nor their third party licensors shall have any liability for any errors, omissions, or interruptions of any index or the data included therein. summary The U.S. economy continued to grow moderately last year and the labor market strengthened further. With these gains, the current expansion entered its 11th year, becoming the longest on record. However, inflation was below the Federal Open Market Committee’s (FOMC) longer-run objective of 2 percent. In light of the implications of global developments for the economic outlook as well as muted inflation pressures, the FOMC lowered the target range for the federal funds rate at its July, September, and October meetings, bringing it to the current range of 1½ to 1¾ percent. In the Committee’s subsequent meetings, it judged that the prevailing stance of monetary policy was appropriate to support sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation returning to the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objective. The labor market. The labor market continued to strengthen last year. Payroll employment growth remained solid in the second half of 2019, and while the pace of job gains during the year as a whole was somewhat slower than in 2018, it was faster than what is needed to provide jobs for new entrants to the labor force. The unemployment rate moved down from 3.9 percent at the end of 2018 to 3.5 percent in December, and the labor force participation rate increased. Meanwhile, wage gains remained moderate although above the pace of gains seen earlier in the expansion. Inflation. After having been close to the FOMC’s objective of 2 percent in 2018, consumer price inflation, as measured by the price index for personal consumption expenditures, moved back below 2 percent last year, where it has been during most of the current expansion. The 12-month change was 1.6 percent in December 2019, as was the 12-month measure that excludes consumer food and energy prices (so-called core inflation), which historically has been a better indicator of where inflation will be in the future than the overall figure. The downshift relative to 2018 partly results from particularly low readings in the monthly price data in the early part of last year that appear to reflect transitory influences. Survey-based measures of longer-run inflation expectations have been broadly stable since the middle of last year, and market-based measures of inflation compensation are little changed on net. Economic growth. Real gross domestic product (GDP) is reported to have increased at a moderate rate in the second half of 2019, although growth was somewhat slower than in the first half of the year and in 2018. Consumer spending rose at a moderate pace, on average, and residential investment turned up after having declined in 2018 and the first half of 2019. In contrast, business fixed investment declined in the second half of last year, reflecting a number of factors that likely include trade policy uncertainty and weak global growth. Downside risks to the U.S. outlook seem to have receded in the latter part of the year, as the conflicts over trade policy diminished somewhat, economic growth abroad showed signs of stabilizing, and financial conditions eased. More recently, possible spillovers from the effects of the coronavirus in China have presented a new risk to the outlook. Financial conditions. Domestic financial conditions for businesses and households remained supportive of spending and economic activity. After showing some volatility over the summer, nominal Treasury yields declined and equity prices increased notably, on balance, supported by accommodative monetary policy actions and easing of investors’ concerns regarding trade policy prospects and the global economic outlook. Spreads of yields on corporate bonds over those on comparable-maturity Treasury securities continued to narrow, and mortgage rates remained low. Moreover, loans remained widely available for most businesses and households, and credit provided by commercial banks continued to expand at a moderate pace. Financial stability. The U.S. financial system is substantially more resilient than it was before the financial crisis. Leverage in the financial sector appears low relative to historical norms. Total household debt has grown at a slower pace than economic activity over the past decade, in part reflecting that mortgage credit has remained tight for borrowers with low credit scores, undocumented income, or high debt-to-income ratios. In contrast, the levels of business debt continue to be elevated compared with the levels of either business assets or GDP, with the riskiest firms accounting for most of the increase in debt in recent years. While overall liquidity and maturity mismatches and funding risks in the financial system remain low, the volatility in repurchase agreement (repo) markets in mid- September 2019 highlighted the possibility for frictions in repo markets to spill over to other markets. Finally, asset valuations are elevated and have risen since July 2019, as investor risk appetite appears to have increased. (See the box “Developments Related to Financial Stability” in Part 1.) International developments. After weakening in 2018, foreign economic growth slowed further in 2019, held down by a slump in global manufacturing, elevated trade tensions, and political and social unrest in several countries. Growth in Asian economies slowed markedly, especially in Hong Kong and India, and many Latin American economies continued to underperform. The pace of economic activity weakened in several advanced foreign economies as well. However, recent indicators provide tentative signs of stabilization. The global slowdown in manufacturing and trade appears to be nearing an end, and consumer spending and services activity around the world continue to hold up. Moreover, in some economically important regions, such as China and the euro area, data through early this year suggested that growth was steadying. The recent emergence of the coronavirus, however, could lead to disruptions in China that spill over to the rest of the global economy. Amid weak economic activity and dormant inflation pressures, foreign central banks generally adopted a more accommodative policy stance. Financial conditions abroad eased in the second half of last year, supported by accommodative actions by central banks and, later in the period, positive political developments, including progress on the U.S.–China trade negotiations and diminished risks of a disorderly Brexit. On balance, since July global equity prices moved higher, sovereign bond spreads in the European periphery narrowed, and measures of sovereign spreads in emerging market economies decreased somewhat. In many advanced foreign economies, long-term interest rates remained well below the levels seen at the end of 2018. Interest rate policy. In light of the implications of global developments for the economic outlook as well as muted inflation pressures, the FOMC lowered the target range for the federal funds rate over the second half of 2019. Specifically, at its July, September, and October meetings, the FOMC lowered the target range a cumulative 75 basis points, bringing it to the current range of 1½ to 1¾ percent. In its subsequent meetings, the Committee judged that the prevailing stance of monetary policy was appropriate to support sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation returning to the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objective. The Committee noted that it will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook as it assesses the appropriate path of the target range for the federal funds rate. Balance sheet policy. At its July meeting, the FOMC decided to conclude the reduction of its aggregate securities holdings in the System Open Market Account, or SOMA, in August. Ending the runoff earlier than initially planned was seen as having only very small effects on the balance sheet, with negligible implications for the economic outlook; it was also seen as helpful in simplifying communications regarding the use of the Committee’s policy tools at a time when the Committee was lowering the target range for the federal funds rate. As discussed further in the next paragraph, since October 2019, the size of the balance sheet has been expanding to provide an ample level of reserves to ensure that the federal funds rate trades within the FOMC’s target range. Monetary policy implementation. Domestic short-term funding markets were volatile in mid-September—amid large flows related to corporate tax payments and settlement of Treasury securities—and experienced a significant tightening of conditions. Since then, the Federal Reserve has been conducting open market operations—repo operations and Treasury bill purchases—in order to maintain ample reserve balances over time. While the balance sheet has expanded in light of the open market operations to maintain ample reserves, these operations are purely technical measures to support the effective implementation of the FOMC’s monetary policy, are not intended to change the stance of monetary policy, and reflect the Committee’s intention to implement monetary policy in a regime with an ample supply of reserves. The Committee will continue to monitor money market developments as it assesses the level of reserves most consistent with efficient and effective policy implementation and stands ready to adjust the details of its technical operations as necessary to foster efficient and effective implementation of monetary policy. (See the box “Money Market Developments and Monetary Policy Implementation” in Part 2.) Manufacturing and U.S. business cycles. After increasing solidly in 2017 and 2018, manufacturing output turned down last year. This decline raised fears among some observers that the weakness could spread and potentially lead to an economy-wide recession. In general, a decline in manufacturing similar to that in 2019 would not be large enough to initiate a major downturn for the economy. Furthermore, after accounting for changing trends in growth of manufacturing output, mild slowdowns have often occurred during expansionary phases of business cycles. In contrast, a more pronounced contraction in manufacturing has historically been associated with an economy-wide recession. (See the box “Manufacturing and U.S. Business Cycles” in Part 1.) Monetary policy rules. Prescriptions for the policy interest rate from monetary policy rules often depend on judgments and assumptions about economic variables that are inherently uncertain and may change over time. Notably, many policy rules depend on estimates of resource slack and of the longer-run neutral real interest rate, both of which are not directly observable and are estimated with a high degree of uncertainty. As a result, the amount of policy accommodation that these rules prescribe—and whether that amount is appropriate in light of underlying economic conditions—is also uncertain. Such a situation cautions against mechanically following the prescriptions of any specific rule. (See the box “Monetary Policy Rules and Uncertainty in Monetary Policy Settings” in Part 2.) Framework review and Fed Listens events. In 2019, the Federal Reserve System began a broad review of the monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices it uses to pursue its statutory dual-mandate goals of maximum employment and price stability. The Federal Reserve sees this review as particularly important at this time because the U.S. economy appears to have changed in ways that matter for monetary policy. For example, the neutral level of the policy interest rate appears to have fallen in the United States and abroad, increasing the risk that the effective lower bound on interest rates will constrain central banks from reducing their policy interest rates enough to effectively support economic activity during downturns. The review is considering what monetary policy strategy will best enable the Federal Reserve to meet its dual mandate in the future, whether the existing monetary policy tools are sufficient to achieve and maintain the dual mandate, and how communication about monetary policy can be improved. A key component of the review has been a series of public Fed Listens events engaging with a broad range of stakeholders in the U.S. economy about how the Federal Reserve can best meet its statutory goals. During 14 Fed Listens events in 2019, policymakers heard from individuals and groups around the country on issues related to the labor market, inflation, interest rates, and the transmission of monetary policy. (See the box “Federal Reserve Review of Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communication Practices” in Part 2.) The labor market strengthened further last year but at a slower pace than in 2018 . . . Payroll employment gains were solid in the second half of 2019 and averaged 176,000 per month during the year as a whole. This pace is somewhat slower than the average monthly gains in 2018, even accounting for the anticipated effects of the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ upcoming benchmark revision to payroll employment (figure 1).1 However, the pace of job gains appears to have remained faster than what is needed to provide jobs for net new entrants to the labor force as the population grows.2 1. Net change in payroll employment Reflecting the employment gains over this period, the unemployment rate declined further in 2019 and stood at 3.5 percent in December, 0.4 percentage point below its year- earlier level and at its lowest level since 1969 (figure 2). In addition, the unemployment rate is 0.6 percentage point below the median of Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants’ estimates of its longer-run normal level.3 NOTE: The data are 3-month and 12-month moving averages. SOURCE: Bureau of Labor Statistics via Haver Analytics. 1. The annual benchmark revision to payroll employment will be published on February 7, after this report has gone to print. According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ preliminary estimates, increases in payrolls will be revised downward roughly 40,000 per month from April 2018 through March 2019. Payroll figures after March 2019 are subject to revision as well. 2. To keep up with population growth, roughly 115,000 to 145,000 payroll jobs per month need to be created, on average, to maintain a constant unemployment rate with an unchanged labor force participation rate. There is considerable uncertainty around these estimates, as the difference between monthly payroll gains and employment changes from the Current Population Survey (the source of the unemployment and participation rates) can be quite volatile over short periods. 3. See the most recent economic projections that were released after the December FOMC meeting in Part 3 of this report. 2. Measures of labor underutilization NOTE: Unemployment rate measures total unemployed as a percentage of the labor force. U-4 measures total unemployed plus discouraged workers, as a percentage of the labor force plus discouraged workers. Discouraged workers are a subset of marginally attached workers who are not currently looking for work because they believe no jobs are available for them. U-5 measures total unemployed plus all marginally attached to the labor force, as a percentage of the labor force plus persons marginally attached to the labor force. Marginally attached workers are not in the labor force, want and are available for work, and have looked for a job in the past 12 months. U-6 measures total unemployed plus all marginally attached workers plus total employed part time for economic reasons, as a percentage of the labor force plus all marginally attached workers. The shaded bar indicates a period of business recession as defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research. 3. Labor force participation rates and employment-to-population ratio NOTE: The data are monthly. The prime-age labor force participation rate is a percentage of the population aged 25 to 54. The labor force participation rate and the employment-to-population ratio are percentages of the population aged 16 and over. Strengthening labor market conditions are also evident in rising labor force participation rates (LFPRs)—that is, the shares of the population either working or actively seeking work. The LFPR for individuals aged 16 and over was 63.2 percent in December, above its level a year ago despite the downward pressure of about ¼ percentage point per year associated with the aging of the population. The LFPR for prime-age individuals (between 25 and 54 years old), which is much less sensitive to the effects of population aging, has been rising over the past few years and continued to increase in 2019 (figure 3). The employment- to-population ratio for individuals aged 16 and over—that is, the share of people who are working—was 61.0 percent in December and has been increasing since 2011. Other indicators are also consistent with strong labor market conditions, albeit with some slowing in the pace of improvement since 2018. As reported in the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey (JOLTS), job openings have remained plentiful, although the private-sector job openings rate has come down over the past year. Similarly, the quits rate in the JOLTS has remained near the top of its historical range, an indication that workers are being bid away from their current jobs or have become more confident that they can successfully switch jobs if they so wish. These data accord well with surveys of consumers that indicate households perceive jobs as plentiful. The JOLTS layoff rate and the number of people filing initial claims for unemployment insurance benefits— historically, a good early indicator of economic downturns—have both remained quite low. . . . and unemployment rates have fallen, on net, for all major demographic groups over the past several years Differences in unemployment rates across ethnic and racial groups have narrowed in recent years, on net, as they typically do during economic expansions, after having widened during the 2007–09 recession (figure 4). The decline in the unemployment rate for African Americans has been particularly sizable, and its average rate in the second half of October 2019 was the lowest recorded since the data began in 1972. Although the unemployment rates for African Americans 4. Unemployment rate by race and ethnicity NOTE: Unemployment rate measures total unemployed as a percentage of the labor force. Persons whose ethnicity is identified as Hispanic or Latino may be of any race. The shaded bar indicates a period of business recession as defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research. 5. Prime-age labor force participation rate by race and ethnicity NOTE: The prime-age labor force participation rate is a percentage of the population aged 25 to 54. Persons whose ethnicity is identified as Hispanic or Latino may be of any race. The data are 12-month moving averages. The shaded bar indicates a period of business recession as defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research. 6. Measures of change in hourly compensation NOTE: Business-sector compensation is on a 4-quarter percent change basis and extends through 2019:Q3. For the private-sector employment cost index, change is over the 12 months ending in the last month of each quarter; for private-sector average hourly earnings, the data are 12-month percent changes and begin in March 2007; for the Atlanta Fed’s Wage Growth Tracker, the data are shown as a 3-month moving average of the 12-month percent change. and for Hispanics remain substantially above those for whites and for Asians, those differentials in the second half of 2019 were at their narrowest levels on record. The rise in LFPRs for prime-age individuals over the past few years has also been apparent in each of these racial and ethnic groups (figure 5). Increases in labor compensation have remained moderate by historical standards . . . Despite strong labor market conditions, the available indicators generally suggest that increases in hourly labor compensation have remained moderate, averaging about 3 percent over the past two years. These indicators include the employment cost index, a measure of both wages and the cost to employers of providing benefits; compensation per hour in the business sector, a broad-based but volatile measure of wages, salaries, and benefits; and average hourly earnings from the payroll survey, a monthly index that is timely but does not account for benefits (figure 6). The median 12-month wage growth of individuals reporting to the Current Population Survey calculated by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, which tends to be higher than broader-based measures of wage growth, remains near the upper portion of its range over the past couple of years.4 Interestingly, wage growth over the past few years has been strongest for workers in relatively low-paying jobs, suggesting that the strong labor market is having a more pronounced benefit for these workers. . . . and likely have been restrained by slow growth in labor productivity over much of the expansion These moderate rates of hourly compensation gains likely reflect the offsetting influences of a strengthening labor market and productivity growth that has been weak through much of the expansion. From 2008 to 2018, labor 4. The Atlanta Fed’s measure differs from others in that it measures the wage growth only of workers who were employed both in the current survey month and 12 months earlier. productivity increased a little more than 1 percent per year, on average, well below the average pace from 1996 to 2007 of nearly 3 percent and also below the average gain in the 1974–95 period (figure 7). Although considerable debate remains about the reasons for the slowdown in productivity growth over this period, the weakness may be partly attributable to the sharp pullback in capital investment, including on research and development, during the most recent recession and the relatively slow recovery that followed. More recently, labor productivity is estimated to have increased 1.5 percent over the four quarters ending in 2019:Q3—a small improvement from the preceding year, especially given the volatility of the productivity data, but still moderate relative to earlier periods. While it is uncertain whether productivity growth will continue to improve, a sustained pickup in productivity growth, as well as additional labor market strengthening, would support stronger gains in labor compensation. Inflation was below 2 percent last year After having been close to the FOMC’s objective of 2 percent in 2018, inflation moved back below 2 percent last year, where it has been for most of the time since the end of the most recent recession. The 12-month change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) was 1.6 percent in December 2019, as was the 12-month measure of inflation that excludes food and energy items (so-called core inflation), which historically has been a better indicator of where inflation will be in the future than the overall index (figure 8). Both measures are down from the rates recorded a year ago; the slowing partly results from particularly low readings in the monthly price data in the first quarter of 2019, which appear to reflect idiosyncratic price declines in a number of specific categories such as apparel, used cars, banking services, and portfolio management services. Indeed, core inflation picked up after the first quarter and was at an average annual rate of 1.9 percent over the remainder of the year. 7. Change in business-sector output per hour NOTE: Changes are measured from Q4 of the year immediately preceding the period through Q4 of the final year of the period except 2019 changes, which are calculated from 2018:Q3 to 2019:Q3. SOURCE: Bureau of Labor Statistics via Haver Analytics. 8. Change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures Trimmed mean Excluding food and energy 9. Spot and futures prices for crude oil NOTE: The data are weekly averages of daily data. The weekly data begin on Thursdays and extend through January 29, 2020. The trimmed mean PCE price index, calculated by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, also suggests a transitory element to inflation readings early last year. The trimmed mean provides an alternative way to purge inflation of transitory influences, and it is less sensitive than the core index to idiosyncratic price movements such as those noted earlier.5 The 12-month change in this measure was about the same in December 2019 as it was in 2018. Oil prices fluctuated in 2019 After falling from more than $80 per barrel to less than $60 per barrel in late 2018, the Brent spot price of crude oil fluctuated between $60 and $70 for most of 2019. Prices generally moved up in the second half of last year, supported by expectations of supply cuts in OPEC member countries and, later on, diminished concerns about the global outlook (figure 9). Prices also spiked briefly in early January over tensions with Iran. In recent weeks, however, oil prices moved lower amid heightened fears that the coronavirus outbreak that started in China might weigh on economic growth and the demand for oil. Despite these fluctuations in oil prices, retail gasoline prices generally edged lower since mid-2019. For 2019 as a whole, consumer energy prices rose modestly more than the core index. Meanwhile, food prices posted only a small increase in 2019, held down by soft prices for farm commodities, and contributed very little to overall consumer price inflation. Reported prices of imports other than energy fell Nonfuel import prices, before accounting for the effects of tariffs on the price of imported goods, have continued to decline from their mid-2018 peak, responding to lower foreign inflation and declines in non-oil commodity 5. The trimmed mean index excludes prices that showed particularly large increases or decreases in a given month. Note that, since 1995, 12-month changes in the trimmed mean index have averaged about 0.3 percentage point above core PCE inflation and 0.2 percentage point above total PCE inflation. prices (figure 10).6 After declining in the first half of 2019, prices of industrial metals appear to have bottomed out in recent months, consistent with increased optimism about global demand following positive trade developments. Survey-based measures of inflation expectations have been broadly stable . . . Expectations of inflation likely influence actual inflation by affecting wage- and price-setting decisions. Survey-based measures of inflation expectations at medium- and longer-term horizons have remained broadly stable over the past year. In the Survey of Professional Forecasters, conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, the median expectation for the annual rate of increase in the PCE price index over the next 10 years has been very close to 2 percent for the past several years (figure 11). In the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers, the median value for inflation expectations over the next 5 to 10 years has fluctuated within a narrow range around 2½ percent since the end of 2016, though this level is between ¼ and ½ percentage point lower than had prevailed through 2014. In the Survey of Consumer Expectations, conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the median of respondents’ expected inflation rate three years hence moved lower, on net, in the second half of last year and averaged 2.5 percent, ¼ percentage point below its average over the preceding three years. . . . and market-based measures of inflation compensation have also been little changed Inflation expectations can also be gauged by market-based measures of inflation compensation. However, the inference is not straightforward, because market- based measures can be importantly affected 6. Published import price indexes exclude tariffs. However, tariffs add to the prices that purchasers of imports actually pay, and tariff-inclusive import prices have likely increased, rather than declined, since mid-2018. 10. Nonfuel import prices and industrial metals indexes NOTE: The data for nonfuel import prices are monthly. The data for industrial metals are a monthly average of daily data and extend through January 31, 2020. 11. Surveys of inflation expectations NOTE: The series are medians of the survey responses. The Michigan survey data are monthly and extend through January 2020. The Survey of Professional Forecasters data for inflation expectations for personal consumption expenditures are quarterly and begin in 2007:Q1. The NY Fed survey data are monthly and begin in June 2013. 12. 5-to-10-year-forward inflation compensation NOTE: The data are weekly averages of daily data and extend through January 31, 2020. TIPS is Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities. 13. Change in real gross domestic product and gross domestic income NOTE: Gross domestic income is not yet available for 2019:H2. SOURCE: Bureau of Economic Analysis via Haver Analytics. by changes in premiums that provide compensation for bearing inflation and liquidity risks. Measures of longer-term inflation compensation—derived either from differences between yields on nominal Treasury securities and those on comparable-maturity Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS) or from inflation swaps—have been little changed, on net, since the middle of 2019, with both measures below their respective ranges that persisted for most of the 10 years before the start of notable declines in mid-2014 (figure 12).7 The TIPS-based measure of 5-to- 10-year-forward inflation compensation and the analogous measure from inflation swaps are now about 1¾ percent and 2 percent, respectively.8 Growth of gross domestic product was moderate in the second half of 2019 . . . Real gross domestic product (GDP) is reported to have increased at a moderate average annual rate of 2.1 percent in the second half of 2019, although growth was somewhat slower than in the first half of the year and in 2018 (figure 13). Consumer spending rose at a moderate pace, on average, and residential investment turned up after having declined since the end of 2017. In contrast, business fixed investment declined in the second half of last year, reflecting a number of factors that likely include uncertainty regarding trade tensions and the weak global growth outlook. Those factors also continued to weigh on manufacturing output, which declined 7. Inflation compensation implied by the TIPS breakeven inflation rate is based on the difference, at comparable maturities, between yields on nominal Treasury securities and yields on TIPS, which are indexed to the total consumer price index (CPI). Inflation swaps are contracts in which one party makes payments of certain fixed nominal amounts in exchange for cash flows that are indexed to cumulative CPI inflation over some horizon. Inflation compensation derived from inflation swaps typically exceeds TIPS-based compensation, but week-to-week movements in the two measures are highly correlated. 8. As these measures are based on CPI inflation, one should probably subtract about ¼ percentage point—the average differential with PCE inflation over the past two decades—to infer inflation compensation on a PCE basis. over the first half of 2019 and has moved roughly sideways since then. (See the box “Manufacturing and U.S. Business Cycles.”) Despite those headwinds, the economic expansion continues to be supported by steady job gains, increases in household wealth, expansionary fiscal policy, and supportive domestic financial conditions that include moderate borrowing costs and easy access to credit for many households and businesses. . . . and downside risks to the outlook receded somewhat Downside risks to the economic outlook seem to have receded somewhat in the latter part of 2019. Labor market conditions and economic growth in the United States have been resilient to the global headwinds in 2019, and conflicts over trade policy diminished somewhat toward the end of the year. Economic growth abroad also shows signs of stabilizing, though the coronavirus outbreak presents a more recent risk. Reflecting these factors as well as more accommodative monetary policy stances in the United States and some foreign economies, financial conditions eased somewhat over the second half of the year. Statistical models designed to gauge the probability of recession using various indicators, including the Treasury yield curve, suggest that the likelihood of a recession occurring over the next year has fallen noticeably in recent months. Similarly, as shown in Part 3, when Federal Reserve policymakers most recently presented their economic projections, in December, fewer participants judged the risks to the outlook to be tilted to the downside compared with their projections from last June. Ongoing improvements in the labor market continue to support household income and consumer spending Consumer spending rose at a moderate pace, on average, in the third and fourth quarters of 2019 and posted another solid gain for the year as a whole (figure 14). The growth in real PCE in recent years reflects the continued 14. Change in real personal consumption expenditures and disposable personal income Personal consumption expenditures Disposable personal income States has been a source of economic strength and of good jobs for workers at all levels of education. It is also a highly cyclical sector that has tended to retrench dramatically during economy-wide contractions and to rebound sharply during expansions. Concerns by some observers about a possible economy-wide recession were prompted by declines in the industrial production index for manufacturing (IP) in the first two quarters of 2019, particularly when viewed in conjunction with the stagnant manufacturing growth that was occurring in many foreign economies. Manufacturing output in the United States remained weak through the end of the year (figure A). And, for 2019 as a whole, production decreased 1.3 percent, with fairly broad-based declines across both durable and nondurable goods industries. The slump in manufacturing last year is attributable to several factors, including trade developments, weak global growth, softer business investment, lower oil prices engendering a cutback in demand by drillers, and the slower production of Boeing’s 737 Max aircraft due to safety issues.1 When considering the implications of these declines in manufacturing production for the broader economy, it is important to recognize that this weakness has likely spilled over to other sectors. Manufacturing production requires inputs from other industries, and goods that are produced need to be transported and sold. For example, a reduction in auto assemblies affects automakers’ demand both for intermediate inputs like steel and for business services like accounting. In turn, the steelmakers need less iron ore, and the accountants need less tech support. The input-output tables for the U.S. economy imply that every dollar of factory output requires 56 cents of input from other domestic sectors.2 Manufacturing currently accounts for 12 percent of gross domestic product (GDP), so its 2019 decline of 1.3 percent would have directly subtracted about 0.15 percent from GDP; including inputs purchased from upstream sectors, the drag is a bit more than 0.2 percent. After adding in the downstream activities needed to bring products to market (such as transportation, wholesaling, and retailing), last year’s decline in manufacturing likely reduced GDP by less than 0.5 percent—not enough to tip an otherwise- expanding economy into recession. 1. See, for example, Aaron Flaaen and Justin Pierce (2019), “Disentangling the Effects of the 2018–2019 Tariffs on a Globally Connected U.S. Manufacturing Sector,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-086 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, December), https://dx.doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2019.086. Also see Dario Caldara, Matteo Iacoviello, Patrick Molligo, Andrea Prestipino, and Andrea Raffo (2019), “The Economic Effects of Trade Policy Uncertainty,” International Finance Discussion Papers 1256 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September), https://dx.doi.org/10.17016/ IFDP.2019.1256. Boeing slowed production of the 737 Max in the spring of 2019 and subsequently announced a temporary suspension of production beginning in early 2020. That modest effect partly reflects the decline in manufacturing’s share of the U.S. economy since the middle of the 20th century. Manufacturing employment has dropped from about 30 percent of total employment (continued) 2. The input-output tables are published by the Bureau of Economic Analysis. Our estimates are from the 2018 sectoral “Domestic Requirements” table, which shows both the intermediate products used directly by manufacturers and the intermediate products used further upstream by their suppliers. The tables do not, however, account for broader general equilibrium effects such as, for example, the lower spending by workers who may have been laid off when there were cutbacks in auto production. B. Manufacturing share of GDP and employment to less than 9 percent today, and the value added from manufacturing has fallen from more than 25 percent of GDP to a bit under 12 percent (figure B). However, although the manufacturing sector has shrunk, factory output may still be a good barometer of aggregate demand and of the economy’s health. Growth in the U.S. manufacturing sector has slowed considerably over time. Measured from business cycle peak to business cycle peak, output grew about 3.5 percent per year between 1920 and 1960, as well as from 1960 through 2001. As seen in figure C, factory production has moved up only about 0.5 percent per year since 2001, and only 2 of those 19 calendar years recorded gains of more than 3.5 percent. To interpret the recent weakness in manufacturing in this light, figure D shows 12-month changes in “detrended” IP, where values below zero indicate year-over-year changes in IP that are slower than its trend at the time. Notably, most expansions include periods of modest below-trend growth. In 2019, growth averaged about 2 percentage points below trend, a slowdown fairly similar to that in the 2015–16 period. Other episodes of modest below-trend growth appear in the expansions of the early 2000s, the 1990s, the mid-1980s, and the 1960s. In contrast, as shown by the red line in figure D, every recession since 1960—but NOTE: The shaded bars indicate periods of business recession as defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research. no expansion—includes at least some months when the 12-month change in IP was at least 7 percentage points below trend. The available data, however, suggest that the recent experience in the United States falls well short of that threshold. NOTE: The red line is drawn at -7. The shaded bars indicate periods of business recession as defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research. 15. Personal saving rate 16. Prices of existing single-family houses NOTE: The data for the S&P/Case-Shiller index extend through SOURCE: CoreLogic Home Price Index; Zillow; S&P/Case-Shiller U.S. National Home Price Index. The S&P/Case-Shiller index is a product of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. (For Dow Jones Indices licensing information, see the note on the Contents page.) 17. Wealth-to-income ratio NOTE: The data extend through 2019:Q3. The series is the ratio of improvements in the labor market, which have supported further increases in household income. Real disposable personal income, a measure of households’ after-tax purchasing power, increased 2.6 percent in 2019, a solid gain albeit below the robust increase in 2018 that was bolstered by a reduction in personal income taxes. The personal saving rate, at 7.7 percent in the fourth quarter, was little changed from the previous year (figure 15). Spending was also supported by high household wealth . . . The relatively high level of aggregate household net worth also supported consumer spending last year. House prices, which are of particular importance for the value of assets held by a large portion of households, continued to increase in 2019, although at a more moderate pace than in recent years (figure 16). In addition, U.S. equity prices, which fell sharply at the end of 2018, have rebounded since then. Equity wealth is more concentrated among high-wealth households with high propensities to save than is housing wealth, however, and may therefore provide less support for consumption. The ratio of aggregate household net worth to household income held steady through the third quarter of last year at 6.9, near its all-time high (figure 17). . . . and consumer sentiment remains strong Consumers have remained upbeat during the past year. The Michigan index of consumer sentiment, which declined last summer as trade tensions spiked, recovered in recent months and currently stands at a high level by historical standards. The sentiment measure from the Conference Board, which has been more stable, also suggests consumers are fairly upbeat (figure 18). Borrowing conditions for households remain generally favorable, and borrowing costs have moved down since the middle of 2019 . . . Financing conditions for consumers remain supportive of growth in household spending. Interest rates on credit cards and auto loans declined, on net, during the second half of 2019, and consumer credit continued to expand at a moderate pace (figure 19). Standards and delinquency rates for these loans have been generally stable. For student loans, credit remains widely available, with over 90 percent of such credit being extended by the federal government. After peaking in 2013, delinquencies on such loans have been gradually declining, reflecting in part the continued improvements in the labor market. In the mortgage market, credit has continued to be readily available for households with solid credit profiles but remains noticeably tighter than before the most recent recession for borrowers with low credit scores. . . . and activity in the housing sector has picked up, likely reflecting lower interest rates Residential investment picked up in the second half of 2019 after declining for six straight quarters. Housing starts for single-family and multifamily housing units increased sharply in the second half of last year and posted appreciable gains for the year as a whole, with starts and permits for new construction rising to the highest levels in more than 10 years (figure 20). Sales of new and existing homes also increased during 2019 (figure 21). This improvement appears to have importantly reflected the reduction in mortgage interest rates; after increasing appreciably from mid- 2017 through 2018, rates declined markedly last year, fully reversing those earlier increases (figure 22). Despite the lower mortgage rates, households’ perceptions of homebuying conditions have remained low, likely reflecting ongoing increases in housing prices. NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through January 2020. SOURCE: University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers; Conference 19. Changes in household debt NOTE: The data extend through 2019:Q3. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Board, Statistical Release Z.1, “Financial 20. Private housing starts and permits 21. New and existing home sales Existing home sales NOTE: Data are monthly. New home sales includes only single-family sales. Existing home sales includes single-family, condo, townhome, and co-op sales. SOURCE: For new home sales, U.S. Census Bureau; for existing home 22. Mortgage rates NOTE: Data are weekly through January 30, 2020. SOURCE: Freddie Mac Primary Mortgage Market Survey. 23. Change in real business fixed investment NOTE: Business fixed investment is known as “private nonresidential fixed investment” in the National Income and Product Accounts. SOURCE: Bureau of Economic Analysis via Haver Analytics. In contrast, business fixed investment weakened in the second half of 2019 . . . After increasing more than 5 percent per year in 2017 and 2018, business fixed investment— spending by businesses on structures, equipment, and intangibles such as research and development—stalled in 2019, as a moderate gain in the first quarter was offset by small declines over the rest of the year. The softness in business investment last year was evident in each of the three main components, and a portion of the weakening appears to reflect concerns over trade policy and slower foreign growth; other factors included the suspension of deliveries of the Boeing 737 Max aircraft and the continued decline in drilling and mining structures investment amid oil prices that fell back from the levels reached in 2018. Forward-looking indicators of business spending—such as orders of capital goods, surveys of business conditions and sentiment, and profit expectations from industry analysts—all appear to have stabilized in recent months but suggest that investment is likely to remain subdued (figure 23). . . . despite corporate financing conditions that remained accommodative overall Financing conditions for nonfinancial firms have remained accommodative amid lower interest rates. Flows of credit to large nonfinancial firms remained solid overall in the third quarter of 2019 (figure 24). The gross issuance of corporate bonds, although lower than in the first half of last year, was robust across credit categories. Yields on both investment- and speculative-grade corporate bonds continued to decrease and are near historical lows. Spreads on corporate bond yields over comparable-maturity Treasury securities have continued to narrow, on net, since the middle of last year and are at the lower end of their historical distributions. Respondents to the January Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices, or SLOOS, reported that banks eased several terms on commercial and industrial (C&I) loans but that demand for C&I loans has continued to weaken, consistent with the slowdown in business investment. C&I loan growth at banks has slowed since the first half of last year, while commercial real estate loan growth has continued to be strong. Meanwhile, financing conditions for small businesses have remained generally accommodative, but credit growth has been subdued. Net exports added to GDP growth in 2019, as exports grew little but imports declined Real exports grew only a touch in 2019, as tariffs on U.S. exports increased and foreign growth weakened (figure 25). Real imports declined last year, in part reflecting higher tariffs on imported goods and weakness in investment and manufacturing. As a result, real net exports—after having subtracted from U.S. real GDP growth in 2018—provided a modest boost to GDP growth in 2019. Relative to 2018, the nominal trade deficit is slightly less negative, and the current account deficit is little changed as a percent of GDP (figure 26). Federal fiscal policy actions continued to boost economic growth in 2019 while raising the federal unified budget deficit . . . The effects of fiscal policy actions enacted at the federal level in earlier years continued to boost GDP growth in 2019; the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 lowered personal and business income taxes, and rising appropriations consistent with the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018 boosted federal purchases.9 In 2019, federal purchases rose 4.3 percent, well above the 2.7 percent increase of 2018 (figure 27). The federal unified budget deficit widened further in fiscal year 2019 to 4½ percent of 9. The Congressional Budget Office (CBO) estimated that the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act would reduce annual tax revenue by around 1 percent of GDP, on average, from fiscal years 2018 through 2021. This revenue projection includes the CBO’s estimated macroeconomic effects of the legislation, which add almost ¼ percentage point to GDP growth, on average, over the same period. 24. Selected components of net debt financing for nonfinancial businesses 25. Change in real imports and exports of goods and services 26. U.S. trade and current account balances NOTE: GDP is gross domestic product. Current account data for 2019 are the average of the first three quarters of the year. 27. Change in real government expenditures on consumption and investment 28. Federal receipts and expenditures NOTE: The receipts and expenditures data are on a unified-budget basis and are for fiscal years (October through September); gross domestic product (GDP) data are for the four quarters ending in Q3. SOURCE: Office of Management and Budget via Haver Analytics. 29. Federal government debt held by the public NOTE: Federal debt extends through 2019:Q3. The data for gross domestic product (GDP) are at an annual rate. Federal debt held by the public equals federal debt less Treasury securities held in federal employee defined benefit retirement accounts, evaluated at the end of the quarter. nominal GDP from 3¾ percent of GDP in 2018, as expenditures moved up as a share of the economy while receipts moved sideways (figure 28). Expenditures, at 21 percent of GDP, are above the level that prevailed in the decade before the start of the 2007–09 recession, while receipts have continued to run below their average levels. The ratio of federal debt held by the public to nominal GDP rose to 79 percent in fiscal 2019 and was quite elevated relative to historical norms (figure 29). The Congressional Budget Office projects that this ratio will rise further over the next several years, reflecting large and rising deficits under current fiscal policy. . . . and the fiscal position of most state and local governments is stable The fiscal position of most state and local governments remains stable, although there is a range of experiences across these governments. Revenues for these governments have continued to grow in recent quarters, as the economic expansion pushes up income and sales tax collections for state governments, and past house price gains continue to push up property tax collections for local governments. Boosted by a rebound in construction spending following two years of weak growth, real purchases by state and local governments rose moderately last year but still remained quite restrained, partly reflecting budget pressures associated with pension and retiree health-care obligations. State and local government payrolls increased moderately in 2019 but have only roughly regained the peak observed before the current expansion, and real outlays for construction are more than 10 percent below their pre-recession peak. The debt of these governments as a share of the economy has continued to edge lower and currently equals around 14 percent of GDP, well below the previous peak of 21 percent following the most recent recession. The expected path of the federal funds rate over the next several years shifted down Market-based measures of the expected path of the federal funds rate over the next several years have moved down, on net, since the middle of last year and show about a 30 basis point decrease in the federal funds rate over 2020 and a relatively flat path thereafter (figure 30). Survey-based measures of the expected path of the policy rate also shifted down from the levels observed in the middle of 2019 but indicate no change to the target range for the federal funds rate over 2020 from its level at the end of 2019. According to the results of the most recent Survey of Primary Dealers and Survey of Market Participants, both conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York in December, the median of respondents’ modal projections implies a flat trajectory for the target range of the federal funds rate for the next few years.10 Additionally, market-based measures of uncertainty about the policy rate approximately one to two years ahead declined, on balance, from their levels at the end of last June and are close to their average level in recent years. U.S. nominal Treasury yields decreased on net After moving significantly lower over the first half of 2019, nominal Treasury yields also fell sharply in August, largely in response to investors’ concerns regarding trade tensions between the United States and China and the global economic outlook (figure 31). Later in the year, as these concerns abated, Treasury yields rose, the yield curve steepened, and uncertainty about near-term Treasury yields— measured by option-implied volatility on short- and longer-dated swap rates—declined. 10. The results of the Survey of Primary Dealers and the Survey of Market Participants are available on the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s website at https://www.newyorkfed.org/markets/primarydealer_ survey_questions.html and https://www.newyorkfed.org/ markets/survey_market_participants, respectively. 30. Market-implied federal funds rate path Note: The federal funds rate path is implied by quotes on overnight index swaps—a derivative contract tied to the effective federal funds rate. The implied path as of July 1, 2019, is compared with that as of February 4, 2020. The path is estimated with a spline approach, assuming a term premium of 0 basis points. The July 1, 2019, path extends through July 2023 and the February 4, 2020, path through December 2023. Source: Bloomberg; Federal Reserve Board staff estimates. 31. Yields on nominal Treasury securities 32. Yield and spread on agency mortgage-backed securities NOTE: The data are daily. Yield shown is for the Fannie Mae 30-year current coupon, the coupon rate at which new mortgage-backed securities would be priced at par, or face, value. Spread shown is to the average of the 5- and 10-year nominal Treasury yields. SOURCE: Department of the Treasury; Barclays Live. 33. Corporate bond yields, by securities rating NOTE: Investment-grade is the 10-year triple-B, which reflects the effective yield of the ICE BofAML 7-to-10-year triple-B U.S. Corporate Index (C4A4). High-yield is the 10-year high-yield and reflects the effective yield of the ICE BofAML 7-to-10-year U.S. Cash Pay High Yield Index (J4A0). 34. Equity prices However, in the second half of January, investors’ concerns about the implications of the coronavirus outbreak for the economic outlook weighed on Treasury yields and led to a flattening of the yield curve as well as some increase in uncertainty about near-term Treasury yields. Since the middle of last year, Treasury yields ended lower on net. Consistent with changes in the yields on nominal Treasury securities, yields on 30-year agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS)—an important determinant of mortgage interest rates—decreased, on balance, since the middle of last year and remained low by historical standards (figure 32). Meanwhile, yields on both investment- and speculative-grade corporate bonds continued to decline and also stayed low by historical standards (figure 33). Spreads on corporate bond yields over comparable-maturity Treasury yields narrowed moderately, on net, over the second half of 2019 and remained in the lower end of their historical distribution. Broad equity price indexes increased notably Equity prices fluctuated in August and September along with investors’ concerns about trade developments and the economic outlook. Later in 2019 and into 2020, as these concerns abated, equity prices rose substantially and were reportedly boosted by greater certainty among investors that monetary policy would remain accommodative in the near term (figure 34). Gains were spread across most major economic sectors, with the exception of the energy sector, for which stock prices declined markedly. Measures of implied and realized stock price volatility for the S&P 500 index—the VIX and the 20-day realized volatility—increased in August to fairly elevated levels but declined later in the year (figure 35). (For a discussion of financial stability issues, see the box “Developments Related to Financial Stability.”) Markets for Treasury securities, mortgage- backed securities, and municipal bonds have functioned well While available indicators of Treasury market functioning have generally remained stable since the first half of 2019—including bid-ask spreads, bid sizes, and estimates of transaction costs—some, such as measures of market depth, have decreased. However, the decline in measures of market depth has reportedly not led to any concerns about Treasury market liquidity. Liquidity conditions in the agency MBS market were also generally stable. Credit conditions in municipal bond markets remained stable as well, with yield spreads on 20-year general obligation municipal bonds over comparable-maturity Treasury securities declining notably and standing near historically low levels. Money market rates moved down in line with decreases in the FOMC’s target range, except for some notable volatility in mid-September Decreases in the FOMC’s target range for the federal funds rate in July, September, and October transmitted effectively through money markets, with yields on a broad set of money market instruments moving lower in response to the FOMC’s policy actions. The effective federal funds rate moved nearly in parity with the interest rate paid on reserves and was closely tracked by the overnight Eurodollar rate. Other short-term interest rates, including those on commercial paper and negotiable certificates of deposit, also moved down in line with decreases in the policy rate. Domestic short-term funding markets were volatile in mid-September—amid large flows related to corporate tax payments and settlement of Treasury securities—and experienced significant tightening of conditions. The effective federal funds rate rose above the target range on September 17 but then moved back within the target range following the Federal Reserve’s open market operations, which eased pressures in money markets (see the box “Money Market Developments and Monetary Policy Implementation” in Part 2). 35. S&P 500 volatility Realized volatility NOTE: The VIX is a measure of implied volatility that represents the expected annualized change in the S&P 500 index over the following 30 days. For realized volatility, five-minute S&P 500 returns are used in an exponentially weighted moving average with 75 percent of weight distributed over the past 20 days. The framework used by the Federal Reserve Board for assessing the resilience of the U.S. financial system focuses on financial vulnerabilities in four broad areas: asset valuations, household and business debt, leverage in the financial sector, and funding risks.1 Asset prices have risen partly because of declines in interest rates, but valuation pressures are elevated. Equity prices increased nearly 30 percent over 2019, and the forward price-to-earnings ratio has reached the recent peak seen in 2018 (figure A). In corporate debt markets, the spreads of interest rates on newly issued leveraged loans over LIBOR (London interbank offered rate) have decreased since July 2019 across the credit- quality spectrum, with spreads for the relatively higher- rated issuers reaching their post-crisis lows. Spreads on investment- and speculative-grade bonds over comparable-maturity Treasury yields narrowed since July 2019 and stand notably below their respective medians (figure B). In commercial real estate markets, prices continued to grow at a robust pace in recent quarters, with capitalization rates at historically low levels. Although house price growth slowed noticeably in 2019, house prices still appear to lie modestly above the level predicted by their historical relationship with rents. NOTE: The data extend through January 2020. The series represents the aggregate forward price-to-earnings ratio of S&P 500 firms based on expected earnings for 12 months ahead. vulnerabilities associated with total private-sector debt continue to be at a moderate level relative to their historical norms. Total household debt has grown at a slower pace than economic activity over the past decade, in part reflecting that mortgage credit has remained tight for borrowers with low credit scores, undocumented income, or high debt-to-income ratios. In contrast, business debt levels continue to be elevated compared with either business assets or gross domestic product, with the riskiest firms accounting for most of the increase in debt in recent years (figure C). Although the net issuance of riskier forms of business debt— high-yield bonds and institutional leveraged loans— has slowed since July 2019, it is still solid by historical standards (figure D). In addition, about half of investment-grade debt outstanding is currently rated in the lowest category of the investment-grade range (triple-B), a share that is near an all-time high. The concentration of investment- grade debt at the lower end of the investment-grade spectrum creates the risk that adverse developments, such as a deterioration in economic activity, could lead 1. The Financial Stability Report published on November 15, 2019, presents the most recent, detailed assessment of these vulnerabilities. NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through January 2020. The 10-year triple-B reflects the effective yield of the ICE BofAML 7-to-10-year triple-B U.S. Corporate Index (C4A4), and the 10-year high-yield reflects the effective yield of the ICE BofAML 7-to-10-year U.S. Cash Pay High Yield Index (J4A0). Treasury yields from smoothed yield curve estimated from off-the-run securities. to a sizable volume of bond downgrades to speculative- grade ratings. Such conditions could trigger investors to sell the downgraded bonds rapidly, increasing market illiquidity and causing outsized downward price pressures. (continued) NOTE: The data extend through 2019:Q3. The shaded bars indicate periods of business recession as defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research. GDP is gross domestic product. Leverage in the financial sector appears low relative to historical norms. The banking sector is much more highly capitalized, in part due to the regulatory reforms enacted after the financial crisis. In addition, the results of the most recent stress test, released in June 2019, indicated that these banks are well positioned to continue lending to households and businesses even in the event of a severe global recession.2 However, several large banks have announced plans to distribute capital to their shareholders in excess of expected earnings, implying that capital at those banks will decrease. Outside the banking sector, broker-dealers as well as property-and-casualty insurance companies continue to operate with historically low levels of leverage. Leverage at life insurance companies has risen but continues to be close to its average level over the past two decades, and leverage at hedge funds remains near the top of its range since 2014. Furthermore, the outlook for profitability of a range of financial institutions has weakened following declines in interest rates. Weaker profitability could affect their ability to absorb losses or build capital through retained earnings. Funding risk in the banking sector remains low. Banks rely only modestly on short-term wholesale 2. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2019), Dodd-Frank Act Stress Test 2019: Supervisory Stress Test Results (Washington: Board of Governors, June), https:// www.federalreserve.gov/publications/files/2019-dfast- results-20190621.pdf. commitments held by banks. funding and maintain large amounts of high-quality liquid assets in compliance with liquidity regulations introduced after the financial crisis and the improved understanding by banks of their liquidity risks. In addition, money market mutual funds remain less prone to runs than they were before the implementation of the money market reforms, as the composition of assets under management remains heavily tilted toward the safer and more liquid government funds. Nonetheless, the volatility in repurchase agreement (repo) markets in mid-September 2019 highlighted the possibility for frictions in repo markets to spill over to other markets.3 developments could pose a number of near-term risks to the U.S. financial system. In China, fragilities in the corporate and financial sector leave it vulnerable to adverse developments. Because of the size of the Chinese economy, significant distress in China could spill over to U.S. and global markets through a retrenchment of risk appetite, U.S. dollar appreciation, and declines in trade and commodity prices. In Europe, the risk of a “no-deal Brexit” passed at the end of January, but the United Kingdom and the European Union are still committed to conclude negotiations over their future relationship—including new trade arrangements—by the end of 2020. Failure to do so could trigger market and economic disruptions in Europe that may weaken systemically important financial institutions and spill over to global markets, leading to a tightening of U.S. financial conditions. 3. See the box “Money Market Developments and 36. Ratio of total commercial bank credit to nominal gross domestic product 37. Profitability of bank holding companies NOTE: The data are quarterly and are seasonally adjusted. The data 38. Real gross domestic product growth in selected advanced foreign economies NOTE: The data for the euro area incorporate a preliminary release for Bank credit continued to expand, and bank profitability remained robust Aggregate credit provided by commercial banks continued to expand through the second half of 2019, as the strength in commercial real estate and residential real estate loan growth, helped by falling interest rates, more than offset the slowdown in C&I and consumer loans. In the second half of last year, the pace of bank credit expansion was about in line with that of nominal GDP, leaving the ratio of total commercial bank credit to current- dollar GDP little changed from its value last June (figure 36). Overall, measures of bank profitability ticked down a bit in the third quarter because of narrower net interest margins but remain near their post-crisis highs (figure 37). Growth in advanced foreign economies weakened, but it appears to be stabilizing Real GDP growth in several advanced foreign economies (AFEs) appears to have stepped down in the second half of the year (figure 38). However, incoming data suggest that the slowdown in the AFEs may have bottomed out. Household spending has generally remained resilient, sustained by low unemployment rates and rising wages. Financial conditions have improved further, supported in part by accommodative monetary policy actions. The protracted slump in global manufacturing, which weighed on external demand across the AFEs, is showing tentative signs of nearing an end. In the euro area, where manufacturing activity was particularly weak, recent indicators suggest that growth may be steadying. In Japan, real GDP appears to have contracted sharply at the end of 2019, following a consumption tax hike in October, but its effects are likely to be transitory. In the United Kingdom, Brexit-related uncertainty weighed on economic activity throughout 2019; around the turn of the year, U.K. and European Union authorities took the necessary steps to prevent a disorderly Brexit from occurring on January 31, 2020, but they still need to negotiate a new trade arrangement. Inflationary pressures remained subdued in many advanced foreign economies Against a backdrop of slower economic growth, consumer prices in many AFEs continued to rise at a subdued pace, especially in the euro area and Japan (figure 39). Canada remains an exception, as inflation there hovered around 2 percent. Central banks in several advanced foreign economies provided accommodation In response to subdued growth and below- target inflation, the European Central Bank introduced a new stimulus package in September of last year, including a deposit rate cut of 10 basis points to negative 0.5 percent, a restart of its Asset Purchase Programme, and more favorable terms for its targeted longer-term refinancing operations. Similarly, the Reserve Bank of Australia and the Reserve Bank of New Zealand reduced their policy rates in the second half of last year, citing concerns about the global outlook. The Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, and the Bank of Japan kept their policy rates unchanged, although communications by their officials took a more dovish tone, emphasizing increased downside risks to the global economy. In contrast, Sweden’s Riksbank and Norway’s Norges Bank increased their policy rates, citing favorable macroeconomic conditions and concerns about growing financial imbalances. Financial conditions in advanced foreign economies eased further Notwithstanding slowing global growth and bouts of political tensions, financial conditions in the AFEs, on balance, eased further in the second half of 2019, supported by accommodative central bank actions, progress on trade negotiations between the United States and China, and diminished fears of a hard Brexit. Long-term interest rates in many AFEs remained well below the levels seen at the end of 2018 (figure 40). Equity 39. Consumer price inflation in selected advanced foreign economies NOTE: The data for the euro area incorporate the flash estimate for 40. Nominal 10-year government bond yields in selected advanced foreign economies NOTE: The data are weekly averages of daily benchmark yields. The 41. Equity indexes for selected advanced foreign economies NOTE: The data are weekly averages of daily data. The weekly data begin on Thursdays and extend through January 29, 2020. 42. Real gross domestic product growth in selected emerging market economies NOTE: The data for China are seasonally adjusted by Board staff. The data for Korea, Mexico, and Brazil are seasonally adjusted by their respective government agencies. The 2019:Q4 value for Mexico is 0 percent. prices, as well as prices of other risky assets, increased moderately (figure 41). Sovereign bond spreads over German bund yields for euro-area peripheral countries narrowed slightly. In recent weeks, however, equity and bond markets gave up some of their gains as uncertainty about the economic effects of the coronavirus weighed on investors’ sentiment. Growth slowed markedly in many emerging market economies, but there are tentative signs of stabilization Chinese GDP growth slowed further in the second half of 2019 against the backdrop of increased tariffs on Chinese exports, global weakness in trade and manufacturing, and authorities’ deleveraging campaign that continued to exert a drag on the economy (figure 42). However, recent data suggest that China’s economic activity picked up at the end of last year, in part supported by some fiscal and monetary policy stimulus and some easing of trade tensions. In emerging Asia excluding China, economic growth was dragged down by a sharp contraction in Hong Kong, where social and political unrest resulted in severe economic disruptions, and by weakness in India, where an ongoing credit crunch continues to weigh on activity. In several other Asian economies, GDP growth held steady but at a lackluster pace amid headwinds from moderating global growth. GDP growth in Korea, Taiwan, and the Philippines rebounded in the last quarter of 2019, consistent with signs of stabilization in the global manufacturing cycle, especially in the high-tech sector. However, the recent emergence of the coronavirus could lead to disruptions in China that spill over to other Asian countries and, more generally, to the rest of the global economy. Many Latin American economies continued to underperform. Economic stagnation persisted in Mexico, reflecting both domestic factors— including market concerns about economic policies—and external factors, notably, renewed weakness in U.S. manufacturing production. Severe social unrest in several countries—including Chile, Ecuador, and Bolivia—disrupted economic activity. Argentina’s financial crisis continued, while Venezuela’s economy likely continued to contract. Growth in Brazil, in contrast, edged up as aggregate demand continued to recover, supported by further reductions in policy interest rates. Financial conditions in emerging market economies fluctuated but, on net, eased somewhat Notwithstanding social and political tensions as well as concerns about the global outlook, financial conditions in the emerging market economies (EMEs) eased somewhat in the second half of 2019. Conditions were supported by the accommodative actions of the FOMC and several foreign central banks and, later in the year, by progress in the negotiations between the United States and its major trading partners as well as improved prospects about global growth. EME equity prices generally increased, especially for Brazil (figure 43). And measures of EME sovereign bond spreads over U.S. Treasury yields generally decreased (figure 44). Political tensions in Hong Kong contributed to an underperformance of Chinese risky assets. After several months of withdrawals, flows to dedicated EME mutual funds resumed in the fourth quarter of 2019, consistent with the improved sentiment toward global prospects 43. Equity indexes for selected emerging market economies NOTE: The data are weekly averages of daily data. The weekly data begin on Thursdays and extend through January 29, 2020. 44. Sovereign spreads in selected emerging market economies NOTE: The data are weekly averages of daily data. The weekly data begin on Thursdays and extend through January 29, 2020. 45. Emerging market mutual fund flows Equity fund flows Bond fund flows NOTE: The bond and equity fund flows data are quarterly sums of weekly data from January 1, 2015, to December 25, 2019. Weekly data span Thursday through Wednesday, and the quarterly and January 2020 values are sums over weekly data for weeks ending in that quarter or month. The data exclude funds located in China. 46. U.S. dollar exchange rate indexes NOTE: The data, which are in foreign currency units per dollar, are weekly averages of daily data. The weekly data begin on Thursdays and extend through January 29, 2020. As indicated by the leftmost arrow, increases in the data represent U.S. dollar appreciation, and decreases represent U.S. dollar depreciation. (figure 45). However, in reaction to the emergence of the coronavirus, in late January equity and bond markets gave up some of their gains. The dollar fluctuated but is, on balance, little changed The foreign exchange value of the U.S. dollar fluctuated but is, on balance, little changed compared with last July (figure 46). While concerns about global growth and trade tensions contributed to the appreciation of the dollar over the summer, monetary policy easing by the Federal Reserve and progress on U.S.–China trade negotiations led to a depreciation of the dollar, especially with respect to the Chinese renminbi. The British pound appreciated notably against the dollar as fears of a disorderly Brexit diminished. The Federal Open Market Committee reduced the federal funds rate to support sustained economic expansion and foster a return of inflation to the Committee’s 2 percent objective Committee judged that the prevailing stance of monetary policy was appropriate to support sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation returning to its symmetric 2 percent objective. After having gradually increased its target range for the federal funds rate from late 2015 through the end of 2018, the Committee maintained its target range for the federal funds rate at 2¼ to 2½ percent during the first half of 2019. In light of the implications of global developments for the economic outlook as well as muted inflation pressures, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) lowered the target range for the federal funds rate at its July, September, and October meetings by 25 basis points each, bringing it to 1½ to 1¾ percent (figure 47).11 At its December and January meetings, the 11. See the FOMC statements issued after the July, September, and October meetings, which are available (along with other postmeeting statements) on the Monetary Policy portion of the Board’s website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy.htm. Future changes in the federal funds rate will depend on the economic outlook and risks to the outlook as informed by incoming data The FOMC has continued to emphasize that the actual path of monetary policy will depend on the evolution of the economic outlook and risks to the outlook as informed by incoming data. Specifically, in deciding on the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its objectives of maximum employment and symmetric 2 percent inflation. This assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation 47. Selected interest rates NOTE: The 2-year and 10-year Treasury rates are the constant-maturity yields based on the most actively traded securities. SOURCE: Department of the Treasury; Federal Reserve Board. In addition to evaluating a wide range of economic and financial data and information gathered from business contacts and other informed parties around the country, policymakers routinely consult prescriptions for the policy interest rate from various monetary policy rules, which can provide useful guidance to the FOMC. Although many practical considerations make it undesirable for the FOMC to mechanically follow the prescriptions of any specific rule, the FOMC’s framework for conducting systematic monetary policy respects key principles of good monetary policy embodied by these rules, while at the same time, providing flexibility to address many of the limitations of these policy rules (see the box “Monetary Policy Rules and Uncertainty in Monetary Policy Settings”). The FOMC concluded the reduction of its aggregate securities holdings in the System Open Market Account . . . At its July meeting, along with its decision to lower the target range for the federal funds rate, the FOMC also announced that it was ending the runoff of securities holdings two months earlier than the initially planned termination at the end of September.12 Ending the runoff earlier than initially planned was seen as having only very small effects on the balance sheet, with negligible implications for the economic outlook. Moreover, doing so avoided the appearance of inconsistency in continuing to allow the balance sheet to run off while simultaneously lowering the target range for the federal funds rate. 12. The Committee had initially indicated in its Balance Sheet Normalization Principles and Plans, issued in March 2019, that it intended to conclude the reduction of its aggregate securities holdings in the System Open Market Account at the end of September 2019. The document is available on the Board’s website at https:// www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/ monetary20190320c.htm. Since then, the Federal Reserve has rolled over at auction all principal payments from its holdings of Treasury securities and has reinvested all principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage- backed securities (MBS) received during each calendar month. The Committee intends to continue to reduce its holdings of agency debt and agency MBS, consistent with the aim of holding primarily Treasury securities in the long run. To allow for a gradual runoff of the MBS portfolio, principal payments from agency debt and agency MBS of up to $20 billion per month have been reinvested in Treasury securities; agency MBS principal payments in excess of $20 billion each month have been reinvested in agency MBS.13 . . . and reaffirmed its intention to implement monetary policy in a regime with an ample supply of reserves In a monetary policy regime with an ample supply of reserves, control over the level of the federal funds rate and other short-term interest rates is exercised primarily through the setting of the Federal Reserve’s administered rates, and active management of the supply of reserves is not required. The Federal Reserve will still conduct periodic open market operations as necessary to accommodate the trend growth in the demand for its nonreserve liabilities, such as currency in circulation, and maintain an ample supply of reserves over time. Separate from such periodic open market operations, beginning in October 2019, the Federal Reserve has implemented a temporary program of open market operations, specifically Treasury bill purchases, aimed at durably raising reserves to levels at or above those prevailing in early September (see the box “Money Market Developments and Monetary Policy Implementation” at the end of Part 2). These actions are purely technical measures to support the effective 13. See the Balance Sheet Normalization Principles and Plans in note 12. Since August, the Federal Reserve has reinvested, on average, about $7 billion per month in agency MBS. Monetary policy rules are mathematical formulas that relate a policy interest rate, such as the federal funds rate, to a small number of other economic variables—typically including the deviation of inflation from its target value and a measure of resource slack in the economy. The prescriptions for the policy interest rate from these rules can provide helpful guidance for the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC).1 This discussion examines prescriptions from selected policy rules and considers how these prescriptions often depend on judgments and assumptions about economic variables that are inherently uncertain and may change over time. Notably, many policy rules depend on estimates of resource slack and of the longer-run neutral real interest rate, both of which are not directly observable and are estimated with a high degree of uncertainty. As a result, the policy stance that these rules prescribe—and whether that stance is appropriate in light of underlying economic conditions—is also uncertain. Such a situation cautions against mechanically following the prescriptions of any specific rule. policymakers’ longer-run inflation objective and employment is below its maximum sustainable level; conversely, monetary policy should be restrictive when the opposite holds. A third principle is that, to stabilize inflation, the policy rate should be adjusted over time by more than one-for-one in response to persistent increases or decreases in inflation. Economists have analyzed many monetary policy rules, including the well-known Taylor (1993) rule, the “balanced approach” rule, the “adjusted Taylor (1993)” rule, the “price level” rule, and the “first difference” rule (figure A).3 These policy rules embody the three key principles of good monetary policy and take into account estimates of how far the economy is from the Federal Reserve’s dual-mandate goals of maximum employment and price stability. The Taylor (1993), balanced-approach, adjusted Taylor (1993), and price-level rules provide prescriptions for the level of the federal funds rate; all require an estimate of the LR)—that is, neutral real interest rate in the longer run (rt the level of the real federal funds rate that is expected to be consistent, in the longer run, with maximum (continued on next page) In many models of the economy, good economic performance can be achieved by following a monetary policy rule that fosters public understanding and that incorporates key principles of good monetary policy.2 One such principle is that monetary policy should respond in a predictable way to changes in economic conditions. A second principle is that monetary policy should be accommodative when inflation is below 1. FOMC policymakers first discussed prescriptions from monetary policy rules in 1995 and have consulted them routinely since 2004. 2. The effectiveness of monetary policy is enhanced when it is well understood by the public. For a discussion of how the public’s understanding of monetary policy matters for the effectiveness of monetary policy, see Janet L. yellen (2012), “Revolution and Evolution in Central Bank Communications,” speech delivered at the Haas School of Business, University of California, Berkeley, November 13, https://www. federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/yellen20121113a. htm. For a discussion regarding principles for the conduct of monetary policy, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2018), “Monetary Policy Principles and Practice,” webpage, https://www.federalreserve.gov/ monetarypolicy/monetary-policy-principles-and-practice.htm. 3. The Taylor (1993) rule was suggested in John B. Taylor (1993), “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie- Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 39 (December), pp. 195–214. The balanced-approach rule was analyzed in John B. Taylor (1999), “A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules,” in John B. Taylor, ed., Monetary Policy Rules (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), pp. 319–41. The adjusted Taylor (1993) rule was studied in David Reifschneider and John C. Williams (2000), “Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Era,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 32 (November), pp. 936–66. A price-level rule was discussed in Robert E. Hall (1984), “Monetary Strategy with an Elastic Price Standard,” in Price Stability and Public Policy, proceedings of a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 2–3 (Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City), pp. 137–59, https://www.kansascityfed.org/ publicat/sympos/1984/s84.pdf. The first-difference rule is based on a rule suggested by Athanasios Orphanides (2003), “Historical Monetary Policy Analysis and the Taylor Rule,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 50 (July), pp. 983–1022. A comprehensive review of policy rules is in John B. Taylor and John C. Williams (2011), “Simple and Robust Rules for Monetary Policy,” in Benjamin M. Friedman and Michael Woodford, eds., Handbook of Monetary Economics, vol. 3B (Amsterdam: North-Holland), pp. 829–59. The same volume of the Handbook of Monetary Economics also discusses approaches other than policy rules for deriving policy rate prescriptions. Note: Rt balanced-approach, adjusted Taylor (1993), price-level, and first-difference rules, respectively. Rt denotes the realized nominal federal funds rate for quarter t, πt is the four-quarter price inflation for quarter t, ut is the LR is the level of the neutral real federal funds rate in the longer run that is expected to be unemployment rate in quarter t, and rt consistent with sustaining maximum employment and inflation at the FOMC’s 2 percent longer-run objective, πLR. In addition, LR is the rate of unemployment expected in the longer run. Zt is the cumulative sum of past deviations of the federal funds rate ut from the prescriptions of the Taylor (1993) rule when that rule prescribes setting the federal funds rate below zero. PLgapt is the percent deviation of the realized level of prices from a price level that rises 2 percent per year from its level in a specified starting period. The Taylor (1993) rule and other policy rules are generally written in terms of the deviation of real output from its full capacity level. In these equations, the output gap has been replaced with the gap between the rate of unemployment in the longer run and its actual level (using a relationship known as Okun’s law) to represent the rules in terms of the FOMC’s statutory goals. The rules are implemented as responding to core PCE inflation rather than to headline PCE inflation because current and near-term core inflation rates tend to outperform headline inflation rates as predictors of the medium-term behavior of headline inflation. Box note 3 provides references for the policy rules. FD represent the values of the nominal federal funds rate prescribed by the Taylor (1993), employment and stable inflation.4 The rules feature the unemployment rate gap, measured as the difference between an estimate of the rate of unemployment that LR) and the current is sustainable in the longer run (ut unemployment rate; the first-difference rule includes the change in the unemployment gap rather than its level.5 In addition, four of the five rules include the difference between recent inflation and the FOMC’s 4. The expression of the first-difference rule shown in figure A does not involve an estimate of the neutral real interest rate in the longer run. However, this rule has its own shortcomings. For example, research suggests that this sort of rule often results in greater volatility in employment and inflation relative to what would be obtained under the Taylor (1993) and balanced-approach rules. longer-run objective of 2 percent, whereas the price- level rule includes the gap between the level of prices today and the level of prices that would have been realized if inflation had been constant at 2 percent from a specified starting year.6 The price-level rule thereby takes account of the deviation of inflation from the longer-run objective in earlier periods as well as in the current period, in contrast with the other rules that do not make up past misses of the inflation objective. The adjusted Taylor (1993) rule recognizes that the federal funds rate cannot be reduced materially below zero and that following the prescriptions of the standard Taylor (1993) rule after a recession during which the federal funds rate has fallen to its effective lower bound may therefore not provide enough policy accommodation. To make up for the 5. The original Taylor (1993) rule represented slack in resource utilization using an output gap (the difference between the current level of real gross domestic product (GDP) and the level that GDP would be if the economy were operating at maximum employment, measured in percent of the latter). The rules in figure A represent slack in resource utilization using the unemployment gap instead, because that gap better captures the FOMC’s statutory goal to promote maximum employment. However, movements in these alternative measures of resource utilization are highly correlated. For more information, see the note below figure A. (continued) 6. Calculating the prescriptions of the price-level rule requires selecting a starting year for the price level from which to cumulate the 2 percent annual rate of inflation. Figure B uses 1998 as the starting year. Around that time, the underlying trend of inflation and longer-term inflation expectations stabilized at levels consistent with PCE (personal consumption expenditures) price inflation being close to 2 percent. cumulative shortfall in accommodation, the adjusted Taylor (1993) rule prescribes only a gradual return of the policy rate to the (positive) levels prescribed by the standard Taylor (1993) rule after the economy begins to recover. Similarly, the price-level rule specified in figure A recognizes that the federal funds rate cannot be reduced materially below zero. If inflation runs below the 2 percent objective during periods when the policy rate is constrained by the effective lower bound, this rule will, over time, call for more accommodation to make up for the past inflation shortfall. may not be directly measurable, hence leading to time- varying and uncertain estimates of ut LR and rt Since 2000, forecasters in the Blue Chip survey have markedly reduced their estimates of the longer- run level of the real short-term interest rate (figure C). FOMC participants have also lowered their estimates of the real federal funds rate in the longer run since the Summary of Economic Projections, or SEP, began reporting this information in 2012. Similarly, in recent years, FOMC participants as well as outside forecasters and analysts generally have lowered their estimates of the longer-run unemployment rate considerably.7 Figure B shows historical prescriptions for the federal funds rate from the five rules described earlier. For each period, the figure reports the policy rates prescribed by the rules given prevailing economic LR at the time. conditions and estimates of ut The prescribed values often vary widely across rules. Because there is no definitive standard for favoring one rule over another, consulting a range of rules is generally preferable to relying on any particular rule. LR and rt Figure D illustrates the imprecision with which the longer-run neutral real interest rate is estimated by reporting values from several time-series models, along with measures of the uncertainty surrounding these values.8 The models use statistical techniques to capture the variations among inflation, interest rates, real gross domestic product, unemployment, and other data series. The point estimates are dispersed across models, ranging from 0.3 to 2.1 percent. Moreover, the 95 percent uncertainty bands around the estimates illustrate the substantial uncertainty inherent in such estimates.9 As already noted, the level of the neutral real interest rate and the unemployment rate that is sustainable in the longer run is not directly observable and can be estimated only imprecisely. The neutral real interest rate in the longer run is determined by structural features of the economy, including trend productivity growth, demographics, and risk-taking behavior. The unemployment rate that can be sustained in the longer run is also determined largely by nonmonetary factors, such as demographics, educational attainment, and the structure and dynamics of the labor market. These various determining factors may change over time and (continued on next page) 7. The SEP median for the longer-run unemployment rate is 8. The estimates are based on data through 2019:Q3. 9. The range of estimates is computed using published values or values computed using the methodology from the following studies: Jens H.E. Christensen and Glenn D. Rudebusch (2019), “A New Normal for Interest Rates? Evidence from Inflation-Indexed Debt,” Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 101 (December), pp. 933–49; Marco Del Negro, Domenico Giannone, Marc P. Giannoni, and Andrea Tambalotti (2017), “Safety, Liquidity, and the Natural Rate of Interest,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Taylor (1993) rule, adjusted NOTE: The rules use historical values of the federal funds rate, core personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation, and the unemployment rate. Quarterly projections of longer-run values for the federal funds rate and the unemployment rate are derived through interpolations of biannual 6-to-10-year-ahead projections from Blue Chip Economic Indicators. The longer-run value for inflation is taken as 2 percent. The target value of the price level is the average level of the price index for PCE excluding food and energy in 1998 extrapolated at 2 percent growth per year. The data extend through 2019:Q3, with the exception of the midpoint of the target range for the federal funds rate data, which go through 2019:Q4. C. Real-time estimates of the neutral real interest rate and the unemployment rate in the longer run LR, equals the 3-month Treasury bill rate projected 6 to 10 years ahead Note: The Blue Chip median for the longer-run neutral real interest rate, rt deflated by the corresponding projected annual change in the price index for gross domestic product. The Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) median for the longer-run neutral real interest rate starts in January 2012 and equals the median of Federal Open Market Committee participants’ projections of the nominal federal funds rate in the longer run minus the corresponding median projection of personal consumption expenditures inflation. The SEP median for the longer-run unemployment rate, ut Source: Wolters Kluwer, Blue Chip Economic Indicators; Federal Reserve Board. LR, is available since April 2009. rate—equal to the sum of the neutral real interest rate in the longer run and the FOMC’s 2 percent inflation objective—is one benchmark for evaluating the current stance of monetary policy. Uncertainty about estimates of the longer-run neutral real interest rate leads to uncertainty about how far the current federal funds rate is from its longer-run neutral level. For the Taylor (1993), balanced-approach, adjusted Taylor (1993), and price-level rules, a decrease in the assumed longer-run neutral real interest rate translates (continued) Spring, pp. 235–94, https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/ uploads/2017/08/delnegrotextsp17bpea.pdf; Kathryn Holston, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams (2017), “Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants,” Journal of International Economics, supp. 1, vol. 108 (May), pp. S59–75; Benjamin K. Johannsen and Elmar Mertens (2016), “The Expected Real Interest Rate in the Long Run: Time Series Evidence with the Effective Lower Bound,” FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 9), https://www.federalreserve.gov/ econresdata/notes/feds-notes/2016/the-expected-real-interest- rate-in-the-long-run-time-series-evidence-with-the-effective- lower-bound-20160209.html; Michael T. Kiley (2015), “What Can the Data Tell Us about the Equilibrium Real Interest Rate?” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-77 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August), http://dx.doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2015.077; Thomas Laubach and John C. Williams (2003), “Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest,” Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 85 (November), pp. 1063–70; Kurt F. Lewis and Francisco vazquez-Grande (2019), “Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: A Note on Transitory Shocks,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, vol. 34 (April), pp. 425–36; Thomas A. Lubik and Christian Matthes (2015), “Calculating the Natural Rate of Interest: A Comparison of Two Alternative Approaches,” Economic Brief 15-10 (Richmond: Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, October), https://www.richmondfed.org/-/media/ richmondfedorg/publications/research/economic_brief/2015/ pdf/eb_15-10.pdf. D. Point estimates and uncertainty bands for the neutral real rate in the longer run Note: The estimates use data through 2019:Q3. Source: Federal Reserve Board staff calculations, along with references listed in box note 9. one-for-one into a decline in these rules’ prescribed settings for the federal funds rate. Therefore, to the extent that the downward revisions to estimates LR reflect learning that the longer-run neutral of rt rate was lower than had been assessed previously, the historical prescriptions of these rules would be less accommodative than previously thought. Uncertainty about estimates of the longer-run normal unemployment rate also imparts uncertainty to these rules’ prescriptions. For example, given current economic conditions, the assumption of a lower sustainable rate of unemployment in the longer run translates one-for-one into reduced unemployment gaps in the rules and, in turn, leads to lower prescribed values of the policy rate. Figure E compares the prescriptions of the Taylor (1993) rule based on the historical median estimates of ut figure C) and the prescriptions generated based on the latest median estimates of these variables. The federal funds rate prescriptions based on the latest estimates (black line) are lower than the prescriptions based on the historical estimates (red line). For example, using the latest median estimates, the rule’s prescribed federal funds rates for 2012 are about 3 percentage points lower than the values prescribed based on the historical estimates. Figure E also shows that revisions to the estimates of ut LR and rt LR from the Blue Chip survey (shown in LR and rt LR contribute roughly equally to Prescriptions based on historical estimates Prescriptions based on latest estimates Note: The note in figure B provides references to the data and calcula- tions used to derive the historical federal funds rate prescriptions from the Taylor (1993) rule. The data extend through 2019:Q3. For each period, the “prescriptions based on historical estimates” use the interpolated median Blue Chip estimates 6 to 10 years ahead for the neutral real LR, as of that period. interest rate, rt “Prescriptions based on latest estimates” use the corresponding estimates as of 2019:Q3 for all periods shown. the difference in the policy rate prescriptions of the Taylor (1993) rule based on the historical and the latest estimates of ut LR and rt To conclude, this discussion illustrates that policy rules crucially entail an important element of judgment. Moreover, the inherent uncertainty about some of the variables included in these rules leads to significant uncertainty regarding their policy settings, which cautions against strict adherence to any particular rule. 10. The extent to which these downward revisions to LR and ut LR lead to downward revisions in estimates of rt historical policy rate prescriptions varies across policy rules. For example, the historical prescriptions of the balanced-approach rule, which responds more strongly to the unemployment gap than the Taylor (1993) rule, would decrease more than shown in figure E when conditioned on LR. By contrast, the historical LR and ut the latest estimates of rt prescriptions of the first-difference rule are essentially unaffected by the downward revisions to rt implementation of the FOMC’s monetary policy and are not intended to change the stance of monetary policy. These Treasury bill purchases are distinct from the large-scale asset purchase programs that the Federal Reserve deployed after the financial crisis. In those programs, the Federal Reserve purchased longer-term securities to put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates and ease broader financial conditions. The Federal Reserve’s total assets have increased from about $3.8 trillion last July to about $4.1 trillion at present, with holdings of Treasury securities at approximately $2.4 trillion and holdings of agency debt and agency MBS at approximately $1.4 trillion (figure 48). The increase in the size of the balance sheet partly reflects an increase in the level of nonreserve liabilities—such as currency in circulation and the TGA—and a rise in the level of reserve balances, which have increased from approximately $1.5 trillion last July to approximately $1.6 trillion at present. Meanwhile, interest income on the Federal Reserve’s securities holdings has continued to result in substantial remittances to the U.S. Treasury. Preliminary data indicate that the Federal Reserve remitted about $55 billion in 2019. The effective federal funds rate moved down in line with the FOMC’s target range for the federal funds rate The Federal Reserve reduced the effective federal funds rate following the FOMC’s decisions in July, September, and October to lower the target range for the federal funds rate by reducing the interest rate paid on required and excess reserve balances and the interest rate offered on overnight reverse repurchase agreements (ON RRPs). Specifically, the Federal Reserve lowered the interest rate paid on required and excess reserve balances to 2.10 percent in July, 1.80 percent in September, and 1.55 percent in October. In addition, the Federal Reserve lowered the ON RRP offering rate to 2 percent in July, 1.70 percent in September, and 1.45 percent in October. The Federal Reserve also approved a ¼ percentage point decrease in the discount rate (the primary credit rate) in July, September, and October. Yields on a broad set of money market instruments also moved lower, roughly in line with the effective federal funds rate, in response to the FOMC’s policy decisions in July, September, and October. 48. Federal Reserve assets and liabilities Treasury securities held outright NOTE: “Credit and liquidity facilities” consists of primary, secondary, and seasonal credit; term auction credit; central bank liquidity swaps; support for Maiden Lane, Bear Stearns, and AIG; and other credit facilities, including the Primary Dealer Credit Facility, the Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility, the Commercial Paper Funding Facility, and the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility. “Other assets” includes repurchase agreements as well as unamortized premiums and discounts on securities held outright. “Capital and other liabilities” includes reverse repurchase agreements, the U.S. Treasury General Account, and the U.S. Treasury Supplementary Financing Account. The data extend through January 29, 2020. The Federal Reserve continued the review of its strategic framework for monetary policy In the second half of 2019, the Federal Reserve continued the review of its monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices. The goal of this assessment is to identify possible ways to improve the Committee’s current policy framework in order to ensure that the Federal Reserve is best positioned going forward to achieve its statutory mandate of maximum employment and price stability. (The box “Federal Reserve Review of Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communication Practices” discusses the review and the public outreach that has accompanied it.) In 2019, the Federal Reserve began a broad review of the monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices it uses to pursue its statutory dual-mandate goals of maximum employment and price stability. The Federal Reserve is undertaking the review because the U.S. economy appears to have changed in ways that matter for monetary policy. For example, the neutral level of the policy interest rate appears to have fallen in the United States and abroad, increasing the risk that the effective lower bound on interest rates will constrain central banks from reducing their policy interest rates enough to effectively support economic activity during downturns. The review is considering what monetary policy strategy will best enable the Federal Reserve to meet its dual mandate in the future, whether the existing monetary policy tools are sufficient to achieve and maintain the dual mandate, and how its communication about monetary policy can be improved. A key component of the review has been a series of public Fed Listens events aimed at consulting with a broad range of stakeholders in the U.S. economy. The goal of Fed Listens was for policymakers to engage directly with a range of individuals and groups on issues pertaining to the dual-mandate objectives of maximum employment and stable prices. councils and community networks and from outreach conducted specifically for the Fed Listens initiative. The participants represented small businesses, labor unions, state and local governments, schools and community colleges, workforce development organizations, housing groups, community development financial institutions (CDFIs), retirees, and academia. Most of the events were conducted in a town hall format with one or more panel sessions. A few incorporated site visits to schools and businesses to learn about local initiatives in underserved communities to increase education, combine high school completion with work experience, or offer after-hours vocational training to enhance skill levels. At the events, participants were asked how they viewed the relative importance of maximum employment and price stability and how monetary policy actions affected them and the people they represent. Participants commented on labor market conditions and whether they saw those conditions as consistent with the dual-mandate objective of maximum employment; they also offered perspectives on inflation, lending conditions, and how people in their organizations or communities responded to interest rate changes. In addition, participants often compared economic conditions today with conditions a few years or a decade ago and assessed the Federal Reserve’s public communications. In keeping with the transparency of the review, all of the events were livestreamed, with written summaries of the events posted on System websites afterward.1 hosted 14 public Fed Listens events—one at the Board of Governors, one at each of the 12 Reserve Banks, and a System research conference at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago. The events featured a broad range of participants drawn from the System’s existing advisory (continued) 1. Information on the Fed Listens events is available on the Board’s website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/ monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and- communications-fed-listens-events.htm. While the Fed Listens events covered a broad range of topics, participants consistently highlighted a few points. Representatives of disadvantaged communities generally saw the strong labor market as providing significant benefits to their constituents—primarily by providing job opportunities for people who had had difficulty finding jobs in the past. These representatives also expressed concern about how newly hired workers would fare in the next downturn and whether the job experience they will have acquired by then would allow them to retain their jobs during the downturn or obtain jobs easily after the economy recovers. Small business owners and representatives from business organizations said finding qualified workers to fill available positions was a challenge in the current labor market conditions. As a result, businesses are partnering with workforce development agencies or community colleges to devise training programs or specialized curriculums to prepare would-be workers. In addition, firms have been more willing to hire people who would not have been considered in less favorable labor market conditions. However, businesses generally are not increasing wages to attract and retain workers. Instead, they are offering new training or education programs and adding or augmenting health-care and other benefits. While businesses and CDFIs generally found low interest rates to be beneficial, representatives of underserved populations and retirees conveyed different views. Many people in lower-income communities generally have little or no access to conventional credit. Consequently, they often do not benefit when interest rates on conventional credit fall as a result of the Fed’s actions. In addition, we heard that retirees with savings have seen interest income on their savings decline. Participants acknowledged that inflation is low, and representatives of small businesses or business associations emphasized the importance of stable and predictable inflation for planning and decisionmaking. Participants representing retirees said rising costs of health care and prescription drugs pose challenges for people on fixed incomes, while representatives of low- and middle-income communities said the people they represent still struggle to afford basic necessities such as housing, utilities, and food. Participants generally did not regard the fact that aggregate inflation is running modestly below the Federal Reserve’s 2 percent objective as a problem. That perception highlights a challenge for the Federal Reserve as it publicly communicates about the rationale for the review and the importance of anchoring inflation expectations at 2 percent for keeping policy interest rates sufficiently above the effective lower bound. policymakers have been discussing issues associated with the monetary policy strategy review at meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). At its July, September, and October meetings, the FOMC reviewed the performance of its current approach to monetary policy, discussed possible alternative policy strategies, and reviewed policy tools. Key points of these discussions have been summarized in publicly released meeting minutes. In December, the FOMC considered the views offered at the Fed Listens events together with staff analysis on the distributional effects of monetary policy. The FOMC’s discussions are continuing into 2020. Policymakers expect to complete the review around the middle of this year. At that time, policymakers will report their findings to the public. Consistent with its decision at the January 2019 meeting, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) reaffirmed, in its Statement Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation on October 11, 2019, the intention to implement monetary policy in a regime with an ample supply of reserves.1 In such a system, active management of reserves through frequent open market operations is not required, and control over the level of the federal funds rate and other short-term interest rates is exercised primarily through the setting of the Federal Reserve’s administered rates. In recent years, depository institutions’ reserve balances held at the Federal Reserve have declined as a result of the normalization of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet as well as growth in nonreserve liabilities. Reserves dropped from a peak of about $2.8 trillion in 2014 to about $2.2 trillion in late September 2017, largely reflecting the expansion of nonreserve liabilities. Subsequently, reserves declined further, reflecting the FOMC’s decision to allow a gradual runoff of maturing securities, and, by the time the FOMC decided to conclude the reduction of its aggregate securities holdings in August 2019, reserves had fallen to about $1.5 trillion. Despite the cessation of balance sheet runoff in August 2019, reserves subsequently continued to decline because of increases in currency and other nonreserve liabilities and reached a multiyear low of about $1.4 trillion in September 2019. Against a backdrop of declining reserves and high 1. See the Statement Regarding Monetary Policy September 2019, imbalances in the supply of and demand for short-term funding led to pressures in the repurchase agreement (repo) market—a money market segment in which banks, securities dealers, money market funds (MMFs), and other financial market participants lend to and borrow from each other for short periods against high-quality collateral. On the demand side, dealers’ and other investors’ needs for financing securities had increased following the settlement of Treasury auctions at mid-month. On the supply side, some institutional investors, such as government-only MMFs and banks, may have been reluctant to increase lending because they faced uncertainty regarding cash outflows as their clients were making corporate tax payments due in mid- September. As a result, repo rates rose sharply in mid-September (figure A). Pressures in the repo market spilled over to other short-term funding markets, including the federal funds market. The federal funds rate firmed, moving out of its target range for one day (as shown in figure A). In response to elevated rates, the Federal Reserve began conducting repo operations to help stabilize money markets and provide reserves to keep the federal funds rate within its target range (figure B). These operations have been effective in meeting these goals. Consistent with its decision to implement monetary policy in a regime with an ample supply of reserves, on October 11, 2019, the Committee announced its decision to purchase Treasury bills at least into the second quarter of 2020 in order to maintain reserves at or above the level that prevailed in early September (as shown in figure B).2 In addition, the FOMC announced (continued) Implementation, which is available on the Board’s website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/ monetary20191011a.htm. 2. For additional information on the FOMC’s plans to implement monetary policy over the longer run, see the A. Selected money market rates NOTE: The Secured Overnight Financing Rate (SOFR) is a broad measure of rates on overnight Treasury general collateral repurchase agreement (repo) transactions and bilateral Treasury repo transactions. term and overnight repo operations to ensure that the supply of reserves remains ample even during periods of sharp increases in nonreserve liabilities and to mitigate the risk of money market pressures that could adversely affect policy implementation.3 Repos outstanding, consisting of both overnight and term operations, have been about $209 billion per day, Statement Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation and Balance Sheet Normalization, which can be found on the Board’s website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/ pressreleases/monetary20190130c.htm. 3. The Statement Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation indicated that the Federal Reserve would conduct term and overnight repo operations at least through January 2020. Such operations will now be continued at least through April 2020; see “Implementation Note Issued January 29, 2020,” which is available on the Board’s website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/ monetary20200129a1.htm. Cumulative bill purchases Outstanding term repos Overnight repos NOTE: Data are at a business-day frequency, excluding the holidays on October 14, November 11, November 28, December 25, and January 1. Data begin September 18, 2019. on average, since the announcement on October 11, 2019. These operations are expected to decline over time as Treasury bill purchases supply a larger base of reserves. The Federal Reserve’s open market operations— repo operations and bill purchases—lifted reserves to levels averaging about $1.6 trillion in early 2020. Besides adding reserves, the repo operations damped funding pressures in repo markets that may otherwise have passed through to the federal funds market. As such, the combination of repo operations and bill purchases fostered conditions that helped maintain the federal funds rate within the target range. Notably, with the provision of about $250 billion in liquidity via the Federal Reserve’s repo operations, money market conditions were quite calm on year-end. Both secured and unsecured overnight funding rates printed in line with the interest rate on excess reserves (as indicated in figure A). The following material appeared as an addendum to the minutes of the December 10–11, 2019, meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee. In conjunction with the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting held on December 10–11, 2019, meeting participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real gross domestic product (GDP) growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for each year from 2019 to 2022 and over the longer run. Each participant’s projections were based on information available at the time of the meeting, together with his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy—including a path for the federal funds rate and its longer-run value— and assumptions about other factors likely to affect economic outcomes. The longer- run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the value to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy.14 “Appropriate monetary policy” is defined as the future path of policy that each participant deems most likely to foster outcomes for economic activity and inflation that best satisfy his or her individual interpretation of the statutory mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability. longer-run rate. The median of the current projections for the unemployment rate was lower than that in the September Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) for each year of the projection period, and some participants reduced their estimates of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment, resulting in a slight decline in the median estimate. The medians of the projections for both total and core inflation, as measured by the four-quarter percent change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), increase significantly from 2019 to 2020 and more modestly in 2021 to reach 2 percent that year. Almost all participants expected that inflation would be at or slightly above the Committee’s 2 percent objective in 2021 and 2022. A couple more participants, relative to the September SEP, projected inflation to exceed 2 percent at some point during the projection period. The medians of the projections for both total and core inflation were unchanged for 2020 through 2022, compared with the September SEP. Table 1 and figure 1 provide summary statistics for the projections. Almost all participants expected that, under appropriate monetary policy, growth of real GDP in 2020 would run at or slightly above 1.9 percent, the median of current estimates of its longer-run rate. The median of the projections for the growth rate of real GDP edges down each year over the projection horizon and, for 2022, is modestly below the median of the current estimates of its 14. One participant did not submit longer-run As shown in figure 2, a substantial majority of participants indicated that their expectations regarding the evolution of the economy, relative to the Committee’s objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation, would likely warrant keeping the federal funds at its current level through the end of 2020. Compared with the September SEP submissions, the median projection for the federal funds rate was 25 basis points lower in each year over the projection period and retained its modest upward tilt in 2021 and 2022. The median of participants’ assessments of the appropriate level for the federal funds rate in 2022 was slightly below the median of estimates of its longer-run level; the median Table 1. Economic projections of Federal Reserve Board members and Federal Reserve Bank presidents, under their individual assumptions of projected appropriate monetary policy, December 2019 Percent Longer run Longer run Longer run Memo: Projected appropriate policy path Note: Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP) and projections for both measures of inflation are percent changes from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. PCE inflation and core PCE inflation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index for personal consumption expen- ditures (PCE) and the price index for PCE excluding food and energy. Projections for the unemployment rate are for the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. Each participant’s projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy. Longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. The projections for the federal funds rate are the value of the midpoint of the projected appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the projected appropriate target level for the federal funds rate at the end of the specified calendar year or over the longer run. The September projections were made in conjunction with the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on September 17–18, 2019. One participant did not submit longer-run projections for the change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, or the federal funds rate in conjunction with the September 17–18, 2019, meeting, and one participant did not submit such projections in conjunction with the December 10–11, 2019, meeting. 1. For each period, the median is the middle projection when the projections are arranged from lowest to highest. When the number of projections is even, the median is the 2. The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each year. 3. The range for a variable in a given year includes all participants’ projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year. 4. Longer-run projections for core PCE inflation are not collected. estimate of the longer-run level was unchanged from its value in the September SEP. Most participants regarded the uncertainties around their projections as broadly similar to the average over the past 20 years. The majority of participants continued to assess the risks to their outlooks for real GDP growth as weighted to the downside and for the unemployment rate as weighted to the upside. However, compared with the September submissions, several participants shifted their assessments of the balance of risks around these projections to being broadly balanced. Most participants judged the risks to their inflation outlook as broadly balanced, though one-third of participants viewed the risks to their inflation projections as weighted to the downside; no participant assessed the risks to his or her inflation outlook as weighted to the upside. The uncertainties and risks around participants’ projections for headline and core inflation were little changed from the September SEP. As shown in table 1, the medians of participants’ projections for real GDP growth in 2019 and 2020, conditional on their individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy, were 2.2 percent and 2.0 percent, respectively, a touch above the median estimate of the longer-run growth rate of 1.9 percent. The median of the projections for the growth rate of real GDP declines slowly over the projection horizon and, in 2022, is modestly below the median of the current estimates of its longer-run rate. The medians of the projections for real GDP growth in all four years of the projection period, as well as in the longer run, were unchanged from the September SEP. A majority of participants marked down their projections of the unemployment rate in each year of the projection period, and some participants lowered their estimates of the Figure 1. Medians, central tendencies, and ranges of economic projections, 2019–22 and over the longer run Longer run Longer run Longer run Longer run Longer run Note: Each shaded circle indicates the value (rounded to the nearest ⅛ percentage point) of an individual participant’s judgment of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the appropriate target level for the federal funds rate at the end of the specified calendar year or over the longer run. One participant did not submit longer-run projections for the federal funds rate. longer-run normal rate of unemployment. As a result, the medians of the projections for the unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of 2020 through 2022 were 3.5 percent, 3.6 percent, and 3.7 percent, respectively, each 0.2 percentage point lower than in the September projections. The median estimate of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment was 4.1 percent, 0.1 percentage point lower than in September. Figures 3.A and 3.B show the distributions of participants’ projections for real GDP growth and the unemployment rate, respectively, from 2019 to 2022 and in the longer run. The distribution of individual projections for real GDP growth for 2020 tilted slightly higher, as many participants upgraded their projections a bit relative to those in the September SEP, although the median projection was unchanged. The distributions of individual projections of real GDP growth in 2021 and 2022 and in the longer run were little changed overall. The distributions of individual projections for the unemployment rate from 2020 to 2022 and in the longer run shifted lower relative to those in September. As shown in table 1, the median projection for core PCE price inflation was 1.6 percent for 2019, a modest decrease from the September projections. The medians of the projections for both total and core PCE price inflation were each 1.9 percent in 2020 and 2.0 percent in both 2021 and 2022—all unchanged from September. Figures 3.C and 3.D show the distributions of participants’ views about their outlooks for inflation. Although the medians of the projections for total and core PCE price inflation from 2020 through 2022 were unchanged from the September SEP, a couple more participants projected inflation to be slightly above the Committee’s 2 percent objective in 2022. Figure 3.E shows the distributions of participants’ judgments regarding the appropriate target—or midpoint of the target range—for the federal funds rate at the end of each year from 2019 to 2022 and over the longer run. A substantial majority of participants projected a federal funds rate of 1.63 percent for the end of 2020. Four participants assessed that the most likely appropriate rate at year-end for 2020 would be 1.88 percent. For subsequent years, the medians of the projections were 1.88 percent at the end of 2021 and 2.13 percent at the end of 2022. The distribution of participants’ estimates of the longer-run level of the federal funds rate was little changed, and the median estimate was unchanged from September at 2.50 percent. Compared with the projections prepared for the September SEP, a number of participants marked down their assessments of the appropriate level of the federal funds rate at the end of 2020, reflecting in part the reduction in the target range at the October meeting and causing both the range and central tendency of projections for 2020 to narrow considerably. Some participants lowered their projections for the appropriate level in 2021 and 2022. The median projection for the federal funds rate was 25 basis points lower in each year in the projection period. Realized inflation running persistently below target and risks associated with trade policy and foreign economic growth were cited as key factors informing participants’ judgments about the appropriate path for the federal funds rate. In assessing the appropriate path of the federal funds rate, FOMC participants take account of the range of possible economic outcomes, the likelihood of those outcomes, and the potential benefits and costs should they occur. As a reference, table 2 provides measures of forecast uncertainty—based on the forecast errors of various private and government forecasts over the past 20 years—for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and total PCE price inflation. Those measures are represented graphically in the “fan charts” shown in the top panels of figures 4.A, 4.B, and 4.C. The fan charts display the SEP medians for the three variables surrounded by symmetric confidence intervals derived from the forecast errors reported in table 2. If the degree of uncertainty attending these Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges Percentage points Note: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root mean squared error of projections for 1999 through 2018 that were released in the winter by various private and government forecasters. As described in the box “Forecast Uncertain- ty,” under certain assumptions, there is about a 70 percent probability that actual outcomes for real GDP, unemployment, consumer prices, and the federal funds rate will be in ranges implied by the average size of projection errors made in the past. For more information, see David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip (2017), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook Using Historical Forecasting Errors: The Federal Reserve’s Approach,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-020 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February), https:// dx.doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2017.020. 1. Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure that has been most widely used in government and private economic forecasts. Projections are percent changes on a fourth quarter to fourth quarter basis. 3. For Federal Reserve staff forecasts, measure is the federal funds rate. For other forecasts, measure is the rate on 3-month Treasury bills. Projection errors are calculat- ed using average levels, in percent, in the fourth quarter. Figure 3.A. Distribution of participants’ projections for the change in real GDP, 2019–22 and over the longer run Longer run Note: Definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Figure 3.B. Distribution of participants’ projections for the unemployment rate, 2019–22 and over the longer run Longer run Note: Definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Figure 3.C. Distribution of participants’ projections for PCE inflation, 2019–22 and over the longer run Longer run Note: Definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Note: Definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Figure 3.E. Distribution of participants’ judgments of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the appropriate target level for the federal funds rate, 2019–22 and over the longer run Longer run Note: Definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the percent change in real gross domestic product (GDP) from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The confidence interval around the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may difer from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the confidence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reflect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections; these current assessments are summa- rized in the lower panels. Generally speaking, participants who judge the uncertainty about their projections as “broadly similar” to the average levels of the past 20 years would view the width of the confidence interval shown in the historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise, participants who judge the risks to their projections as “broadly balanced” would view the confidence interval around their projections as approximate- ly symmetric. For definitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The confidence interval around the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may difer from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the confidence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reflect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections; these current assessments are summarized in the lower panels. Generally speaking, participants who judge the uncertainty about their projections as “broadly similar” to the average levels of the past 20 years would view the width of the confidence interval shown in the historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise, participants who judge the risks to their projections as “broadly balanced” would view the confidence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For definitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Risks to core PCE inflation December projections September projections Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the percent change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The confidence interval around the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may difer from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the confidence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reflect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections; these current assessments are summarized in the lower panels. Generally speaking, participants who judge the uncertainty about their projections as “broadly similar” to the average levels of the past 20 years would view the width of the confidence interval shown in the historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise, participants who judge the risks to their projections as “broadly balanced” would view the confidence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For definitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” projections is similar to the typical magnitude of past forecast errors and the risks around the projections are broadly balanced, then future outcomes of these variables would have about a 70 percent probability of being within these confidence intervals. For all three variables, this measure of uncertainty is substantial and generally increases as the forecast horizon lengthens. Participants’ assessments of the level of uncertainty surrounding their individual economic projections are shown in the bottom- left panels of figures 4.A, 4.B, and 4.C. A substantial majority of participants viewed the uncertainty surrounding each of the four economic variables as being broadly similar to the average over the past 20 years. Because the fan charts are constructed to be symmetric around the median projections, they do not reflect any asymmetries in the balance of risks that participants may see in their economic projections. Participants’ assessments of the balance of risks to their current economic projections are shown in the bottom-right panels of figures 4.A, 4.B, and 4.C. Relative to the September SEP, more participants saw the risks to the outlook for real GDP growth and the unemployment rate as broadly balanced, although a small majority continued to view the risks to their outlooks for real GDP growth as weighted to the downside and for the unemployment rate as weighted to the upside. Most participants continued to judge the risks to their inflation outlook as broadly balanced, while some participants viewed the risks to their inflation outlook as weighted to the downside. No participant assessed the risks to his or her inflation outlook as weighted to the upside. In discussing the uncertainty and risks surrounding their economic projections, some participants mentioned trade developments and concerns about foreign economic growth as sources of uncertainty or downside risk to the U.S. economic growth outlook. In contrast, the underlying strength of both consumer spending and the labor market was cited as balancing the risks around the growth outlook. In addition, most of the participants who shifted their balance of risks for output growth to “broadly balanced” cited more accommodative monetary policy as a contributing factor. For the inflation outlook, the possibility that inflation expectations could be drifting below levels consistent with the FOMC’s 2 percent inflation objective was viewed as a downside risk. A couple of participants mentioned higher tariffs as a source of upside risk to their inflation outlook. Participants’ assessments of the appropriate future path of the federal funds rate are also subject to considerable uncertainty. Because the Committee adjusts the federal funds rate in response to actual and prospective developments over time in key economic variables—such as real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation— uncertainty surrounding the projected path for the federal funds rate importantly reflects the uncertainties about the paths for these economic variables, along with other factors. Figure 5 provides a graphic representation of this uncertainty, plotting the SEP median for the federal funds rate surrounded by symmetric confidence intervals derived from the results presented in table 2. As with the macroeconomic variables, the forecast uncertainty surrounding the appropriate path of the federal funds rate is substantial and increases for longer horizons. Note: The blue and red lines are based on actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the Committee’s target for the federal funds rate at the end of the year indicated. The actual values are the midpoint of the target range; the median projected values are based on either the midpoint of the target range or the target level. The confidence interval around the median projected values is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years. The confidence interval is not strictly consistent with the projections for the federal funds rate, primarily because these projections are not forecasts of the likeliest outcomes for the federal funds rate, but rather projections of participants’ individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy. Still, historical forecast errors provide a broad sense of the uncertainty around the future path of the federal funds rate generated by the uncertainty about the macroeconomic variables as well as additional adjustments to monetary policy that may be appropriate to onset the effects of shocks to the economy. The confidence interval is assumed to be symmetric except when it is truncated at zero—the bottom of the lowest target range for the federal funds rate that has been adopted in the past by the Committee. This truncation would not be intended to indicate the likelihood of the use of negative interest rates to provide additional monetary policy accommodation if doing so was judged appropriate. In such situations, the Committee could also employ other tools, including forward guidance and large-scale asset purchases, to provide additional accommodation. Because current conditions may difer from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the confidence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reflect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections. * The confidence interval is derived from forecasts of the average level of short-term interest rates in the fourth quarter of the year indicated; more information about these data is available in table 2. The shaded area encompasses less than a 70 percent confidence interval if the confidence interval has been truncated at zero. The economic projections provided by the members of the Board of Governors and the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks inform discussions of monetary policy among policymakers and can aid public understanding of the basis for policy actions. Considerable uncertainty attends these projections, however. The economic and statistical models and relationships used to help produce economic forecasts are necessarily imperfect descriptions of the real world, and the future path of the economy can be affected by myriad unforeseen developments and events. Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, participants consider not only what appears to be the most likely economic outcome as embodied in their projections, but also the range of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of their occurring, and the potential costs to the economy should they occur. Table 2 summarizes the average historical accuracy of a range of forecasts, including those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports and those prepared by the Federal Reserve Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). The projection error ranges shown in the table illustrate the considerable uncertainty associated with economic forecasts. For example, suppose a participant projects that real gross domestic product (GDP) and total consumer prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty attending those projections is similar to that experienced in the past and the risks around the projections are broadly balanced, the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a probability of about 70 percent that actual GDP would expand within a range of 2.2 to 3.8 percent in the current year, 1.4 to 4.6 percent in the second year, and 1.0 to 5.0 percent in the third and fourth years. The corresponding 70 percent confidence intervals for overall inflation would be 1.8 to 2.2 percent in the current year, 1.1 to 2.9 percent in the second year, 1.0 to 3.0 percent in the third year, and 1.1 to 2.9 percent in the fourth year. Figures 4.A through 4.C illustrate these confidence bounds in “fan charts” that are symmetric and centered on the medians of FOMC participants’ projections for GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation. However, in some instances, the risks around the projections may not be symmetric. In particular, the unemployment rate cannot be negative; furthermore, the risks around a particular projection might be tilted to either the upside or the downside, in which case the corresponding fan chart would be asymmetrically positioned around the median projection. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over history, participants provide judgments as to whether the uncertainty attached to their projections of each economic variable is greater than, smaller than, or broadly similar to typical levels of forecast uncertainty seen in the past 20 years, as presented in table 2 and reflected in the widths of the confidence intervals shown in the top panels of figures 4.A through 4.C. (continued) Participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty surrounding their projections are summarized in the bottom-left panels of those figures. Participants also provide judgments as to whether the risks to their projections are weighted to the upside, are weighted to the downside, or are broadly balanced. That is, while the symmetric historical fan charts shown in the top panels of figures 4.A through 4.C imply that the risks to participants’ projections are balanced, participants may judge that there is a greater risk that a given variable will be above rather than below their projections. These judgments are summarized in the lower-right panels of figures 4.A through 4.C. As with real activity and inflation, the outlook for the future path of the federal funds rate is subject to considerable uncertainty. This uncertainty arises primarily because each participant’s assessment of the appropriate stance of monetary policy depends importantly on the evolution of real activity and inflation over time. If economic conditions evolve in an unexpected manner, then assessments of the appropriate setting of the federal funds rate would change from that point forward. The final line in table 2 shows the error ranges for forecasts of short- term interest rates. They suggest that the historical confidence intervals associated with projections of the federal funds rate are quite wide. It should be noted, however, that these confidence intervals are not strictly consistent with the projections for the federal funds rate, as these projections are not forecasts of the most likely quarterly outcomes but rather are projections of participants’ individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy and are on an end-of-year basis. However, the forecast errors should provide a sense of the uncertainty around the future path of the federal funds rate generated by the uncertainty about the macroeconomic variables as well as additional adjustments to monetary policy that would be appropriate to offset the effects of shocks to the economy. interval around the federal funds rate were to extend below zero, it would be truncated at zero for purposes of the fan chart shown in figure 5; zero is the bottom of the lowest target range for the federal funds rate that has been adopted by the Committee in the past. This approach to the construction of the federal funds rate fan chart would be merely a convention; it would not have any implications for possible future policy decisions regarding the use of negative interest rates to provide additional monetary policy accommodation if doing so were appropriate. In such situations, the Committee could also employ other tools, including forward guidance and asset purchases, to provide additional accommodation. While figures 4.A through 4.C provide information on the uncertainty around the economic projections, figure 1 provides information on the range of views across FOMC participants. A comparison of figure 1 with figures 4.A through 4.C shows that the dispersion of the projections across participants is much smaller than the average forecast errors over the past 20 years. emerging market economy London interbank offered rate implied volatility for the S&P 500 index The Board of Governors is pleased to submit its Monetary Policy Report pursuant to section 2B of the Federal Reserve Act. Statement on Longer-run goaLS and monetary PoLicy Strategy Adopted effective January 24, 2012; as amended effective January 26, 2021 The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) is firmly committed to fulfilling its statutory mandate from the Congress of promoting maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates. The Committee seeks to explain its monetary policy decisions to the public as clearly as possible. Such clarity facilitates well-informed decisionmaking by households and businesses, reduces economic and financial uncertainty, increases the effectiveness of monetary policy, and enhances transparency and accountability, which are essential in a democratic society. Employment, inflation, and long-term interest rates fluctuate over time in response to economic and financial disturbances. Monetary policy plays an important role in stabilizing the economy in response to these disturbances. The Committee’s primary means of adjusting the stance of monetary policy is through changes in the target range for the federal funds rate. The Committee judges that the level of the federal funds rate consistent with maximum employment and price stability over the longer run has declined relative to its historical average. Therefore, the federal funds rate is likely to be constrained by its effective lower bound more frequently than in the past. Owing in part to the proximity of interest rates to the effective lower bound, the Committee judges that downward risks to employment and inflation have increased. The Committee is prepared to use its full range of tools to achieve its maximum employment and price stability goals. The maximum level of employment is a broad-based and inclusive goal that is not directly measurable and changes over time owing largely to nonmonetary factors that affect the structure and dynamics of the labor market. Consequently, it would not be appropriate to specify a fixed goal for employment; rather, the Committee’s policy decisions must be informed by assessments of the shortfalls of employment from its maximum level, recognizing that such assessments are necessarily uncertain and subject to revision. The Committee considers a wide range of indicators in making these assessments. The inflation rate over the longer run is primarily determined by monetary policy, and hence the Committee has the ability to specify a longer-run goal for inflation. The Committee reaffirms its judgment that inflation at the rate of 2 percent, as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, is most consistent over the longer run with the Federal Reserve’s statutory mandate. The Committee judges that longer-term inflation expectations that are well anchored at 2 percent foster price stability and moderate long-term interest rates and enhance the Committee’s ability to promote maximum employment in the face of significant economic disturbances. In order to anchor longer-term inflation expectations at this level, the Committee seeks to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time, and therefore judges that, following periods when inflation has been running persistently below 2 percent, appropriate monetary policy will likely aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time. Monetary policy actions tend to influence economic activity, employment, and prices with a lag. In setting monetary policy, the Committee seeks over time to mitigate shortfalls of employment from the Committee’s assessment of its maximum level and deviations of inflation from its longer-run goal. Moreover, sustainably achieving maximum employment and price stability depends on a stable financial system. Therefore, the Committee’s policy decisions reflect its longer-run goals, its medium-term outlook, and its assessments of the balance of risks, including risks to the financial system that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. The Committee’s employment and inflation objectives are generally complementary. However, under circumstances in which the Committee judges that the objectives are not complementary, it takes into account the employment shortfalls and inflation deviations and the potentially different time horizons over which employment and inflation are projected to return to levels judged consistent with its mandate. The Committee intends to review these principles and to make adjustments as appropriate at its annual organizational meeting each January, and to undertake roughly every 5 years a thorough public review of its monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices. The Uneven Recovery in Labor Force Participation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 Recent Inflation Developments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 Supply Chain Bottlenecks in U.S. Manufacturing and Trade . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 Assessing the Recent Rise in Inflation Expectations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 Developments Related to Financial Stability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30 Monetary Policy Rules, the Effective Lower Bound, and the Economic Recovery . . . . . . . . . 42 Developments in the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet and Money Markets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46 Forecast Uncertainty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64 note: This report reflects information that was publicly available as of noon EDT on July 7, 2021. Unless otherwise stated, the time series in the figures extend through, for daily data, July 6, 2021; for monthly data, May 2021; and, for quarterly data, 2021:Q1. In bar charts, except as noted, the change for a given period is measured to its final quarter from the final quarter of the preceding period. For figures 20, 32, and 44, note that the S&P/Case-Shiller U.S. National Home Price Index, the S&P 500 Index, and the Dow Jones Bank Index are products of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates and have been licensed for use by the Board. Copyright © 2021 S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC, a division of S&P Global, and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Redistribution, reproduction, and/or photocopying in whole or in part are prohibited without written permission of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC. For more information on any of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC’s indices, please visit www. spdji.com. S&P® is a registered trademark of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC, and Dow Jones® is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. Neither S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC, Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC, their affiliates, nor their third-party licensors make any representation or warranty, express or implied, as to the ability of any index to accurately represent the asset class or market sector that it purports to represent, and neither S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC, Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC, their affiliates, nor their third-party licensors shall have any liability for any errors, omissions, or interruptions of any index or the data included therein. For figure 22, neither DTCC Solutions LLC nor any of its affiliates shall be responsible for any errors or omissions in any DTCC data included in this publication, regardless of the cause, and, in no event, shall DTCC or any of its affiliates be liable for any direct, indirect, special, or consequential damages, costs, expenses, legal fees, or losses (including lost income or lost profit, trading losses, and opportunity costs) in connection with this publication. summary Over the first half of 2021, progress on vaccinations has led to a reopening of the economy and strong economic growth, supported by accommodative monetary and fiscal policy. However, the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic have continued to weigh on the U.S. economy, and employment has remained well below pre-pandemic levels. Furthermore, shortages of material inputs and difficulties in hiring have held down activity in a number of industries. In part because of these bottlenecks and other largely transitory factors, PCE (personal consumption expenditures) prices rose 3.9 percent over the 12 months ending in May. Over the first half of the year, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) held its policy rate near zero and continued to purchase Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities to support the economic recovery. These measures, along with the Committee’s guidance on interest rates and the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet, will help ensure that monetary policy continues to deliver powerful support to the economy until the recovery is complete. The labor market. The labor market continued to recover over the first six months of 2021. Job gains averaged 540,000 per month, and the unemployment rate moved down from 6.7 percent in December to 5.9 percent in June. Although labor market improvement has been rapid, the unemployment rate remained elevated in June, and labor force participation has not moved up from the low rates that have prevailed for much of the past year. A surge in labor demand that has outpaced the recovery in labor supply has resulted in a jump in job vacancies and a step-up in wage gains in recent months. Inflation. Consumer price inflation, as measured by the 12-month change in the PCE price index, moved up from 1.2 percent at the end of last year to 3.9 percent in May. The 12-month measure of inflation that excludes food and energy items (so-called core inflation) was 3.4 percent in May, up from 1.4 percent at the end of last year. Some of the strength in recent 12-month inflation readings reflects the comparison of current prices with prices that sank at the onset of the pandemic as households curtailed spending—a transitory result of “base effects.” More lasting but likely still temporary upward pressure on inflation has come from prices for goods experiencing supply chain bottlenecks, such as motor vehicles and appliances. In addition, prices for some services, such as airfares and lodging, have moved up sharply in recent months toward more normal levels as demand has recovered. Both survey-based and market-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations have risen since the end of last year, largely reversing the downward drift in those measures in recent years, and are in a range that is broadly consistent with the FOMC’s longer-run inflation objective. Economic activity. In the first quarter, real gross domestic product (GDP) increased 6.4 percent, propelled by a surge in household consumption and a solid increase in business investment but restrained by a substantial drawdown in inventories as firms contended with production bottlenecks. Data for the second quarter suggest a further robust increase in demand. Against a backdrop of elevated household savings, accommodative financial conditions, ongoing fiscal support, and the reopening of the economy, the strength in household spending has persisted, reflecting continued strong spending on durable goods and solid progress toward more normal levels of spending on services. Financial conditions. Since mid-February, equity prices and yields on nominal Treasury securities at longer maturities increased, as the rapid deployment of highly effective COVID-19 vaccines in the United States and the support provided by fiscal policy boosted optimism regarding the economic outlook. Despite having increased since February, mortgage rates for households remain near historical lows. Overall financing conditions for businesses and households eased further since February, as market-based lending conditions remained accommodative and bank-lending conditions eased markedly. Large firms, as well as those households that have solid credit ratings, continued to experience ample access to financing. However, financing conditions remained tight for small businesses and households with low credit scores. Financial stability. While some financial vulnerabilities have increased since the previous Monetary Policy Report, the institutions at the core of the financial system remain resilient. Asset valuations have generally risen across risky asset classes with improving fundamentals as well as increased investor risk appetite, including in equity and corporate bond markets. Vulnerabilities from both business and household debt have continued to decline in the first quarter of 2021, reflecting a slower pace of business borrowing, an improvement in business earnings, and government programs that have supported business and household incomes. Even so, business-sector debt outstanding remains high relative to income, and some businesses and households are still under considerable strain. In the financial sector, leverage at banks and broker-dealers remains low, while available measures of leverage at hedge funds increased into early 2021 and are high. Issuance volumes of collateralized loan obligations and asset-backed securities recovered strongly through the first quarter of 2021, while issuance of non-agency commercial mortgage-backed securities was weak in that quarter. Funding risks at domestic banks continued to be low in the first quarter, but structural vulnerabilities persist at some types of money market funds and bank- loan and bond mutual funds. (See the box “Developments Related to Financial Stability” in Part 1.) International developments. Foreign GDP growth moderated at the start of the year, as some countries tightened public health restrictions to contain renewed COVID-19 outbreaks. Compared with last spring, many foreign economies exhibited greater resilience to public-health-related restrictions, and their governments have continued to provide fiscal support. Recent indicators suggest a pickup in activity in advanced foreign economies this spring following an increase in vaccination rates and an easing of restrictions. However, conditions in emerging market economies are more mixed, in part dependent on their success in containing outbreaks and the availability of vaccines. Inflation has been rising in many economies, as the price declines seen last spring reversed and commodity prices ramped up. Monetary and fiscal policies continue to be supportive, but some foreign central banks are adopting or signaling less-accommodative policy stances. Foreign financial conditions generally improved or held steady. Equity prices and longer-term sovereign yields increased across advanced foreign economies, boosted by their ongoing reopening. Equity markets in emerging market economies were mixed, and flows into dedicated emerging market funds slowed. After trending lower since the spring of 2020, the foreign exchange value of the dollar has changed little on net since the start of the year. Interest rate policy. To continue to support the economic recovery, the FOMC has kept the target range for the federal funds rate near zero and has maintained the monthly pace of its asset purchases. The Committee expects it will be appropriate to maintain the current target range for the federal funds rate until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with its assessments of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed that rate for some time. Balance sheet policy. With the federal funds rate near zero, the Federal Reserve has also continued to undertake asset purchases, increasing its holdings of Treasury securities by $80 billion per month and its holdings of agency mortgage-backed securities by $40 billion per month. These purchases help foster smooth market functioning and accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. The Committee expects these purchases to continue at least at this pace until substantial further progress has been made toward its maximum-employment and price-stability goals. In coming meetings, the Committee will continue to assess the economy’s progress toward these goals since the Committee adopted its asset purchase guidance last December. In assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the Committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. The Committee is prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. The uneven recovery in labor force participation. The labor force participation rate (LFPR) has improved very little since early in the recovery and remains well below pre-pandemic levels. Relative to its February 2020 level, the LFPR remains especially low for individuals without a college education, for individuals aged 55 and older, and for Hispanics and Latinos. Factors likely contributing both to the incomplete recovery of the LFPR and to differences across groups include a surge in retirements, increased caregiving responsibilities, and individuals’ fear of contracting COVID-19; expansions to the availability, duration, and level of unemployment insurance benefits may also have supported individuals who withdrew from the labor force. Many of these factors should have a diminishing effect on participation in the coming months as public health conditions continue to improve and as expanded unemployment insurance expires. (See the box “The Uneven Recovery in Labor Force Participation” in Part 1.) Recent inflation developments. Consumer price inflation has increased notably this spring as a surge in demand has run up against production bottlenecks and hiring difficulties. As these extraordinary circumstances pass, supply and demand should move closer to balance, and inflation is widely expected to move down. (See the box “Recent Inflation Developments” in Part 1.) Supply chain bottlenecks in U.S. manufacturing and trade. Supply chain bottlenecks have hampered U.S. manufacturers’ ability to procure the inputs needed to meet the surge in demand that followed widespread factory shutdowns during the first half of last year. Additionally, a massive influx of goods has exceeded the capacity of U.S. ports, extending manufacturers’ wait times for imported parts. The stress on supply chains is reflected in historically high order backlogs and historically low customer inventories; these stresses, together with strong demand, have led to increased price pressures. When these bottlenecks will resolve is uncertain, as they reflect the global supply chain as well as industry-specific factors, but for some goods, such as lumber, the previous sharp increases in prices have begun to reverse. (See the box “Supply Chain Bottlenecks in U.S. Manufacturing and Trade” in Part 1.) Inflation expectations. To avoid sustained periods of unusually low or high inflation, a fundamental aspect of the FOMC’s monetary policy framework is for longer-term inflation expectations to be well anchored at the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run inflation objective. Even though the pace of price increases has jumped in the first half of this year, recent readings on various measures of inflation expectations indicate that inflation is expected to return to levels broadly consistent with the FOMC’s 2 percent longer-run inflation objective after a period of temporarily higher inflation. That said, upside risks to the inflation outlook in the near term have increased. (See the box “Assessing the Recent Rise in Inflation Expectations” in Part 1.) Monetary policy rules. Simple monetary policy rules, which relate a policy interest rate to a small number of other economic variables, can provide useful guidance to policymakers. Many of the rules have prescribed strongly negative values of the federal funds rate since the start of the pandemic-driven recession. Because of the effective lower bound for the federal funds rate, the Federal Reserve’s other monetary policy tools—namely, forward guidance and asset purchases—have been critical for providing the necessary support to the economy through this challenging period. (See the box “Monetary Policy Rules, the Effective Lower Bound, and the Economic Recovery” in Part 2.) The Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. Since January, the growth in reserves, the drawdown of the Treasury General Account, and the surge in usage of the overnight reverse repurchase agreement (ON RRP) facility have significantly affected the composition of the Federal Reserve’s liabilities. Against a backdrop of low short-term market interest rates and ample liquidity, the use of the ON RRP facility has increased substantially since April and has reached a recent high of nearly $1 trillion, compared with usage near zero in February. Factors contributing to this increase included the decline in Treasury bill supply, downward pressure on money market rates, and the recent technical adjustment to the Federal Reserve’s administered rates. (See the box “Developments in the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet and Money Markets” in Part 2.) 1. Nonfarm payroll employment The labor market improved substantially in the first half of the year as the economy reopened and activity rebounded Payroll employment increased by 3.2 million jobs in the first half of 2021, driven by a 1.6 million job gain in the leisure and hospitality sector, where the largest employment losses occurred last year. Despite the substantial improvement in the labor market, employment remained well below its pre-pandemic level (figure 1). In addition, although the unemployment rate declined 0.8 percentage point in the first half of the year, to 5.9 percent in June, it remained well above its pre-pandemic level (figure 2). This figure understates the shortfall in employment, particularly as factors related to the pandemic appear to be weighing on participation in the labor market. NOTE: The data extend through June 2021. SOURCE: Bureau of Labor Statistics via Haver Analytics. 2. Civilian unemployment rate A brisk increase in labor demand outpaced the return of labor supply . . . With economic activity rebounding, labor demand rose briskly in the spring, while the supply of labor struggled to keep up. Employers reported widespread hiring difficulties, job openings jumped to about 30 percent above the average level for 2019, and the ratio of job openings to job seekers surged (figure 3). With a dwindling pool of temporarily laid-off workers to recall, hiring increasingly involved reallocation of workers across firms and industries, a more time- consuming process. In addition, enhanced unemployment benefits have allowed potential workers to be more selective and reduce the intensity of their job search. Faced with a challenging environment for hiring, many employers raised wages to attract new workers and lengthened the workweeks of existing employees. NOTE: The data extend through June 2021. SOURCE: Bureau of Labor Statistics via Haver Analytics. 3. Ratio of job openings to job seekers NOTE: The data are the ratio of job openings to unemployed excluding 4. Labor force participation rate and employment-to-population ratio NOTE: The labor force participation rate and the employment- to-population ratio are percentages of the population aged 16 and over and extend through June 2021. 5. Employment-to-population ratio, by age NOTE: The data are monthly, extend through June 2021, and are seasonally adjusted. . . . which was restrained by ongoing effects of the pandemic . . . Several pandemic-related factors continued to weigh on labor supply in the spring. The share of working-age adults either employed or actively seeking work—the labor force participation rate—has remained low after falling dramatically with the onset of the pandemic and stood at 61.6 percent in June (figure 4). With less than half of the population fully vaccinated for COVID-19 and inoculation rates far lower in some places, safety in the workplace remained a salient issue for many potential workers, and caregiving demands were still elevated for many households. Furthermore, a surge in retirements both last year and this year, possibly in response to health-related concerns or job loss induced by the pandemic, reduced the pool of potential hires for employers (figure 5). . . . and much slack remains in the labor market . . . Although the unemployment rate has moved down sharply from its pandemic high, broad measures of labor conditions continue to point to substantial slack in the labor market. The employment-to-population ratio, which encompasses both unemployment and labor force participation, remains well below the trend observed in recent years, at 58.0 percent in June. Adjusted to include workers who have exited the labor force since the start of the pandemic and workers on temporary layoff misclassified as nonparticipants, the unemployment rate was about 8.7 percent in June.1 1. Since the beginning of the pandemic, some people on temporary layoff, who should be counted as unemployed, have instead been recorded as “employed but not at work.” Had these workers been correctly classified, the Bureau of Labor Statistics estimates that the unemployment rate in June would have been as much as 0.2 percentage point above the reported rate. . . . especially for some groups that have been particularly hard hit by the crisis Further progress has been made since the turn of the year in reversing the pandemic-induced spike in unemployment for all racial and ethnic groups (figure 6). That said, improvement in the labor market has been uneven. The effect of the pandemic on employment was largest for workers with lower wages, for workers with lower educational attainment, and for African Americans and Hispanics, and these hard- hit groups still have the most ground left to regain. And the pandemic seems to have taken a particularly large toll on the labor force participation of mothers, especially Hispanic mothers. (See the box “The Uneven Recovery in Labor Force Participation.”) Wages have risen sharply as the economy has reopened . . . Amid the transition to a more normal pace of economic activity, labor market pressures have led to a step-up in wage gains so far this year. Total hourly compensation as measured by the employment cost index rose at an annual rate of 4.0 percent over the first three months 6. Unemployment rate, by race and ethnicity NOTE: The data extend through June 2021. Unemployment rate measures total unemployed as a percentage of the labor force. Persons whose ethnicity is identified as Hispanic or Latino may be of any race. Small sample sizes preclude reliable estimates for Native Americans and other groups for which monthly data are not reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. By many measures, the labor market has only partially recovered from the depths of the pandemic- driven recession. This discussion presents comparisons of recent readings on labor market conditions to those just before the pandemic. However, the reactions of businesses and workers to the pandemic may have long-lasting effects on the structure of the labor market. For example, the pandemic seems to have accelerated the adoption of new technologies by fi rms and the pace of retirements by workers. The post-pandemic labor market and the characteristics of maximum employment may well be different from those of early 2020. As shown in the top bar of fi gure A, in June the percentage of the population aged 16 and older that is employed—or the employment-to-population (EPOP) ratio—was about 3 percentage points below its pre-pandemic (February 2020) level. This fi gure decomposes the decline in the EPOP ratio into the amount attributable to a decline in the percentage of the population working or actively looking for work, or the labor force participation rate (LFPR, light-blue bar), and an increase in unemployment (dark-blue bar).1 About one-half of the decline in the EPOP ratio since February 2020 refl ects a decline in the LFPR, which in June was 1¾ percentage points below its pre-pandemic level, while the rest is due to elevated unemployment. Some college or associate’s degree Bachelor’s degree and higher NOTE: The data are seasonally adjusted and extend from February 2020 to June 2021. Small sample sizes preclude reliable estimates for Native Americans and other groups for which monthly data are not reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. demographic groups existed even before the recession, and they widened after the start of the pandemic. While they have generally narrowed somewhat over the past year, the fi gure illustrates that differences across groups relative to pre-pandemic levels remain signifi cant: EPOP ratios are more depressed for those without a college education relative to the college educated and for Hispanics relative to others, with much of these differences refl ecting larger declines in the LFPRs of these groups.2 The EPOP ratio is depressed more for those aged 25 to 54 relative to other ages, while the LFPR has fallen by more for those aged 55 or older. While the unemployment rate has moved down gradually but steadily since peaking in April 2020, improvements in the LFPR have been less consistent, and since August 2020, the LFPR has fl uctuated in a narrow, low range despite broader improvement in labor market conditions. The LFPRs for most of the groups shown in fi gure A also remain well below pre-pandemic levels. The rest of this discussion covers three reasons why the recovery in the LFPR remains incomplete, and that also may help explain why the recovery has been weaker for some groups than others—namely, a surge in retirements, heightened caregiving responsibilities, and individuals’ fears of contracting COvID-19 . In addition, expansions to the availability, amount, and duration of unemployment insurance (UI) benefi ts have given many individuals the fi nancial means to be more selective when fi nding a new job, especially if pandemic- or individual-specifi c factors have limited their ability to quickly reenter the labor force. 1. The unemployment series in fi gure A shows changes in the number of unemployed workers as a percentage of the civilian population aged 16 or older. This measure differs from the unemployment rate, which is the number of unemployed individuals as a percentage of the civilian labor force. Retirements: Even in the absence of the pandemic, the aging of the baby boomer cohort would likely have implied an increase in the share of the population that is retired relative to pre-pandemic levels of around 0.3 percentage point.3 However, the share of the population in the Current Population Survey (CPS) that 2. For further discussion of factors contributing to these differences, see the box “Disparities in Job Loss during the Pandemic” in Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2021), Monetary Policy Report (Washington: Board of Governors, February), pp. 12–14, https://www.federalreserve. gov/monetarypolicy/files/20210219_mprfullreport.pdf. (continued) 3. For estimates of the effect of population aging on the LFPR in the decade before the start of the pandemic, see, for example, Joshua Montes (2018), “CBO’s Projection of Labor Force Participation Rates,” Working Paper 2018-04 B. Percent of the population not in the labor force and retired, change from January and February 2020 to April and May 2021 Not in the labor force and retired All individuals aged 16 Aged 55 and older Note: Federal Reserve Board staff estimates from microdata in the Current Population Survey (CPS). Estimates are not seasonally adjusted. Small sample sizes preclude reliable estimates for Native Americans and other groups not included in the table. indicates being out of the labor force and retired jumped at the start of the pandemic and, as shown in fi gure B, has increased by 1 percentage point since early 2020— accounting for more than one-half of the 1.7 percentage point decline in the aggregate LFPR over this period.4 Among individuals aged 55 and older, the increase has been larger for women than for men and larger for Hispanics and Asians than for whites and Blacks. Caregiving responsibilities: Figure C shows that nonparticipation in the labor force associated with caregiving has increased 0.7 percentage point.5 This increase likely refl ects in part the diffi culties imposed on parents and other caregivers from in-person education not being fully available to many K–12 students, and some of these parents may have decided to stop working or looking for work to help care for their children and facilitate their virtual education.6 4. The Federal Reserve Board staff estimates presented in fi gures B and C are derived from non–labor force participants’ responses in the CPS to the question “What best describes your current situation at this time?”; some possible responses include “in retirement,” “disabled,” “in school,” and “taking care of house or family.” These fi gures do not correspond exactly with fi gure A because fi gures B and C use data through May 2021 (which is the latest month for which CPS microdata were available at the time of writing) and show data that are not seasonally adjusted. Figures B and C display two-month averages because these data can have considerable noise at monthly frequency. 5. Nonparticipation in the labor force associated with caregiving is measured as nonparticipants in the CPS who report “taking care of house or family” as their current situation. 6. Indeed, according to the Return to Learn Tracker (R2L), even as of June 7, 2021, only 54 percent of districts provided fully in-person education. More information is available on the R2L website at https://www.returntolearntracker.net. All individuals aged 16 Women aged 25 to 54 without Mothers aged 25 to 54 with only children aged 5 and younger Mothers aged 25 to 54 with children aged 6 to 17 Fathers aged 25 to 54 with children aged 6 to 17 Population Survey (CPS). Estimates are not seasonally adjusted. Individuals not in the labor force and caregiving are those who are not in the labor force and report “taking care of house or family” as their current situation. Small sample sizes preclude reliable estimates for Native Americans and other groups not included in the table. Consistent with a considerable effect from students’ virtual education, estimates from the fi gure also show that the increase in nonparticipation for caregiving reasons has been larger for mothers aged 25 to 54 with children aged 6 to 17 (2.6 percentage points) than for women without their own children in the home (1.0 percentage point), women who only have children aged 5 and younger (1.4 percentage points), and fathers (0.6 percentage point) and accounts for all of the decline in the LFPR for mothers.7 The increase in nonparticipation for caregiving has been especially large for Black and Hispanic mothers, and it accounts for much of the larger decline in the LFPR for these groups.8 (continued on next page) 7. The increase in nonparticipation due to caregiving concerns for women with younger children may refl ect the lack of available childcare facilities during much of the pandemic. For adults without their own school-age children, the increase may refl ect that some of these individuals have also likely had to stop working or looking for work in order to assist with children of relatives or with elderly or disabled relatives rather than risk care outside of the home. Indeed, the increase in nonparticipation for caregiving reasons among women who are not mothers is larger for those with other adult household members who report being disabled or are aged 65 or older. 8. These differences may in part refl ect that the groups with larger increases in nonparticipation due to caregiving were less likely to work in telecommute-capable occupations before COvID-19; for example, based on May 2021 Federal Reserve Board staff estimates from the CPS, 19 percent of white mothers aged 25 to 54 with kids aged 6 to 17 report telecommuting due to COvID, compared with 15 percent of Black mothers and 12 percent of Hispanic mothers. It may also Fear of the COVID-19 virus: Individuals’ fears of contracting the COvID-19 virus are likely also still depressing labor force participation somewhat and may in part be refl ected in the factors previously discussed; COvID-19 fears may be especially relevant for those who would otherwise be working on-site in high-contact industries and occupations—and even for some fully vaccinated individuals, such as older and immunocompromised workers who are at higher risk for severe illness or death from COvID-19. Consistent with the importance of this reason, data from the Census Bureau’s Household Pulse Survey show that between May 26 and June 7, 2021, about 1 percent of the population reported not working or having recently looked for work because of fears of COvID-19.9 This share was higher for Blacks and Hispanics, those aged 18 to 24, and individuals with no college education, which aligns with demographic differences in the share of individuals employed in high-contact industries before COvID-19 and with differences in individuals’ ability to work from home. Expanded unemployment insurance: The pandemic recession prompted an unprecedented expansion in the availability and level of support of UI. A suite of federal programs has extended benefi ts to groups normally ineligible for UI, increased the potential duration of benefi ts, and boosted the weekly benefi t amounts received by UI claimants.10 Complementing the new programs, many states broadened UI eligibility refl ect that in-person education was less common in school districts with a larger share of Black and Hispanic students; for example, data from the Return to Learn Tracker for June 7 show that fully in-person education was more common in majority-white school districts than majority-Black or majority- Hispanic school districts. 9. The data are Federal Reserve Board staff calculations from week 31 of the Household Pulse Survey Public Use File. The percentage not working due to fears of COvID-19 is measured as the percentage of respondents who say that their main reason for not working was concern about “getting or spreading the coronavirus.” The data can be found on the Census Bureau’s website at https://www.census.gov/programs- surveys/household-pulse-survey/datasets.html. 10. These programs are Pandemic Unemployment Assistance (PUA), which provides benefi ts to pandemic- affected individuals with insuffi cient wage and salary earnings to qualify for regular UI benefi ts; Pandemic Emergency Unemployment Compensation (PEUC), which provides additional weeks of coverage to workers who exhaust their regular UI benefi ts; and Federal Pandemic Unemployment Compensation (FPUC), which currently provides $300 in supplemental benefi ts to all UI claimants, including those in the PUA and PEUC programs. See Tomaz Cajner, Andrew Figura, Brendan M. Price, David Ratner, and Alison Weingarden (2020), “Reconciling Unemployment Claims with Job Losses in the First Months of the COvID-19 Crisis,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-055 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July), https://doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2020.055. at the start of the pandemic by temporarily suspending work search requirements and relaxing other eligibility criteria. While the income support from expanded UI and other fi scal stimulus likely led some jobseekers to search less intensively or to be more selective in accepting job offers, the effects of these programs on labor force participation are not clear.11 The support from enhanced UI has been especially consequential for lower-wage workers, who have borne the brunt of recent job losses and who have benefi ted most from broader coverage and higher benefi t levels.12 The path ahead: Many of the factors constraining labor force participation should gradually abate in the coming months, and, as they do, the overall participation rate should rise and the demographic disparities in labor force participation that widened during the pandemic will likely continue to narrow. Fears of getting or spreading COvID-19 are likely to recede if vaccination rates continue to climb and if caseloads continue to diminish, and caregiving responsibilities should ease if most students return to in-person instruction in the fall. With federal pandemic UI programs slated to end in September and many states withdrawing from them in advance of their nationwide expiration, any effects of enhanced UI benefi ts on labor force participation will likely wane soon as well. The spate of retirements spurred by the pandemic will continue to weigh on labor force participation for some time, but this factor should leave a gradually diminishing imprint over the next few years, because these workers were likely poised to retire soon even in the absence of the pandemic. The full effect of the pandemic on the structure of the labor market remains to be seen, and the characteristics of maximum employment may well be different from those of early 2020. 11. Research into the labor market effects of pandemic UI policy has largely centered on FPUC, rather than the broader set of state and federal policy changes, and has focused on employment rather than labor market participation. Several recent studies have found that $600 weekly benefi t increases under FPUC had at most a modest effect on employment last year, in part because UI generosity has less effect on hiring when the labor market is slack. (See, for example, Nicolas Petrosky-Nadeau and Robert G. valletta (2021), “UI Generosity and Job Acceptance: Effects of the 2020 CARES Act,” Working Paper Series 2021-13 (San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, June), https://www.frbsf.org/ economic-research/files/wp2021-13.pdf.) Less is known about the possible effects of FPUC, PEUC, and PUA on labor force participation, particularly in the tighter labor market conditions prevailing in 2021. 12. The $300 FPUC supplement to weekly UI benefi ts replaces a larger portion of lost earnings for workers displaced from lower-wage jobs, while PUA has made benefi ts available to self-employed workers, labor market entrants, and other groups with limited earnings histories. of the year, lifting the 12-month change up to 2.8 percent (figure 7). More timely indicators show continuing large wage gains, though swings in the composition of the workforce make these difficult to interpret.2 In particular, average hourly earnings exhibited very large monthly increases in April, May, and June despite being held down in those months by large job gains in industries with below- average wages. Compensation per hour in the business sector, a broad-based but volatile measure of wages, salaries, and benefits, rose 8 percent through the first quarter, bolstered significantly by changes in the composition of the workforce.3 . . . and price inflation has stepped up, boosted by returning demand and by supply bottlenecks . . . As measured by the 12-month change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), inflation jumped from 1.2 percent in December 2020 to 3.9 percent in May, well above the FOMC’s longer-run objective of 2 percent (figure 8). The closely watched core PCE price index, which excludes more volatile components, rose 3.4 percent over the 12 months ending in May. The price acceleration appears to have arisen largely from a small number of categories, as suggested by muted movements in the Dallas trimmed mean index, which removes the largest price changes.4 For example, sharp price 2. Early in the pandemic, job losses were much larger for lower-wage workers, raising average wages and measured wage growth. This process is now being reversed as many lower-wage workers, particularly in services, have been rehired, thus lowering average wages and measured wage growth. Consequently, in the 12-month changes, large composition effects obscure the underlying movements in wages of typical workers. 3. Over the same period, labor productivity in the business sector is estimated to have increased 4 percent, much faster than the pre-pandemic trend. Both compensation and productivity have been affected by changes in the composition of inputs and outputs that may be largely transitory. Nevertheless, some of the increases may reflect more persistent factors. 4. The trimmed mean omits the highest and lowest price changes, removing products representing roughly half of the PCE basket by consumption share. 7. Measures of change in hourly compensation NOTE: Business-sector compensation is on a 4-quarter percent change basis. For the private-sector employment cost index, change is over the 12 months ending in the last month of each quarter; for private-sector average hourly earnings, the data are 12-month percent changes and extend through June 2021; for the Atlanta Fed’s Wage Growth Tracker, the data are shown as a 3-month moving average of the 12-month percent change. 8. Change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures Trimmed mean Excluding food and energy 9. Nonfuel import prices and industrial metals indexes NOTE: The data for nonfuel import prices are monthly. The data for industrial metals are weekly averages of daily data and extend through July 2, 2021. 10. Spot and futures prices for crude oil NOTE: The data are weekly averages of daily data and extend through increases for goods have been concentrated among a subset of products experiencing strong demand coupled with supply chain bottlenecks. In addition, as demand for services has returned to normal, some prices have bounced back from levels depressed following the onset of the pandemic. (See the box “Recent Inflation Developments.”) . . . with further upward pressure on inflation from rising import prices Increased import prices also contributed to the step-up in consumer price inflation in the first half of 2021, boosted by commodity prices, which rose in response to strong demand for goods. The effects of higher import prices have been exacerbated by bottlenecks abroad that have raised transport costs (figure 9). (See the box “Supply Chain Bottlenecks in U.S. Manufacturing and Trade.”) After a sharp recovery in late 2020 and early 2021, oil prices have risen over $10 per barrel in the past few months, a substantial increase but less dramatic than some of the increases for nonfuel commodity prices. Even though oil consumption is still well below pre- pandemic levels, oil production is also down, and oil prices are now above pre-pandemic levels (figure 10). Oil demand continues to be held back by the slow recovery in travel and commuting. Meanwhile, OPEC (Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries) and its partners, notably Russia, have only slowly increased their production toward pre-pandemic levels, offsetting the effect of weak demand. Survey-reported inflation expectations and market-based inflation compensation measures have moved up in recent months Survey-based measures of inflation expectations at medium- and longer-term horizons have moved up over the first half of the year. These measures, which exhibited a downward drift in recent years, have returned to levels last observed 5 to 10 years ago. Similarly, market measures of longer-term Since the beginning of this year, personal consumption expenditures (PCE) infl ation—as measured by 12-month percent changes—has increased markedly, reaching 3.9 percent in May (fi gure 8 in the main text). The sharp increase in infl ation this year refl ects both a rebound in prices from pandemic-induced price declines last spring and imbalances between demand and supply associated with a strong increase in aggregate demand amid supply chain bottlenecks, hiring diffi culties, and other capacity constraints. As global demand has surged, prices for crude oil and other traded commodities, such as livestock, crops, and metals, have increased notably (fi gures 9 and 10 in the main text). Commodity prices started to rebound during the second half of last year as the global economy partially reopened and have continued to rise this year, in some cases reaching multiyear highs. These prices most directly affect food and energy consumer prices (the blue and black lines, respectively, in fi gure A). However, readings from manufacturing surveys and anecdotes reported in the Federal Reserve’s Beige Book suggest rising costs for raw materials have contributed to infl ation for other goods as well (the red line in fi gure A). More recently, prices of some commodities, such as lumber, have come down from their peaks in the spring or have fl attened out, suggesting that infl ation pressures from commodities might ease in the coming months or even reverse. Supply chain bottlenecks are another factor pushing up consumer prices this year. As the economy reopened and as consumer demand for goods surged, many producers have reported shortages of critical parts and packaging materials, as well as delivery delays. (See the box “Supply Chain Bottlenecks in U.S. Manufacturing and Trade.”) Supply chain bottlenecks have been particularly constraining in the motor vehicle sector, where global shortages of semiconductors and other parts have curtailed production, at the same time that demand by households and rental companies has been strong. Prices for motor vehicles—particularly used vehicles—have jumped in recent months and are currently at levels well above their pre-COvID-19 trends (fi gure B, top-left panel). Strong demand amid supply chain bottlenecks has also boosted prices for other durable goods in recent months, but the pattern is not quite as pronounced as it is for motor vehicles (fi gure B, top-right panel). In fact, the rise in prices A. Personal consumption expenditures price indexes NOTE: The data are monthly. SOURCE: Bureau of Labor Statistics via Haver Analytics. connected to the motor vehicle sector—including prices for new and used vehicle purchases and vehicle rental services—accounts for almost one-third of the increase in PCE prices in April and May. Regarding services prices, demand for certain non- energy services that were severely curtailed by social distancing during the pandemic has surged this spring as the vaccines have become widely available (the green line in fi gure A). Just as the drop in demand last year led to a step-down in prices for categories related to travel and group activities, the resurgence in demand for these services is pushing up prices this year. As two prominent examples, airline fares and prices for hotel accommodations have jumped since the beginning of the year but so far remain somewhat below their pre- COvID trends (fi gure B, bottom panels). Even as demand for services appears to be strong and growing, many service-sector businesses have reported diffi culties in fi nding workers quickly enough to ramp up their operations accordingly. These reports are consistent with most available measures of wage growth, which have stepped up notably since the beginning of the year. Wage gains have been especially large in the leisure and hospitality sector and in other service industries that have relatively low average wages, which has likely contributed to the rise in infl ation for certain categories of spending, such as food away from home. (continued on next page) B2. Durables excluding motor vehicles Note: Trend is calculated from February 2017 to February 2020. Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis via Haver Analytics; FRB calculations. overall, an important part of the rise in infl ation this spring appears to be due to a surge in demand, including the rebound in travel-related spending, running up against short-run production bottlenecks and hiring diffi culties. as these extraordinary circumstances pass, supply and demand should become better aligned, and infl ation is widely expected to move down toward the Fomc’s 2 percent longer- run goal. (For a more detailed discussion of recent developments in infl ation expectations, see the box “assessing the recent rise in infl ation expectations.”) The strong U.S. demand for goods has been faced with a supply chain that has struggled to keep pace. With the onset of the pandemic in the spring of 2020, many manufacturers sharply curtailed production in expectation of a long downturn and a drawn-out recovery. Companies laid off workers, idled plants, and canceled orders for materials. In many cases, however, the pause in demand was much shorter and the rebound in demand was much stronger than anticipated, and by late 2020, factories in some industries were scrambling to fi nd the workers, parts, and materials to fi ll a rush of new orders. As demand for goods surged in the second half of 2020, U.S. import volumes shot up to record levels and have remained elevated . The massive infl ux of goods combined with COvID-19-related staffi ng issues have overwhelmed U.S. ports, resulting in additional challenges for manufacturers that experience extended wait times for imported parts. NOTE: The data extend through June 2021. SOURCE: Institute for Supply Management, Manufacturing ISM Ample evidence—including widespread anecdotes of shortages mentioned in the press and in the Federal Reserve’s Beige Book—points to broad and sometimes deep supply chain disruptions across the manufacturing sector. The challenges in procuring materials are also refl ected in reports from the Institute for Supply Management on order backlogs, which recently reached historical highs at the same time as customer inventories were at historical lows (fi gure A).1 Additionally, roughly one-fourth of all manufacturers cannot produce at full capacity because of an insuffi cient supply of materials, labor, or both (fi gure B).2 Amid strong demand, these shortages have put upward pressure on the prices manufacturers pay for parts and materials (fi gure C). B. Reasons production is below capacity A few key manufacturing industries have experienced pronounced supply disruptions or shortfalls. Perhaps most notably, the burst in NOTE: Gaps in series represent the end of the Annual Survey of Plant Capacity in 2006 and the start of the Quarterly Survey of Plant Capacity in 2008. 1. The Institute for Supply Management survey asks respondents whether their customers’ inventories are currently “too high,” “too low,” or “about right.” values below 50 indicate more respondents perceived customers’ inventories as “too low” than “too high.” Similarly, respondents are asked to compare the current month’s backlog of orders with the previous month’s backlog; values above 50 suggest more respondents reported higher backlogs than reported lower backlogs. demand for consumer electronics contributed to full order books, long lead times, and shortages of semiconductors; these shortages led to widespread shutdowns and slowdowns at several U.S. motor vehicle assembly plants.3 Lumber supply has also fallen 2. Labor shortages appear increasingly problematic. Although manufacturers have long expressed challenges in attracting and retaining workers, the most recent reading from the Bureau of Labor Statistics reported 814,000 job openings in the sector, nearly double the 2017–19 average. (continued on next page) 3. The semiconductor shortage was exacerbated when a chip factory in Japan closed for about a month in the spring after being damaged by a fi re; the company announced that it expects shipments to return to pre-fi re levels in late July. C. Prices paid by manufacturers for materials NOTE: Values greater than 50 indicate that more respondents paid higher prices for material inputs relative to a month earlier than reported lower prices. The data extend through June 2021. short, as last year’s increase in remodeling projects and new home construction outpaced production at sawmills. Meanwhile, supply bottlenecks for steel emerged last fall after a resurgence in orders surprised mill operators that had not yet fully restarted steelmaking equipment idled in the early days of the pandemic.4 Finally, extremely cold temperatures in mid-February caused extensive damage to several petrochemical facilities along the Gulf Coast, resulting 4. More than half of the nation’s blast furnaces were idled last year, and a few were permanently shuttered; the vast majority of the idled furnaces were restarted by this spring. in acute shortages; the outages resolved slowly, and only in early May did operations essentially return to normal. Logjams at some of the nation’s ports—particularly on the West Coast—resulted from the unprecedented volume of imports and were compounded by limitations on labor attributable to COvID-19 precautions and to isolated outbreaks among dock workers. For example, since the fall of 2020, the Port of Los Angeles, the nation’s busiest port, has had more ships to unload than it could easily accommodate. Typically, ships have little to no wait before they reach a berth at the port, but since last October, on average, more than 10 ships have been waiting at anchor at any given time (fi gure D). While this number has retreated from its peak, ships are still spending an extended time in the port. Continued high import volumes have hampered the port’s progress in resolving congestion even as the quick pace of vaccinations in the United States has allowed the port to resume processing incoming containers at full capacity. In addition to the congestion at ports, carriers have raised shipping rates and imposed large surcharges on containers sent to the United States.5 These delays and elevated costs have likely discouraged additional imports of low-value, high-volume products, contributing to higher prices and reduced inputs for (continued) 5. Air freight rates have also risen sharply, as many goods normally shipped by sea are being transported by air to avoid extended delays. Furthermore, pandemic-related restrictions on international travel have limited the number of international fl ights, reducing the supply of cargo space for air shipments and further increasing prices. D. Ships waiting at anchor (Port of Los Angeles) Averages Jan. 2016–Sept. 2020: .2 Oct. 2020–present: 10.9 NOTE: The data are 7-day moving averages. SOURCE: Port of Los Angeles. U.S. manufacturers. Relatedly, the higher inbound rates have created a challenge for U.S. exports in the form of a container shortage. Shipping rates for U.S. exports have risen by much less than rates for inbound shipments, so carriers fi nd it more profi table at times to quickly return empty containers for another inbound U.S. delivery than to receive modest revenue from taking on U.S. exports. Thus, although the number of inbound loaded containers skyrocketed in the second half of last year, the number of outbound loaded containers stayed below pre-pandemic levels until March 2021 (fi gure E). In summary, trade and production bottlenecks have been an important factor as the economy emerges from E. Container flows at U.S. ports Inbound loaded Outbound loaded NOTE: The data extend through April 2021. The data include the ports of Baltimore, Charleston, Houston, Los Angeles, Long Beach, New York and New Jersey, Oakland, Savannah, Seattle, and Tacoma, which accounted for 91 percent of total throughput at U.S. ports in 2019. TEUs are 20-foot equivalent units. the pandemic. As producers and the distribution network work through these bottlenecks, production is expected to pick up and price pressures to ease—for example, lumber prices have come down from their late-spring peaks. The time frame for the resolution of these bottlenecks is uncertain, as they refl ect both the global supply chain and some industry-specifi c reasons for the tight conditions. 11. Real gross domestic product and gross domestic income 12. Real personal consumption expenditures NOTE: The data are monthly. SOURCE: Bureau of Economic Analysis via Haver Analytics. inflation compensation—including inflation swaps and the yield gap between nominal Treasury securities and Treasury Inflation- Protected Securities—continued to climb in 2021, returning to the range observed in the 2010–14 period. (See the box “Assessing the Recent Rise in Inflation Expectations.”) Gross domestic product surged in the first half of the year . . . Real gross domestic product (GDP) rose at a brisk annual rate of 6½ percent in the first quarter and, with indicators suggesting another strong increase in the second quarter, appears to have now recovered to its pre- pandemic level (figure 11). Even so, supply chain bottlenecks, hiring difficulties, and other capacity constraints have damped the economic rebound to some degree this year, causing order backlogs and longer delivery times and leading producers to meet demand in part by drawing down inventories rather than from new production. . . . driven by a sharp increase in household spending . . . The rebound in GDP primarily reflects a resurgence of household spending, driven by the reopening of the economy and additional fiscal support. In particular, the easing of voluntary and mandatory social distancing has spurred an increase in services spending, such as more prevalent dining out, hotel stays, and air travel (figure 12). Still, concerns about COVID-19 continue to limit in-person interactions, and services spending has yet to reach its pre-pandemic level. Spending on goods, which quickly recovered in the second half of 2020, soared from January through May. Spending on durable goods has been especially strong, including on motor vehicles, where sales reached levels among the highest on record in March and April before being held back in May by extremely low dealer inventories. . . . supported by rising personal income, consumer sentiment, and wealth . . . The marked increase in personal consumption has been supported by increasing income, accumulated savings, rising housing and stock market wealth, low interest rates, and improving consumer sentiment (figure 13). Disposable personal income—that is, household income net of taxes—surged in the first quarter of this year, boosted by further fiscal support, including stimulus checks and enhanced unemployment insurance benefits, along with solid gains in wages and compensation. Meanwhile, the continuing brisk rise in house prices and stock prices has boosted the wealth of homeowners and equity investors (figure 14). The tremendous gains in income have led to a very elevated saving rate (figure 15). That said, these aggregate figures mask important variation across households, and many low-income households, especially those whose earnings declined as a result of the pandemic and recession, have seen their finances stretched. Household borrowing has expanded moderately. Consumer loans have grown at a modest pace so far this year, driven by the continued expansion of auto loans (figure 16). Banks reported significant easing of lending standards on consumer loans in the first quarter of 2021 after a moderate easing in the last quarter of the previous year, though standards remain tight relative to the period just before the pandemic. Delinquency rates for nonprime auto and credit card borrowers remained well below pre-pandemic levels, likely stemming from forbearance programs and fiscal support. Mortgage credit is broadly available to high-credit-score borrowers who meet standard conforming loan criteria but continues to be tight for borrowers with lower credit scores. Historically low mortgage rates have led to elevated refinance and purchase activity, supported by accommodative credit NOTE: The data extend through June 2021. SOURCE: University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers; Conference 14. Wealth-to-income ratio NOTE: The series is the ratio of household net worth to disposable 15. Personal saving rate The sharp rise in infl ation so far this year (see the box “Recent Infl ation Developments”) has raised the question of whether the recent elevated pace of price increases (1) will abate, as the effects of the strong rebound in aggregate demand and accompanying supply chain bottlenecks fade, without calling for a change in the path of monetary policy or (2) will instead be followed by a period of higher infl ation pressures and call for a change in the stance of monetary policy. The latter situation could arise if longer-term infl ation expectations were to rise persistently above levels consistent with the Federal Open Market Committee’s (FOMC) longer-run infl ation goal. Infl ation expectations are often seen as a driver of actual infl ation, which is why a fundamental aspect of the FOMC’s monetary policy framework is for longer- term infl ation expectations to be well anchored at the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run infl ation objective.1 In monitoring the infl ation outlook, the FOMC considers a variety of fi nancial and economic data in order to gauge whether infl ation expectations are consistent with meeting its infl ation objective. Recent readings on these measures indicate that infl ation is expected to return to levels consistent with the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run infl ation objective after a period of temporarily higher infl ation. That said, some measures suggest that the upside risks to the infl ation outlook in the near term have increased. Information concerning infl ation expectations can be obtained from various sources, including fi nancial instruments linked to infl ation and surveys of fi nancial market participants, professional forecasters, households, and businesses. For example, the compensation that investors require to hold certain fi nancial instruments whose payouts are linked to infl ation sheds light on fi nancial market participants’ expectations regarding infl ation. Infl ation compensation implied by the yields on Treasury securities, known as the Treasury Infl ation-Protected Securities (TIPS) breakeven infl ation rate, is defi ned as the difference between yields on conventional Treasury securities and yields on TIPS, which are linked to actual outcomes regarding headline consumer price index (CPI) infl ation. An alternative market-based measure of infl ation compensation can be derived from infl ation swaps, which are contracts in which two parties agree to swap fi xed nominal payments for fl oating cash fl ows that are tied to cumulative CPI infl ation over some horizon. Longer-horizon TIPS- and swaps-based measures of infl ation compensation have both moved up since the start of the year. The TIPS-based measure of 10-year infl ation compensation increased from an annual rate close to 2 percent in the beginning of 2021 to somewhat above 2¼ percent in early July. Over the same period, the swaps-based measure increased from around 2¼ percent to 2½ percent. To shed further light on how the recent economic developments are infl uencing investors’ views on the infl ation rate likely to prevail at different horizons, it is useful to split the recent rise in infl ation compensation over the next 10 years into changes in infl ation compensation for the next year and for subsequent 1-year periods starting at times between 1 and 9 years from now. The result of this exercise suggests that market-based measures of infl ation compensation over the next year have increased about 1½ percentage points since early 2021, reaching levels above 3 percent in early July. Measures of infl ation compensation for the period beyond the next year have also moved up but by a much smaller amount than have measures of 1-year infl ation compensation. In particular, infl ation compensation beyond fi ve years has reversed the large declines seen earlier in the pandemic, bouncing back to levels consistent with those observed before 2014, when measures of longer-term infl ation compensation ran modestly above 2 percent on a CPI basis, and before these measures showed signs that CPI infl ation expectations may have drifted down (fi gure A). If the recent readings on infl ation compensation could be interpreted as direct measures of expected CPI infl ation, they would suggest that investors currently anticipate that average CPI infl ation will temporarily run somewhat above 3 percent over the next year before moving back down. Over the longer run, assuming no wedge between infl ation compensation and infl ation expectations, market-based measures indicate that investors are expecting CPI infl ation to settle at around 2¼ percent. This pattern is consistent with expectations of CPI infl ation moving to levels in line with the FOMC’s longer-run infl ation goal of 2 percent PCE (personal consumption expenditures) infl ation.2 1. For a discussion of the role infl ation expectations play in infl ation dynamics, see Janet L. yellen (2015), “Infl ation Dynamics and Monetary Policy,” speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, September 24, https://www.federalreserve.gov/ newsevents/speech/yellen20150924a.htm. TIPS- and swaps-based measures of infl ation compensation, however, refl ect not only expected (continued) 2. The Committee’s 2 percent longer-run infl ation objective is stated in terms of the PCE price index, and PCE infl ation Inflation compensation implied by Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities NOTE: The data are at a business-day frequency and are based on smoothed nominal and inflation-indexed Treasury yield curves. infl ation, but also other factors, including the infl ation risk premium and possibly other premiums driven by liquidity differences and shifts in demand and supply of TIPS relative to those of nominal Treasury securities. The presence of these additional factors can make it diffi cult to ascertain the information regarding expected infl ation embedded in market-based measures of infl ation compensation.3 Survey-based measures, in contrast, provide information about infl ation tends to run somewhat below CPI infl ation, which is used in pricing TIPS and infl ation swaps. Over the past two decades, PCE price infl ation has run, on average, around ¼ percentage point lower than CPI infl ation, though this wedge has varied from year to year. 3. The Federal Reserve System staff maintains several term structure models to disentangle the various components of infl ation compensation. For more details, see, for example, Michael Abrahams, Tobias Adrian, Richard K. Crump, Emanuel Moench, and Rui yu (2016), “Decomposing Real and Nominal yield Curves,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 84 (December), pp. 182–200; Jens H.E. Christensen, Jose A. Lopez, and Glenn D. Rudebusch (2010), “Infl ation Expectations and Risk Premiums in an Arbitrage-Free Model of Nominal and Real Bond yields,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 42 (September), pp. 143–78; Stefania D’Amico, Don H. Kim, and Min Wei (2018), “Tips from TIPS: The Informational Content of Treasury Infl ation-Protected Security Prices,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, vol. 53 (February), pp. 395–436; and Andrea Ajello, Luca Benzoni, and Olena Chyruk (2020), “Core and ‘Crust’: Consumer Prices and the Term Structure of Interest Rates,” Review of Financial Studies, vol. 33 (August), pp. 3719–65. expectations that is not obscured by the presence of these risk premiums. Information about infl ation expectations obtained from surveys of fi nancial market participants, economists, and professional forecasters tells a story similar to that of market-based measures. Since the turn of the year, projections of PCE infl ation for 2021 as a whole, obtained from information in the Blue Chip Financial Forecasts, the Survey of Professional Forecasters, and the Survey of Primary Dealers, increased substantially to well above 2 percent. Over the same period, the projections of PCE infl ation beyond 2022 appear, in comparison, to be little changed at levels just over 2 percent (fi gure B). This pattern suggests that these forecasters expect the recent jump in infl ation to be transitory and that survey respondents do not appear to have revised their views regarding the longer-term infl ation rate in response to the recent strong readings on infl ation. forecasters see infl ation returning to levels close to 2 percent after a bout of higher infl ation as the most likely outcome, they still could have judged that the likelihood of higher infl ation had increased. Probability (continued on next page) consumption expenditures inflation expectations NOTE: The data are for expectations of year-over-year percent changes. The mean of Blue Chip (BC) survey responses and medians of the Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF) and Survey of Primary Dealers (SPD) are shown. Longer-run expectations are 5-to-10-year expectations for the BC survey and SPF. Gaps represent unreported forecast horizons, and dots represent the longer-run value of the series that have a gap after 2023. The BC and SPF 2021:Q1 series end at 2.1 percent in the longer run, and the SPF 2021:Q2 and the SPD series end at 2.0 percent. Rise in Infl ation Expectations (continued) distributions of future infl ation derived from surveys provide information on how respondents’ views about the likelihood of various outcomes for infl ation have evolved. Since the turn of the year, the probability distribution of PCE infl ation for 2022 derived from the Survey of Professional Forecasters suggests that the average respondent now appears to attach lower probabilities to outcomes of infl ation below 2 percent, and somewhat higher odds of infl ation running above 3 percent, which suggests that respondents’ perceived upside risks to infl ation in the near term have shifted up somewhat.4 Finally, survey-based measures of households’ infl ation expectations have also moved up in recent months. And, similarly to the other surveys, the movements have been more pronounced in the near- to medium-term infl ation expectations. In the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers, households’ expectations for infl ation over the next 12 months in June were markedly higher than in February and well above the expectations for average infl ation over the next 5 to 10 years (fi gure C). Over the same period, the median value of infl ation expectations over the next C. Survey measures of consumers’ inflation expectations NOTE: The series are medians of the survey responses. The NY Fed data begin in June 2013. The Michigan survey data extend through June 2021. 4. Of note, distributions of CPI infl ation 5 to 10 years ahead derived from the Federal Reserve Bank of New york’s Survey of Primary Dealers and Survey of Market Participants have remained stable over the year, consistent with the stability of survey-based measures of longer-run infl ation expectations. 5 to 10 years picked up only slightly. Nevertheless, the latest reading is above its pre-pandemic level and stands close to levels last seen consistently in 2015 when this measure started drifting down and raised concerns that households’ expectations might have slipped below the FOMC’s 2 percent longer-run goal. In the Survey of Consumer Expectations, conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New york, the median of respondents’ expected infl ation rate 3 years ahead also increased sharply in May, the highest reading since the summer of 2013. The common infl ation expectations (CIE) index constructed by Federal Reserve Board staff—a series that takes many measures of infl ation expectations and infl ation compensation and consolidates them into a single indicator—has continued to edge up in recent quarters, more than reversing the moderate decline recorded in the middle of last year (fi gure D).5 Taking a somewhat longer view, the CIE has now also reversed the net decline since 2014 and has brought the index up to levels that are likely more consistent with the FOMC’s longer-term goal of 2 percent PCE infl ation. CIE, projected onto 10-year SPF 2007:Q1 and extend through 2021:Q2. 5. For more details, see Hie Joo Ahn and Chad The housing sector remains remarkably strong Residential investment surged following the shutdown last spring and has remained at a high level since then. Low mortgage rates have boosted demand, as have adaptations to the pandemic, including working from and spending more time at home. New construction, home sales, and residential improvements have all been well above pre- pandemic levels, and demand has outpaced supply, as construction has been limited by material shortages and sales have been constrained by low inventories (figures 18 and 19). This tension has fueled a sizable rise in home prices and driven down the inventory of homes for sale to extraordinarily low levels (figure 20). Business investment has recovered from its plunge last year and continues to rise at a solid pace . . . Solid business investment in the first half of the year has been supported by the unwinding of pandemic disruptions, accommodative monetary policy and fiscal support, and the strong business outlook. Investment in equipment and intangibles has led the rise in investment, especially investment in high- technology equipment and software driven by the shift to remote work and other changes to business practices. Investment in structures in the oil and gas sector also has risen in recent quarters, spurred by a turnaround in oil prices. In contrast, investment in structures outside of the drilling and mining sector has been subdued after falling sharply last year (figure 21). . . . amid financing conditions that remain accommodative for nonfinancial corporations Financing conditions for nonfinancial firms through capital markets have remained broadly 16. Consumer credit flows NOTE: The data are seasonally adjusted by the Federal Reserve Board. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Board, Statistical Release G.19, “Consumer 17. Mortgage rates NOTE: The data are contract rates on 30-year, fixed-rate conventional home mortgage commitments and extend through July 1, 2021. SOURCE: Freddie Mac Primary Mortgage Market Survey. 18. Private housing starts and permits 19. New and existing home sales Existing home sales include only single-family sales. Existing home sales include single-family, condo, and co-op sales. NOTE: The data are monthly. New home sales SOURCE: For new home sales, Census Bureau; for existing home sales, 20. Real prices of existing single-family houses NOTE: Series are deflated by the personal consumption expenditures SOURCE: CoreLogic Home Price Index; Zillow; S&P/Case-Shiller U.S. National Home Price Index. The S&P/Case-Shiller index is a product of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. (For Dow Jones Indices licensing information, see the note on the Contents page.) 21. Real business fixed investment accommodative since the start of the year and continued to be supported by historically low interest rates. The gross issuance of nonfinancial corporate bonds continued to be solid during the first part of year and was particularly strong in March for investment- grade firms (figure 22). Corporate bond yields have remained at historically low levels, and corporate bond spreads have narrowed to very low levels, supported in part by signs of improvement in the credit quality of nonfinancial firms. In contrast, net bank lending to businesses has been subdued so far this year. For commercial and industrial loans, increasing new loan originations have been obscured to some degree by balance reductions due to forgiveness of loans under the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP). Commercial real estate loans have remained little changed, held down in part by weak growth in construction and land development loans amid tighter credit standards earlier in the year. For small businesses, privately financed lending has climbed smartly since the turn of the year, as the PPP has increased access to credit. Outside of the PPP, credit availability for small businesses remains fairly tight, demand for such credit is weak, and default risk is still elevated. Small business loan performance has improved, and the share of small businesses expecting to require additional financial assistance has moved down, though hotels and restaurants report ongoing stress. Exports have partly recovered as imports have continued to increase U.S. exports have moved higher in recent months but still remain below pre-pandemic levels (figure 23). Despite the robust recovery for goods exports, the overall contribution to GDP from exports has been held down by the continuing depressed level of service exports given ongoing restraint in international travel. In contrast to the relatively modest recovery of exports, imports have soared since last summer, boosted by strong demand for both immediate consumption and rebuilding inventories. High levels of imports have strained the ability of the international logistics channel to deliver goods to U.S. customers in a timely fashion. Given the recent strength of imports relative to the milder recovery in exports, both the nominal trade deficit and current account deficit, relative to GDP, widened since 2019 (figure 24). Federal fiscal actions provided substantial support to economic activity while also significantly raising the budget deficit Federal fiscal policies enacted in response to the pandemic, most recently the American Rescue Plan, continue to fuel the economic recovery now under way. Stimulus checks have boosted most household incomes, and supplemental unemployment insurance has supported households affected by job loss. Increased grants-in-aid to state and local governments and business programs have supported aggregate demand as well. The Congressional Budget Office estimates that pandemic-related fiscal policies enacted to date will increase federal expenditures or reduce federal revenues by over $5 trillion over 10 years, with much of the effect on the deficit occurring in fiscal years 2020 and 2021.5 These discretionary fiscal measures, combined with the automatic stabilizers—the reduction in tax receipts and increase in transfers that occur as a consequence of depressed economic activity—caused the federal deficit to surge to 15 percent of nominal GDP in fiscal 2020 5. For more information, see Congressional Budget Office (2020), The Effects of Pandemic- Related Legislation on Output (Washington: CBO, September), https://www.cbo.gov/publication/56537; Congressional Budget Office (2020), “Summary Estimate for Divisions M through FF; H.R. 133, Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021,” January 14, https://www. cbo.gov/system/files/2021-01/PL_116-260_Summary. pdf; and Congressional Budget Office (2021), “Estimated Budgetary Effects of H.R. 1319, American Rescue Plan Act of 2021,” March 10, https://www.cbo.gov/ publication/57056. 22. Selected components of net debt financing for nonfinancial businesses SOURCE: Mergent Inc., Fixed Income Securities Database; S&P Global, Leveraged Commentary & Data; DTCC Solutions LLC, an affiliate of the Depository Trust & Clearing Corporation. This publication includes data licensed from DTCC Solutions LLC, an affiliate of the Depository Trust & Clearing Corporation. (For the DTCC licensing disclaimer, see the note on the Contents page.) 23. Real imports and exports of goods and services 24. U.S. trade and current account balances 25. Federal receipts and expenditures NOTE: The data are 12-month moving sums. SOURCE: Office of Management and Budget via Haver Analytics. 26. Federal government debt and net interest outlays Debt held by the public NOTE: The data for net interest outlays are annual, begin in 1948, and extend through 2021. Net interest outlays are the cost of servicing the debt held by the public. Federal debt held by the public equals federal debt less Treasury securities held in federal employee defined-benefit retirement accounts, evaluated at the end of the quarter. The data for federal debt are annual from 1901 to 1951 and quarterly thereafter. GDP is gross domestic product. (figure 25). Federal debt held by the public jumped to around 100 percent of nominal GDP—the highest debt-to-GDP ratio since 1947—and is expected to rise further this fiscal year (figure 26).6 Challenges to state and local government financing have been mitigated by federal aid The pandemic pushed down state and local government tax collections and induced additional COVID-related expenses. In response, federal policymakers provided a historic level of fiscal support to state and local governments, covering budget shortfalls in aggregate, although some governments continue to confront pandemic-related fiscal stress. Moreover, the drag on state tax receipts from the pandemic is abating, as revenues have moved up smartly so far this year (figure 27). Property tax receipts—the primary tax source for local governments—have increased steadily during the pandemic. State and local government payrolls, though, have only edged up from their lows at the onset of the pandemic, and they remain 5 percent below pre-pandemic levels, including notably lower education employment (figure 28). Finally, municipal bond market conditions continued to be generally accommodative this year. Issuance has been robust, as yields remained historically low and bond spreads relative to Treasury securities have declined moderately so far this year. The path of the federal funds rate expected to prevail over the next year remains near zero Market-based measures of the path that the federal funds rate is expected to take over the 6. Even before accounting for the additional budget effects from the most recent fiscal policy, the American Rescue Plan, the CBO projected in February that the debt-to-GDP ratio would rise in 2021. See Congressional Budget Office (2021), The Budget and Economic Outlook: 2021 to 2031 (Washington: CBO, February), https://www. cbo.gov/system/files/2021-02/56970-Outlook.pdf. next few years remain below 0.25 percent until the fourth quarter of 2022, about two quarters earlier than in February (figure 29).7 The shift in the path followed news of the rapid deployment in the United States of highly effective COVID-19 vaccines, the reopening of contact-intensive sectors of the economy, and expectations that further support for aggregate demand would be coming from fiscal policy. Survey-based measures of the expected path of the policy rate shifted up somewhat since the start of the year. According to the results of two surveys that the Federal Reserve Bank of New York conducted in June—the Survey of Primary Dealers and the Survey of Market Participants—the median respondent of each survey views the most likely path of the federal funds rate as remaining in its current range of 0 to ¼ percent until the third quarter of 2023, a quarter earlier than in March.8 Longer-term nominal Treasury yields were little changed . . . Yields on nominal Treasury securities at longer maturities were little changed, on net, since mid-February (figure 30). Concurrently, near- term uncertainty about longer-term interest rates—as measured by volatility of near-term swap options (swaptions) on 10-year swap interest rates—remained roughly unchanged, on net, since February. . . . while spreads of other long-term debt to Treasury securities narrowed modestly on net Across different categories of corporate credit, bond yields are little changed since mid- February and have remained near the lowest levels of their historical distributions. Spreads 7. These measures are based on a straight read of market quotes and are not adjusted for term premiums. 8. The results of the Survey of Primary Dealers and the Survey of Market Participants are available on the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s website at https:// www.newyorkfed.org/markets/primarydealer_survey_ questions.html and https://www.newyorkfed.org/ markets/survey_market_participants, respectively. 27. State and local tax receipts NOTE: State tax data are year-over-year percent changes of 12-month moving averages, begin in June 2012, extend through April 2021, and are aggregated over all states except Wyoming, for which data are not available. Revenues from Washington, DC, are also excluded. Data for March and April are missing for New Mexico, as this state has longer reporting lags than others. Property tax data are year-over-year percent changes of 4-quarter moving averages, begin in 2012:Q2, and are primarily collected by local governments. 28. State and local government payroll employment NOTE: The data are seasonally adjusted and extend through June 29. Market-implied federal funds rate path NOTE: The federal funds rate path is implied by quotes on overnight index swaps—a derivative contract tied to the effective federal funds rate. The implied path as of February 19, 2021, is compared with that as of July 6, 2021. The path is estimated with a spline approach, assuming a term premium of 0 basis points. The February 19, 2021, path extends through 2025:Q1 and the July 6, 2021, path through 2025:Q3. SOURCE: Bloomberg; Federal Reserve Board staff estimates. 30. Yields on nominal Treasury securities 31. Yield and spread on agency mortgage-backed securities NOTE: The data are daily. Yield shown is for the Fannie Mae 30-year current coupon, the coupon rate at which new mortgage-backed securities would be priced at par, or face, value. Spread shown is to the average of the 5-year and 10-year nominal Treasury yields. of corporate bond yields over comparable- maturity Treasury securities have narrowed modestly and stand somewhat below the levels prevailing at the onset of the pandemic, supported in part by signs of improvement in the credit quality of nonfinancial firms. Since mid-February, yields on 30-year agency mortgage-backed securities—an important factor entering into the pricing of home mortgages—were little changed, on net, while those on comparable-maturity Treasury securities increased a bit, leaving their spread modestly lower on net (figure 31). Municipal bond spreads over rates on longer-term Treasury securities have declined moderately across credit categories since mid-February and stand at the lower end of the historical distribution, while municipal bond yields across credit categories are at about their all- time lowest historical levels. Broad equity price indexes increased moderately Broad stock price indexes have continued to rise since mid-February, as strong corporate earnings, optimism about the pace of vaccinations, additional fiscal stimulus, and signs of a faster pace of economic recovery outweighed concerns about high valuations, higher inflation, and prospects for the control of the virus abroad (figure 32). Prices of cyclical stocks, including those associated with companies in the basic materials, energy, and industrial sectors, outperformed broad equity price indexes. Banks’ stock prices have also risen notably, on net, as the improved economic outlook and banks’ reports of strong first-quarter earnings provided a further boost to investor optimism regarding the banking sector. Measures of realized and option-implied stock price volatility for the S&P 500 index—the 20-day realized volatility and the VIX, respectively—have declined somewhat and are near their historical medians (figure 33). (For a discussion of financial stability issues, see the box “Developments Related to Financial Stability.”) Markets for Treasury securities, mortgage- backed securities, and corporate and municipal bonds have functioned well . . . Measures of market liquidity for Treasury securities—such as measures of market depth and bid-ask spreads—remained close to pre-pandemic levels overall, particularly for shorter-dated securities. However, longer-dated Treasury securities and some portions of the mortgage-backed securities market—notably those classes of securities excluded from Federal Reserve open market purchases—remain somewhat less liquid than before the onset of the pandemic. Measures of market functioning in the corporate and municipal bond markets remained stable since February, with these markets functioning roughly as they did in the months before the pandemic. Bid-ask spreads across corporate bond credit categories have been slightly below pre-pandemic levels, and issuance of corporate bonds in primary markets has been solid. Municipal bond market liquidity—as measured by round-trip transaction costs—has come back to near pre-pandemic levels. . . . while short-term funding market conditions remained stable The effective federal funds rate (EFFR) and other overnight unsecured rates have seen some slight downward pressure relative to the interest rate on excess reserves since mid-February. The EFFR has nevertheless been comparatively stable, while other short- term interest rates registered more sizable declines. Secured overnight rates traded lower, with the Secured Overnight Financing Rate trading at or just above the offering rate on the overnight reverse repurchase agreement (ON RRP) facility since mid-March. Ample liquidity, arising from substantial increases in reserves, has, in conjunction with paydowns of Treasury bills, driven short-term interest rates lower. Notwithstanding the very low level of rates—including small volumes of negative-rate trading in overnight repurchase agreements on most days between mid-March 32. Equity prices SOURCE: S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC via Bloomberg. (For Dow Jones Indices licensing information, see the note on the Contents page.) 33. S&P 500 volatility Realized volatility NOTE: The VIX is a measure of implied volatility that represents the expected annualized change in the S&P 500 index over the following 30 days. For realized volatility, 5-minute S&P 500 returns are used in an exponentially weighted moving average with 75 percent of weight distributed over the past 20 days. While some fi nancial vulnerabilities have increased since February, the institutions at the core of the fi nancial system remain resilient. This discussion reviews vulnerabilities in the U.S. fi nancial system. The framework used by the Federal Reserve Board for assessing the resilience of the U.S. fi nancial system focuses on fi nancial vulnerabilities in four broad areas: asset valuations, business and household debt, leverage in the fi nancial sector, and funding risks. Prices of risky assets have generally increased in the fi rst half of 2021. They have been buoyed by the rapid deployment of highly effective COvID-19 vaccines in the United States, the support provided by fi scal policy, and increased investor risk appetite. Broad equity market indexes have reached record highs in recent months, and the ratio of prices to forecasts of earnings remains high relative to its historical distribution (fi gure A). Option-implied volatility has been declining throughout the fi rst half of 2021 and now stands at about its historical median. yields on corporate bonds and leveraged loans remain low. On balance, indicators of commercial real estate (CRE) valuations remain high; however, low transaction volumes— especially for distressed properties—may mask declines in commercial property values. Supported by relatively low mortgage rates and shifting supply and demand dynamics brought about by the pandemic, house prices have increased at double-digit annual rates for several months amid strong home sales. The surge in NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through June 2021. The triple-B series reflects the effective yield of the ICE Bank of America Merrill Lynch (BofAML) 7-to-10-year triple-B U.S. Corporate Index (C4A4), and the high-yield series reflects the effective yield of the ICE BofAML 7-to-10-year U.S. Cash Pay High Yield Index (J4A0). Treasury yields from the smoothed yield curve are estimated from off-the-run securities. the prices of a variety of crypto-assets also refl ects in part increased risk appetite. Long-term Treasury yields have risen since mid-February but remain low by historical standards. The high asset prices in part refl ect the continued low level of Treasury yields. However, valuations for some assets are elevated relative to historical norms even when using measures that account for Treasury yields (fi gure B). Asset prices may be vulnerable to signifi cant declines should investor risk appetite fall, interest rates rise unexpectedly, or the recovery stall. NOTE: The data extend through June 2021. The series represents the aggregate forward price-to-earnings ratio of S&P 500 firms based on expected earnings for 12 months ahead. vulnerabilities from both business and household debt have declined through the fi rst quarter of 2021, refl ecting a slower pace of business borrowing, an improvement in business earnings, and government programs that have supported business and household incomes. Even so, some businesses and households remain under considerable strain. Business debt outstanding changed little in the second half of 2020 and fi rst quarter of 2021, although it remains high relative to gross domestic product (fi gure C). Recovering earnings and the low level of interest rates have generally aided businesses’ ability to carry debt. Some smaller businesses continue to face signifi cant fi nancial strains but have been supported by government (continued) NOTE: The data are quarterly. The shaded bars indicate periods of business recession as defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER). As of the publication of this report, the NBER has not declared an end to the current recession. GDP is gross domestic product. programs, including the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP). Debt owed by households remains at a moderate level relative to income. Household borrowing continues to be heavily concentrated among borrowers with high credit scores. Moreover, government actions taken in response to the pandemic have provided signifi cant support to household balance sheets and incomes, with many households saving more and holding more liquid assets. broker-dealers remained low, while leverage at hedge funds and life insurance companies continued to be high. The common equity Tier 1 ratio for most banks increased, on net, over 2020 and into the fi rst quarter of 2021. Measures of credit quality of bank loans have also improved in the fi rst quarter of 2021. Moreover, the share of loan balances in loss-mitigation programs at the largest banks has declined. The shares of credit cards and auto loans in loss mitigation have seen larger declines, while the shares of residential real estate, commercial and industrial, and CRE loans remain high. Nevertheless, some uncertainty remains about the ability of borrowers in loss-mitigation programs to meet their obligations after those programs end and government support runs out. Broker-dealer leverage remained near historically low levels through the fi rst quarter of 2021, although dealers continue to fi nance sizable inventories of Treasury securities. No notable effect on Treasury market functioning followed the expiration in March 2021 of temporary changes to the supplementary leverage ratio, which were implemented to ease strains in Treasury market intermediation in the initial weeks of the pandemic. Most measures of hedge fund leverage increased in the second half of 2020 into the beginning of 2021 and are now above their historical averages. A few recent episodes have highlighted the opacity of risky exposures and the need for greater transparency at hedge funds and other leveraged fi nancial entities that can transmit stress to the fi nancial system. The Financial Stability Oversight Council has restarted its Hedge Fund Working Group to improve data sharing, identify risks, and strengthen the fi nancial system. Leverage at life insurance companies remains historically high as of the fi rst quarter of 2021. Issuance volumes of non-agency securities recovered somewhat in the fi rst quarter of 2021, although the recovery was uneven across asset classes.1 Collateralized loan obligation and asset-backed securities issuance was elevated, whereas non-agency commercial mortgage-backed securities issuance was weak. Funding risks at domestic banks remained low, as these banks rely only modestly on short-term wholesale funding and maintain sizable holdings of high-quality liquid assets. Liquidity ratios were well above regulatory requirements at most large domestic banks as of the fi rst quarter of 2021. Assets under management at prime and tax-exempt money market funds (MMFs) have declined since the middle of 2020, but vulnerabilities at these funds remain and call for structural fi xes. Markets released a report in December 2020 outlining potential reforms to address risks from the MMF sector.2 Subsequently, the Securities and Exchange Commission issued a request for comment on these potential reforms and summarized its fi ndings.3 If (continued on next page) 1. Securitization can add leverage to the fi nancial system through its use of “special purpose entities,” which are generally subject to rules such as risk retention that are less stringent than banks’ regulatory capital requirements. 2. See U.S. Department of the Treasury (2020), “President’s 3. See U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (2021), “SEC Requests Comment on Potential Money Market Fund Reform Options Highlighted in President’s Working Group properly calibrated, some of these reforms—such as swing pricing, a minimum balance at risk, and capital buffers—could signifi cantly reduce the run risk associated with MMFs. Meanwhile, the Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility and the Commercial Paper Funding Facility, which were deployed during the COvID-19 pandemic to backstop short-term funding markets, expired at the end of March with no material effect on these markets. Bond and bank loan mutual funds benefi ted from net infl ows but are exposed to risks due to large holdings of illiquid assets. shocks to fi nancial stability highlights several important risks. A worsening of the global pandemic could stress the fi nancial systems in emerging markets and some European countries. Further, if global interest rates were to rise abruptly, some emerging market economies could experience additional fi scal strains. These risks, if realized, could interact with fi nancial vulnerabilities and pose additional risks to the U.S. fi nancial system. Federal Reserve took forceful actions and established emergency lending facilities, with the approval of the Secretary of the Treasury as needed. These actions and facilities supported the fl ow of credit to households and businesses and served as backstop measures that have given investors confi dence that support would be available should conditions deteriorate substantially. Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility, which currently has $90.6 billion in loans outstanding funded to the PPP, was extended to July 30, 2021. The Federal Reserve has begun winding down the portfolio of the Secondary Market Corporate Credit Facility, an emergency lending facility that closed on December 31, 2020.4 The portfolio sales have been gradual and orderly and have aimed to minimize the potential for any adverse effect on market functioning by taking into account daily liquidity and trading conditions for exchange-traded funds and corporate bonds. To date, these sales have had no notable effect on mutual fund fl ows or price effects in the market. The Federal Reserve also took actions to reduce spillovers to the U.S. economy from foreign fi nancial stresses. Temporary U.S. dollar liquidity swap lines were established in March 2020, in addition to the preexisting standing lines, and have improved liquidity conditions in dollar funding markets in the United States and abroad by providing foreign central banks with the capacity to deliver U.S. dollar funding to institutions in their jurisdictions during times of market stress. The FIMA (Foreign and International Monetary Authorities) Repo Facility has helped support the smooth functioning of the U.S. Treasury market by providing a temporary source of U.S. dollars to a broad range of countries, many of which do not have swap line arrangements with the Federal Reserve. The Federal Reserve recently announced the extension of its temporary swap lines through December 31, 2021, which should help sustain improvements in global U.S. dollar funding markets. Most of the facilities established at the onset of the pandemic expired at the end of December 2020, the beginning of January 2021, or the end of March 2021. These facilities expired with no notable effect on fi nancial market functioning. 4. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2021), “Federal Reserve Board Announces Plans to Begin Winding Down the Portfolio of the Secondary Market Corporate Credit Facility,” press release, June 2, https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/ monetary20210602a.htm. and mid-June—short-term funding markets have functioned smoothly since February. Money market funds increased significantly their holdings of overnight repurchase agreements Since February, assets under management of government money market funds (MMFs) have gradually increased to an all-time high of nearly $4 trillion amid the disbursement of fiscal relief payments to individuals, states, and municipalities, and as some banks have reportedly taken steps to discourage additional deposit inflows. Against the backdrop of a sizable decrease in outstanding Treasury bill supply, government MMFs reduced their holdings of Treasury and agency securities while increasing their holdings of overnight repurchase agreements, including with the Federal Reserve. This development led to record levels of usage of the Federal Reserve’s ON RRP facility in late May and June. (See the box “Developments in the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet and Money Markets” in Part 2.) Bank credit remained little changed, while lending standards eased Total loans and leases outstanding at commercial banks remained little changed in the first half of the year (figure 34). The April Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices, conducted by the Federal Reserve, reported easier standards for most business and household loans over the first quarter of the year. Bank profitability increased over the first quarter of 2021 (figure 35). Delinquency rates on bank loans remain low but may increase later in the year, as foreclosure moratoriums and payment forbearance programs are set to expire. 34. Growth in total loans and leases NOTE: The data are calculated as monthly annualized growth rates and are seasonally and break adjusted. 35. Profitability of bank holding companies NOTE: The data are quarterly and are seasonally adjusted. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Board, Form FR Y-9C, Consolidated 36. Foreign real gross domestic product Note: Foreign gross domestic product is computed on a representative sample of 40 countries and aggregated using U.S. trade weights. Source: Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, Database of Global Economic Indicators, “Real Gross Domestic Product.” 37. Manufacturing output purchasing managers index in selected foreign economies NOTE: For the foreign manufacturing output purchasing managers index (PMI), values greater than (less than) 50 indicate better (worse) business conditions, on average, for the participants surveyed relative to conditions at the time of the previous survey. SOURCE: IHS Markit, Global Sector PMI. 38. Services purchasing managers index in selected foreign economies The recovery abroad slowed in the first half of the year . . . A resurgence of COVID-19 cases late last year led to substantial tightening in social- distancing restrictions in many foreign economies. Consequently, foreign GDP growth slowed in the last quarter of 2020 and the first quarter of 2021, as several advanced foreign economies (AFEs) experienced contractions in activity (figure 36). In most AFEs, the level of GDP in the first quarter remained below its pre-pandemic peak. However, compared with last spring, many foreign economies exhibited greater resilience to public health restrictions, and their governments have continued to provide fiscal support. Recent available indicators suggest a pickup for AFEs in GDP growth in the second quarter of this year as vaccination rates increased and restrictions were eased (figures 37 and 38). Although the situation in the AFEs appears to be improving, conditions in emerging market economies (EMEs) are more mixed, partly reflecting differences in success in containing COVID-19 outbreaks. Also, the pace of vaccinations in many EMEs remains slow due to supply shortages and other logistical challenges. Some higher-income Asian economies, where infections have so far remained mostly under control, experienced surprisingly fast growth, boosted by increased export demand and a partial recovery in domestic consumption. Most notably, the levels of GDP in China and in other industrialized EMEs such as Taiwan—which had managed to remain fairly insulated from the virus but has seen outbreaks recently—are already roughly 8 percent above their pre- pandemic levels (figure 39). Conversely, in many Latin American countries and some South and Southeast Asian economies, infection outbreaks led to continuing or increased public health restrictions and social distancing. Reflecting these headwinds, recent economic indicators suggest a decline in growth in the second quarter of 2021 in many of these EMEs following a sharp rebound in the first quarter, with economic activity still well below pre-pandemic levels. Unemployment rates in Europe are about 1 percentage point higher in early 2021 than before the pandemic (figure 40). This relatively muted change is partly a result of wage subsidy programs that kept workers on payrolls and employment protection regulations that limited rapid job destruction. Hours worked, however, have fallen more substantially, suggesting that the extent of economic slack in Europe may be greater than indicated by the unemployment rate. The unemployment trajectory in Canada was more similar to that in the United States, with a rapid increase early last spring followed by a steep decline subsequently. Inflation rates abroad have increased in recent months. In many AFEs, inflation readings moved up since the beginning of the year after substantial declines last year (figure 41). The rise in inflation was largely driven by base effects due to low price levels in 2020 as well as run-ups in energy prices. In some EMEs, currency depreciation and higher food prices are also contributing to inflation pressures. Even so, core inflation readings in many AFEs still point to moderate underlying inflation pressure, suggesting that the observed rise in inflation so far this year largely reflects temporary factors. Monetary policy abroad remained accommodative, as central banks focused on supporting growth and viewed the recent rise in inflation as transitory. Market-implied policy paths in many AFEs continue to signal a period of monetary accommodation, although paths in Canada and the United Kingdom moved higher this year (figure 42). The European Central Bank increased its pace of asset purchases in the spring, and the Bank of Japan’s yield curve control policy 39. Real gross domestic product in selected emerging market economies NOTE: The data are for 2021:Q1. SOURCE: For Taiwan, Directorate General of Budget, Accounting and Statistics; for China, National Bureau of Statistics of China; for South Korea, Bank of Korea; for Indonesia, Badan Pusat Statistik; for Mexico, Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Geografía; for Thailand, Office of the National Economic and Social Development Board; all via Haver Analytics. 40. Unemployment rate in selected advanced economies NOTE: The data for the United Kingdom extend through March 2021 and are centered 3-month averages of monthly data. The data for the United States extend through June 2021. 41. Consumer price inflation in selected advanced foreign economies NOTE: The data for the euro area incorporate the flash estimate for 42. 24-month policy expectations for selected advanced foreign economies NOTE: The data are weekly averages of daily 24-month market-implied central bank policy rates. The 24-month policy rates are implied by quotes on overnight index swaps tied to the policy rates. The data extend through July 2, 2021. proved effective in containing a rise in bond yields. By contrast, while still maintaining an accommodative policy rate, the Bank of Canada announced plans to end liquidity support programs and started slowing its pace of asset purchases. The Bank of England also slowed its pace of asset purchases but indicated that its policy stance remains accommodative. Monetary policy in EMEs was generally accommodative as well, but some EME central banks—including in Brazil, Russia, and Turkey—increased policy rates, citing concerns about inflationary pressures. The Bank of Mexico, while leaving its policy rate unchanged, highlighted concerns about financial market volatility and past peso depreciation. Improved outlook led to increases in foreign yields and equity prices . . . Longer-term sovereign yields and market- based inflation compensation measures increased in some major advanced economies, as the economic outlook brightened and commodity prices rose (figure 43). Despite the increase, market-based inflation compensation in many AFEs remained below the inflation target of their respective central banks. Japanese yields were little changed due to the Bank of Japan’s yield curve control policy. Equity markets in AFEs generally rose despite the new wave of COVID-19 infections earlier this year, as many economies proved resilient to increased case numbers and lockdowns and the vaccine rollout allowed gradual reopening (figure 44). Equities in emerging markets were mixed. Since the beginning of the year, equity prices in some EMEs, including South Korea, Taiwan, and Mexico, improved considerably, but equity prices in other countries, including China, underperformed (figure 45). Inflows into dedicated EME investment funds slowed this year but remained positive, and EME bond spreads moved little so far this year (figure 46). . . . and the dollar remained little changed After depreciating sharply in late 2020, the broad dollar index—a measure of the trade- weighted value of the dollar against foreign currencies—has changed little, on net, since the beginning of the year. It has strengthened somewhat recently, amid increases in medium- term U.S. yields (figure 47). Among AFE currencies, the dollar appreciated most against the Japanese yen, as Japanese yields moved least. Since the beginning of the year, the U.S. dollar depreciated against the Canadian dollar, which was buoyed by higher commodity prices and signs of a stronger-than-expected recovery in Canada (figure 48). 43. Nominal 10-year government bond yields in selected advanced economies NOTE: The data are weekly averages of daily benchmark yields and 44. Equity indexes for selected advanced economies NOTE: The data are weekly averages of daily data and extend through July 2, 2021. SOURCE: For euro area, Dow Jones Euro Stoxx Index; for Japan, Tokyo Stock Price Index; for United Kingdom, Financial Times Stock Exchange 100 Index; for United States, S&P 500 Index; all via Bloomberg. (For Dow Jones Indices licensing information, see the note on the Contents page.) 45. Equity indexes for selected emerging market economies NOTE: The data are weekly averages of daily data and extend through 46. Emerging market mutual fund flows and spreads Equity fund flows (right scale) Bond fund flows (right scale) EMBI+ (left scale) NOTE: The bond and equity fund flows data are semiannual sums of weekly data from December 28, 2006, to December 30, 2020; a quarterly sum of weekly data from December 31, 2020, to March 31, 2021; and monthly sums of weekly data from April 1, 2021, to May 26, 2021. Weekly data span Thursday through Wednesday, and the semiannual, quarterly, and monthly values are sums over weekly data for weeks ending in that half year, quarter, or month. The fund flows data exclude funds located in China. The J.P. Morgan Emerging Markets Bond Index Plus (EMBI+) data are weekly averages of daily data and extend through July 2, 2021. The EMBI+ data exclude Venezuela. SOURCE: For bond and equity fund flows, EPFR Global; for EMBI+, 47. U.S. dollar exchange rate indexes NOTE: The data, which are in foreign currency units per dollar, are weekly averages of daily values of the broad dollar index, advanced foreign economies (AFE) dollar index, and emerging market economies (EME) dollar index. The weekly data extend through July 2, 2021. As indicated by the leftmost arrow, increases in the data reflect U.S. dollar appreciation and decreases reflect U.S. dollar depreciation. 48. Exchange rate indexes for selected economies NOTE: The data, which are in foreign currency units per dollar, are weekly averages of daily data and extend through July 2, 2021. As indicated by the leftmost arrow, increases in the data reflect U.S. dollar appreciation and decreases reflect U.S. dollar depreciation. The Federal Open Market Committee maintained the federal funds rate near zero as it seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run . . . inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. The Committee expects to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these outcomes are achieved. As part of its actions to ensure that monetary policy will continue to deliver powerful support to the economy until the recovery is complete, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has maintained the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent (figure 49). The Committee has indicated that it expects it will be appropriate to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee’s assessments of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. With inflation having run persistently below the Committee’s longer-run goal, the Committee will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term . . . and the Committee increased the holdings of Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities in the System Open Market Account In addition, the Federal Reserve has continued to expand its holdings of Treasury securities by $80 billion per month and its holdings of agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) by $40 billion per month. These asset purchases help foster smooth market functioning and accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. The Committee’s current guidance regarding asset purchases indicates that increases in the holdings of Treasury securities and agency MBS in the System Open Market Account will continue at least at this pace until substantial further progress has been made toward its maximum-employment and price-stability goals since the Committee 49. Selected interest rates NOTE: The 2-year and 10-year Treasury rates are the constant-maturity yields based on the most actively traded securities. SOURCE: Department of the Treasury; Federal Reserve Board. adopted its asset purchase guidance last December. In addition, the minutes of the June 2021 FOMC meeting noted the importance that policymakers attach to clear communications about the Committee’s assessment of progress toward its longer-run goals and to providing these communications well in advance of the time when progress can be judged substantial enough to warrant a change in the pace of asset purchases.9 In coming meetings, the FOMC will continue to assess the economy’s progress toward the Committee’s goals. The FOMC is committed to using its full range of tools to promote maximum employment and price stability Progress on vaccinations will likely continue to reduce the effects of the public health crisis on the economy, but risks to the economic outlook remain. The Federal Reserve is committed to using its full range of tools to support the U.S. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum- employment and price-stability goals. The Committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook and is prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. The Committee’s assessments will continue to take into account a wide range of information, including readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments. In addition to considering a wide range of economic and financial data and information gathered from business contacts and other informed parties around the country, 9. The minutes for the June 2021 FOMC meeting are available on the Board’s website at https://www. federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm. policymakers routinely consult prescriptions for the policy interest rate provided by various monetary policy rules. These rule prescriptions can provide useful benchmarks for the FOMC. Simple rules cannot capture the complexities of monetary policy, and many practical considerations make it undesirable for the FOMC to adhere strictly to the prescriptions of any specific rule. However, some principles associated with good monetary policy can be illustrated by these policy rules (see the box “Monetary Policy Rules, the Effective Lower Bound, and the Economic Recovery”). The FOMC’s framework for conducting monetary policy involves a systematic approach in keeping with key principles of good monetary policy but allows for more flexibility than is implied by simple policy rules. The size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet continued to grow, reflecting purchases of U.S. Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities The Federal Reserve’s balance sheet has grown to $8.1 trillion from $7.4 trillion at the end of January, reflecting continued asset purchases to help foster smooth market functioning and accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses (figure 50). The Federal Reserve has continued rolling over at auction all principal payments from its holdings of Treasury securities. Principal payments received from agency MBS and agency debt continue to be reinvested into agency MBS. After the March FOMC meeting, in light of the sustained smooth functioning of markets for agency commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS), the Federal Reserve ended regular purchases of agency CMBS. The increase in aggregate asset holdings on the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet arising from Treasury security and agency MBS purchases has been offset in part by declines in several other asset categories. Outstanding balances at many of the Federal Reserve’s emergency liquidity and credit facilities 50. Federal Reserve assets and liabilities Other assets Credit and liquidity facilities Agency debt and mortgage-backed securities holdings Treasury securities held outright NOTE: “Agency debt and mortgage-backed securities holdings” includes agency residential mortgage-backed securities and agency commercial mortgage-backed securities. “Credit and liquidity facilities” consists of primary, secondary, and seasonal credit; term auction credit; central bank liquidity swaps; support for Maiden Lane, Bear Stearns Companies, Inc., and AIG; and other credit and liquidity facilities, including the Primary Dealer Credit Facility, the Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility, the Commercial Paper Funding Facility, the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility, the Primary and Secondary Market Corporate Credit Facilities, the Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility, the Municipal Liquidity Facility, and the Main Street Lending Program. “Other assets” includes repurchase agreements, FIMA (Foreign and International Monetary Authorities) repurchase agreements, and unamortized premiums and discounts on securities held outright. “Capital and other liabilities” includes reverse repurchase agreements, the U.S. Treasury General Account, and the U.S. Treasury Supplementary Financing Account. The data extend through June 30, 2021. The key identifies shaded areas in order from top to bottom. have declined since the end of January, and most facilities have now expired.10 In June, the Federal Reserve Board announced plans to begin winding down the portfolio of the Secondary Market Corporate Credit Facility (SMCCF). The SMCCF proved very important in restoring market functioning last year, supporting the availability of credit for large employers, and bolstering employment through the COVID-19 pandemic. The winding down of the SMCCF portfolio has been gradual and orderly and has not produced any adverse effect on market 10. A list of credit and liquidity facilities established by the Federal Reserve in response to COVID-19 is available on the Board’s website at https://www. federalreserve.gov/funding-credit-liquidity-and-loan- facilities.htm. functioning. Draws on central bank liquidity swap lines have decreased further to near zero, and usage of repurchase operations has remained at zero since February. In contrast, the Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility has expanded to around $80 billion since the end of January. Reserves have increased significantly to around $4 trillion, mostly because of asset purchases and the large drawdown in the Treasury General Account from around $1.6 trillion in January to about $850 billion in June. However, reserves have been relatively stable more recently given a substantial increase in the use of the overnight reverse repurchase agreement facility. (See the box “Developments in the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet and Money Markets.”) Simple interest rate rules relate a policy interest rate, such as the federal funds rate, to a small number of other economic variables—typically including the deviation of infl ation from its target value and a measure of resource slack in the economy. Policymakers consult prescriptions of the policy interest rate derived from a variety of policy rules for guidance, without mechanically following the prescriptions of any particular rule. This discussion examines the prescriptions of a number of interest rate rules. One simplifi cation these rules typically adopt is ignoring the effective lower bound (ELB) on interest rates, and many of the rules have prescribed negative values for the federal funds rate since the onset of the pandemic- driven recession. economic outcomes can be achieved by following a monetary policy rule that incorporates key principles of good monetary policy. One such principle is that monetary policy should respond in a predictable way to changes in economic conditions, thus fostering public understanding of policymakers’ goals and strategy. A second principle is that, to stabilize infl ation, the policy rate should be adjusted over time in response to persistent increases or decreases in infl ation to an extent suffi cient to ensure a return of infl ation to the central bank’s longer-run objective. Most rules analyzed in the research literature respond to deviations—both positive and negative— of resource utilization from its trend level because they were informed by historical periods and economic models in which high resource utilization is accompanied by infl ation pressure. By contrast, the Federal Open Market Committee’s (FOMC) Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy indicates that policymakers would not respond to high employment unless it was accompanied by signs of unwanted increases in infl ation or the emergence of other risks that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals.1 Accordingly, this discussion examines—in addition to the prescriptions of a number of commonly studied monetary policy rules—the prescriptions of a modifi ed simple rule that, all else being equal, does not mechanically call for policy rate increases as unemployment drops below its estimated longer-run level.2 Simple monetary policy rules also have important limitations. As noted earlier, simple rules do not typically recognize that the ELB limits the extent to which the policy rate can be lowered to support the economy, which may impart a downward bias to both employment and infl ation. To mitigate the challenges posed by the ELB and anchor longer-term infl ation expectations at 2 percent, the Committee indicates in its statement that it “seeks to achieve infl ation that averages 2 percent over time, and therefore judges that, following periods when infl ation has been running persistently below 2 percent, appropriate monetary policy will likely aim to achieve infl ation moderately above 2 percent for some time.”3 None of the simple rules analyzed in this discussion include any mechanism to offset the downward bias in infl ation imposed by the ELB. As such, they do not refl ect these important aspects of the FOMC’s monetary policy strategy. (continued) 1. For a discussion of changes made to the statement, see the box “The FOMC’s Revised Statement on Longer- Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy” in Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2021), Monetary Policy Report (Washington: Board of Governors, February), pp. 40–41, https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/ files/20210219_mprfullreport.pdf. the Decade Ahead: Implications for Monetary Policy,” an economic policy symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo. (via webcast), August 27, https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/ powell20200827a.htm. 3. The statement recognizes the ELB as an important 2. Other key features of the Committee’s monetary policy strategy outlined in its statement, including the aim of having infl ation average 2 percent over time to ensure that longer- term infl ation expectations remain well anchored, are not incorporated in the simple rules analyzed in this discussion. For a description of the revised statement, see Jerome H. Powell (2020), “New Economic Challenges and the Fed’s Monetary Policy Review,” speech delivered at “Navigating consideration in the conduct of monetary policy by indicating that “the federal funds rate is likely to be constrained by its effective lower bound more frequently than in the past.” In part because of the proximity of interest rates to the ELB, the Committee judges that downward risks to employment and infl ation have increased. The Committee is prepared to use its full range of tools to achieve its maximum-employment and price-stability goals. Another limitation is that simple rules respond to only a small set of economic variables and thus necessarily abstract from many of the considerations that the FOMC takes into account. For example, a simple rule might respond to movements in a specifi c labor market indicator, such as the overall unemployment rate. However, no single labor market indicator can precisely capture the size of the shortfall from maximum employment or identify when a strong labor market can be sustained without putting undue upward pressure on infl ation; many labor market indicators must be assessed.4 Similarly, simple policy rules that systematically call for increases in the policy rate as slack in the labor market diminishes might fail to recognize the benefi ts of sustaining a strong labor market.5 Finally, simple rules for the policy rate do not explicitly recognize that the monetary policy toolkit includes other tools—notably, large-scale asset purchases and forward guidance, which are especially relevant when the policy rate is constrained by the ELB. (See the box “Developments in the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet and Money Markets.”) Economists have analyzed many monetary policy rules, including the well-known Taylor (1993) rule, the “balanced approach” rule, the “adjusted Taylor (1993)” rule, and the “fi rst difference” rule.6 In addition to these 4. See Lael Brainard (2021), “How Should We Think about Full Employment in the Federal Reserve’s Dual Mandate?” speech delivered at the Ec10, Principles of Economics, Lecture, Faculty of Arts and Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge, Mass. (via webcast), February 24, https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/ brainard20210224a.htm. 5. For examples of the benefi ts associated with strong labor market conditions, see Fed Listens: Perspectives from the Public, which summarizes the feedback received from the community as part of the FOMC’s 2019–20 review of its monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices and is available on the Board’s website at https://www. federalreserve.gov/publications/files/fedlistens-report- 20200612.pdf. 6. The Taylor (1993) rule was suggested in John B. Taylor (1993), “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie- Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 39 (December), pp. 195–214. The balanced-approach rule was analyzed in John B. Taylor (1999), “A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules,” in John B. Taylor, ed., Monetary Policy Rules (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), pp. 319–41. The rules, fi gure A shows a “balanced approach (shortfalls)” rule, which represents one simple way to illustrate the Committee’s focus on shortfalls from maximum employment. All of the policy rules analyzed in this discussion embody the key principles of good monetary policy previously noted as well as the important limitations. All fi ve rules feature the unemployment rate gap, measured as the difference between an estimate of the rate of unemployment in the longer run (ut the current unemployment rate; the fi rst-difference rule includes the change in the unemployment rate gap rather than its level.7 All of the rules abstract from the uncertainty that surrounds estimates of the unemployment rate gap. In addition, all of the rules include the difference between infl ation and the FOMC’s longer-run objective of 2 percent.8 All but the (continued on next page) adjusted Taylor (1993) rule was studied in David Reifschneider and John C. Williams (2000), “Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low-Infl ation Era,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 32 (November), pp. 936–66. The fi rst-difference rule is based on a rule suggested by Athanasios Orphanides (2003), “Historical Monetary Policy Analysis and the Taylor Rule,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 50 (July), pp. 983–1022. A review of policy rules is in John B. Taylor and John C. Williams (2011), “Simple and Robust Rules for Monetary Policy,” in Benjamin M. Friedman and Michael Woodford, eds., Handbook of Monetary Economics, vol. 3B (Amsterdam: North-Holland), pp. 829–59. The same volume of the Handbook of Monetary Economics also discusses approaches other than policy rules for deriving policy rate prescriptions. 7. The original Taylor (1993) rule represented slack in resource utilization using an output gap (the difference between the current level of real gross domestic product (GDP) and the level that GDP would be if the economy were operating at maximum employment, measured in percent of the latter). The rules in fi gure A represent slack in resource utilization using the unemployment gap instead, because that gap better captures the FOMC’s statutory goal to promote maximum employment. Movements in these alternative measures of resource utilization are highly correlated. For more information, see the note below fi gure A. 8. None of these rules take into account historical infl ation performance. As such, these rules do not incorporate the aim of achieving infl ation that averages 2 percent over time as described in the FOMC’s Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy. In particular, that statement indicates that “the Committee seeks to achieve infl ation that averages 2 percent over time, and therefore judges that, following periods when infl ation has been running persistently below 2 percent, appropriate monetary policy will likely aim to achieve infl ation moderately above 2 percent for some time.” FD represent the values of the nominal federal funds rate prescribed by the Taylor Note: Rt (1993), balanced-approach, balanced-approach (shortfalls), adjusted Taylor (1993), and first-difference rules, respectively. Rt denotes the realized nominal federal funds rate for quarter t, πt is the 4-quarter price inflation for quarter t, ut is the LR is the level of the neutral real federal funds rate in the longer run that is expected to be unemployment rate in quarter t, and rt consistent with sustaining maximum employment and inflation at the Federal Open Market Committee’s 2 percent longer-run objective, πLR. In addition, ut deviations of the federal funds rate from the prescriptions of the Taylor (1993) rule when that rule prescribes setting the federal funds rate below an effective lower bound (ELB) of 12.5 basis points. The Taylor (1993) rule and other policy rules are generally written in terms of the deviation of real output from its full capacity level. In these equations, the output gap has been replaced with the gap between the rate of unemployment in the longer run and its actual level (using a relationship known as Okun’s law) to represent the rules in terms of the unemployment rate. The rules are implemented as responding to core personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation rather than to headline PCE inflation because current and near-term core inflation rates tend to outperform headline inflation rates as predictors of the medium-term behavior of headline inflation. Box note 6 provides references for the policy rules. LR is the rate of unemployment expected in the longer run. Zt is the cumulative sum of past fi rst-difference rule include an estimate of the neutral real interest rate in the longer run (rt By construction, the balanced-approach (shortfalls) rule prescribes identical policy rates to those prescribed by the balanced-approach rule at times when the unemployment rate is above its estimated longer-run 9. The neutral real interest rate in the longer run (rt LR) is the level of the real federal funds rate that is expected to be consistent, in the longer run, with maximum employment LR is determined largely by LR, rt and stable infl ation. Like ut nonmonetary factors. The fi rst-difference rule shown in LR. However, this rule fi gure A does not involve an estimate of rt has its own shortcomings. For example, research suggests that this sort of rule often results in greater volatility in employment and infl ation relative to what would be obtained under the Taylor (1993) and balanced-approach rules. level. However, when the unemployment rate is below that level, the balanced-approach (shortfalls) rule is more accommodative than the balanced-approach rule because it does not call for the policy rate to rise as the unemployment rate drops further. Unlike the other simple rules featured here, the adjusted Taylor (1993) rule recognizes that the federal funds rate cannot be reduced materially below the ELB. To make up for the cumulative shortfall in accommodation following a recession during which the federal funds rate has fallen to its ELB, the adjusted Taylor (1993) rule prescribes delaying the return of the policy rate to the (positive) levels prescribed by the standard Taylor (1993) rule until after the economy begins to recover. (continued) NOTE: The rules use historical values of the federal funds rate, core personal consumption expenditures inflation, and the unemployment rate. Quarterly projections of longer-run values for the federal funds rate and the unemployment rate are derived through interpolations of the biannual projections from Blue Chip Economic Indicators. The longer-run value for inflation is taken as 2 percent. Figure B shows historical prescriptions for the federal funds rate from the fi ve rules. For each period, the fi gure reports the policy rates prescribed by the rules, taking as given the prevailing economic conditions and estimates of ut The four rules whose formulas do not impose a lower bound on the value of the federal funds rate imply prescriptions of strongly negative policy rates in response to the pandemic-driven recession, well below their respective troughs in the 2008–09 recession. The prescriptions of the balanced-approach and balanced- approach (shortfalls) rules are the most negative because these rules call for relatively large responses to resource slack. The negative prescriptions of the four rules show the extent to which policymakers’ ability to support the economy through reductions in the federal funds rate has been constrained by the ELB during the pandemic-driven recession—a constraint that underlines the importance of the FOMC’s other policy actions at the time, including forward guidance about the federal funds rate and large-scale asset purchases. LR and rt Regarding the recovery from the 2008–09 recession, all of the simple rules shown here prescribed departure from the ELB well before the FOMC determined that it was appropriate to raise the federal funds rate. The FOMC judged, on the basis of a wide range of information available at the time, that it was appropriate to maintain a more accommodative path of the federal funds rate than prescribed by these rules. Similarly, in the aftermath of the pandemic-driven recession, the FOMC has been drawing from a broad range of indicators, analyses, and judgments in making its determinations concerning the appropriate stance for monetary policy, including readings on public health, labor market conditions, infl ation pressures and infl ation expectations, and fi nancial and international developments. Under the FOMC’s fl exible form of average infl ation targeting, departure from the ELB might be delayed relative to the simple rules by the desire to see infl ation run moderately above 2 percent for some time. While the simple rules are concerned with period-by-period infl ation, the Committee aims for a sustained return of infl ation to the 2 percent objective. the Federal reserve’s asset purchases since March 2020 have resulted in a large and rapid expansion of the Federal reserve’s balance sheet. Federal reserve assets totaled $4.2 trillion before the pandemic in January 2020 and have since grown to $8.1 trillion (fi gure a). as net asset purchases proceed at a pace of $120 billion per month, the Federal reserve’s total liabilities increase correspondingly.1 alongside this growth in aggregate liabilities arising from asset purchases, there have also been large compositional shifts between liabilities this year due to factors that are not directly related to monetary policy decisions (fi gure B). this discussion reviews recent developments in the Federal reserve’s balance sheet and associated changes in money market conditions. reserve balances are the largest liability on the Federal reserve’s balance sheet. Federal reserve asset purchases are settled by adding reserves to the banking system; thus, the magnitude of asset purchases since the onset of the pandemic has brought reserves to record levels.2 reserves grew substantially earlier this year, from $3.1 trillion in early January to $3.9 trillion by early april. the level of reserves was, however, mostly stable from april to June 2021, refl ecting growth in other liabilities such as the overnight reverse repurchase agreement (on rrP) facility. Other assets Loans Central bank liquidity swaps Repurchase agreements Agency debt and MBS Treasury securities held outright NOTE: The data extend through June 30, 2021. MBS is mortgage-backed securities. The key identifies shaded areas in order from top to bottom. in light of the Federal reserve’s role as fi scal agent for the federal government, the U.S. treasury holds balances in the treasury General account (tGa), which is another liability on the Federal reserve’s balance sheet. changes in the tGa affect other Federal reserve liabilities such as reserves and may have implications for money market conditions. a reduction in the tGa increases the level of reserves, other things being equal, as the treasury makes payments to individuals and businesses, which may increase private deposits in the banking system. an important recent development in this regard has been the substantial drawdown of the tGa over the fi rst half of 2021. With the enactment 1. For general explanations of several liabilities on the Federal reserve’s balance sheet, see the box “the role of liabilities in Determining the Size of the Federal reserve’s Balance Sheet” in Board of Governors of the Federal reserve System (2019), Monetary Policy Report (Washington: Board of Governors, February), pp. 41–43, https://www.federalreserve. gov/monetarypolicy/files/20190222_mprfullreport.pdf. 2. reserves consist of deposits held at Federal reserve Banks by depository institutions, such as commercial banks, savings banks, credit unions, thrift institutions, and U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks. reserve balances allow depository institutions to facilitate daily payment fl ows, both in ordinary times and in stress scenarios, without borrowing funds or selling assets. NOTE: The data extend through June 30, 2021. “Capital and other liabilities” includes Treasury contributions. The key identifies shaded areas in order from top to bottom. of pandemic-related fi scal stimulus measures through multiple rounds of federal legislation in 2020 and 2021, the treasury’s balance in the tGa increased to unprecedentedly high levels. as shown in fi gure c, as the bulk of the most recent fi scal stimulus payments and tax refunds came to an end, the treasury lowered its outstanding balance in the tGa from about $1.6 trillion at the end of January 2020 to about $850 billion by the end of June 2021. as the treasury sought to reduce its tGa balance, the treasury also lowered its net issuance of treasury bills substantially in 2021. the developments with reserves, the tGa, and treasury bill issuance have affected money markets in 2021. the recent large increases in reserves, resulting (continued) Total securities Treasury securities Agency debt and MBS Net unamortized premiums Repurchase agreements Loans and lending facilities PPPLF Other loans and lending facilities Central bank liquidity swaps Other assets Total assets Federal Reserve notes Reserves held by depository institutions Reverse repurchase agreements Foreign offi cial and international accounts Others U.S. Treasury General Account Other deposits Other liabilities and capital Total liabilities and capital Note: MBS is mortgage-backed securities. PPPLF is Paycheck Protection from both asset purchases and reductions in the tGa, have put broad but modest downward pressure on short-term interest rates over recent months. additionally, the net declines in treasury bill supply have put downward pressure on bill yields, which similarly affected rates on close substitutes to bills such as repurchase agreements (repos) collateralized by treasury securities.3 downward pressure on money market rates, the Federal reserve’s on rrP facility has seen a historically large increase in usage since april 2021, primarily driven by greater participation from government money market funds. take-up at the on rrP facility reached record levels—nearly $1 trillion by the end of June 2021. in light of the potential for expanded use of the facility and given growth in money market fund assets under management in recent years, the Federal open Market committee (FoMc) raised the per-counterparty cap on on rrP participation to $80 billion per day from $30 billion at the March 2021 FoMc meeting. With the increase in usage, the on rrP facility continued 3. For further information on recent money market developments, see the Financial Developments section in Part 1 of this report. to serve its intended purpose of helping to provide a fl oor under short-term interest rates.4 the recent spike in facility usage refl ected government money market funds turning to the facility because of their large infl ows. certain banks reportedly sought to limit further growth of their reserve holdings and of certain deposit liabilities. this phenomenon has reportedly been important in recent months in driving additional infl ows into money market funds in lieu of bank deposits. additionally, money market funds faced a relative lack of eligible short-term investments amid declining treasury bill supply and reduced demand for repo funding on the part of borrowers. in this situation, the on rrP has provided money market funds with an additional investment option for these infl ows despite its offering rate being at 0 percent through mid-June. other deposits, another liability on the Federal reserve’s balance sheet, include deposits from government-sponsored enterprises (GSes) and designated fi nancial market utilities. these deposits roughly doubled since the beginning of 2021 to $408 billion by mid-June, refl ecting in part the same money market conditions that drove higher on rrP take-up. Following the June 2021 FoMc meeting, the Federal reserve made a technical adjustment to its administered rates: interest on excess reserves and the on rrP offering rate. Both rates were increased 5 basis points in order to keep the federal funds rate well within the FoMc’s target range and to support smooth functioning of short-term funding markets. on rrP take-up rose substantially over subsequent days. this increase refl ected shifts to the on rrP from GSes’ deposits at the Federal reserve that do not earn interest as well as additional participation from money market funds. Following the technical adjustment, short-term market interest rates adjusted slightly higher, largely in step with the increase in administered rates. the effective federal funds rate rose to 10 basis points, while the Secured overnight Financing rate increased to 5 basis points. 4. the on rrP facility helps keep the effective federal funds rate from falling below the target range set by the FoMc, as institutions with access to the on rrP should be unwilling to lend funds below the on rrP’s pre-announced offering rate. the on rrP facility is primarily used by nonbank counterparties such as money market funds. the rate offered through the on rrP facility complements the interest on excess reserves rate in supporting effective monetary policy implementation. the Federal reserve provides a similar service to foreign offi cial and international accounts (primarily foreign central banks), though these balances have not seen notable growth in recent months. The following material was released after the conclusion of the June 15–16, 2021, meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee. In conjunction with the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting held on June 15– 16, 2021, meeting participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real gross domestic product (GDP) growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for each year from 2021 to 2023 and over the longer run. Each participant’s projections were based on information available at the time of the meeting, together with her or his assessment of appropriate monetary policy—including a path for the federal funds rate and its longer- run value—and assumptions about other factors likely to affect economic outcomes. The longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the value to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. “Appropriate monetary policy” is defined as the future path of policy that each participant deems most likely to foster outcomes for economic activity and inflation that best satisfy his or her individual interpretation of the statutory mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability. Table 1. Economic projections of Federal Reserve Board members and Federal Reserve Bank presidents, under their individual assumptions of projected appropriate monetary policy, June 2021 Percent Longer run Longer run Longer run Memo: Projected appropriate policy path . Note: Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP) and projections for both measures of inflation are percent changes from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. PCE inflation and core PCE inflation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index for personal consump- tion expenditures (PCE) and the price index for PCE excluding food and energy. Projections for the unemployment rate are for the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. Each participant’s projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy. Longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the econ- omy. The projections for the federal funds rate are the value of the midpoint of the projected appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the projected appropriate target level for the federal funds rate at the end of the specified calendar year or over the longer run. The March projections were made in conjunction with the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on March 16–17, 2021. One participant did not submit longer-run projections for the change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, or the federal funds rate in conjunction with the March 16–17, 2021, meeting, and one participant did not submit such projections in conjunction with the June 15–16, 2021, meeting. 1. For each period, the median is the middle projection when the projections are arranged from lowest to highest. When the number of projections is even, the median is the 2. The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each year. 3. The range for a variable in a given year includes all participants’ projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year. 4. Longer-run projections for core PCE inflation are not collected. Figure 1. Medians, central tendencies, and ranges of economic projections, 2021–23 and over the longer run Longer run Longer run Longer run Longer run Longer run Note: Each shaded circle indicates the value (rounded to the nearest 1/8 percentage point) of an individual participant’s judgment of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the appropriate target level for the federal funds rate at the end of the specified calendar year or over the longer run. One participant did not submit longer-run projections for the federal funds rate. Figure 3.A. Distribution of participants’ projections for the change in real GDP, 2021–23 and over the longer run Longer run Note: Definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Figure 3.B. Distribution of participants’ projections for the unemployment rate, 2021–23 and over the longer run Longer run Note: Definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Figure 3.C. Distribution of participants’ projections for PCE inflation, 2021–23 and over the longer run Longer run Note: Definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Note: Definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Figure 3.E. Distribution of participants’ judgments of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the appropriate target level for the federal funds rate, 2021–23 and over the longer run Longer run Note: Definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the percent change in real gross domestic product (GDP) from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The confidence interval around the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the confidence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reflect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections; these current assessments are summa- rized in the lower panels. Generally speaking, participants who judge the uncertainty about their projections as “broadly similar” to the average levels of the past 20 years would view the width of the confidence interval shown in the historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise, participants who judge the risks to their projections as “broadly balanced” would view the confidence interval around their projections as approximate- ly symmetric. For definitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The confidence interval around the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the confidence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reflect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections; these current assessments are summarized in the lower panels. Generally speaking, participants who judge the uncertainty about their projections as “broadly similar” to the average levels of the past 20 years would view the width of the confidence interval shown in the historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise, participants who judge the risks to their projections as “broadly balanced” would view the confidence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For definitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Risks to core PCE inflation Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the percent change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The confidence interval around the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the confidence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reflect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections; these current assessments are summarized in the lower panels. Generally speaking, participants who judge the uncertainty about their projections as “broadly similar” to the average levels of the past 20 years would view the width of the confidence interval shown in the historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise, participants who judge the risks to their projections as “broadly balanced” would view the confidence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For definitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” Note: For each SEP, participants provided responses to the question “Please indicate your judgment of the uncertainty attached to your projections relative to the levels of uncertainty over the past 20 years.” Each point in the diffusion indexes represents the number of participants who responded “Higher” minus the number who responded “Lower,” divided by the total number of participants. Figure excludes March 2020 when no projections were submitted. Note: For each SEP, participants provided responses to the question “Please indicate your judgment of the risk weighting around your projections.” Each point in the diffusion indexes represents the number of participants who responded “Weighted to the Upside” minus the number who responded “Weighted to the Downside,” divided by the total number of participants. Figure excludes March 2020 when no projections were submitted. Note: The blue and red lines are based on actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the Committee’s target for the federal funds rate at the end of the year indicated. The actual values are the midpoint of the target range; the median projected values are based on either the midpoint of the target range or the target level. The confidence interval around the median projected values is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years. The confidence interval is not strictly consistent with the projections for the federal funds rate, primarily because these projections are not forecasts of the likeliest outcomes for the federal funds rate, but rather projections of participants’ individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy. Still, historical forecast errors provide a broad sense of the uncertainty around the future path of the federal funds rate generated by the uncertainty about the macroeconomic variables as well as additional adjustments to monetary policy that may be appropriate to onset the effects of shocks to the economy. The confidence interval is assumed to be symmetric except when it is truncated at zero - the bottom of the lowest target range for the federal funds rate that has been adopted in the past by the Committee. This truncation would not be intended to indicate the likelihood of the use of negative interest rates to provide additional monetary policy accommodation if doing so was judged appropriate. In such situations, the Committee could also employ other tools, including forward guidance and large-scale asset purchases, to provide additional accommodation. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the confidence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reflect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections. * The confidence interval is derived from forecasts of the average level of short-term interest rates in the fourth quarter of the year indicated; more information about these data is available in table 2. The shaded area encompasses less than a 70 percent confidence interval if the confidence interval has been truncated at zero. Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges Percentage points Note: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root mean squared error of projections for 2001 through 2020 that were released in the summer by various private and government forecasters. As described in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain assumptions, there is about a 70 percent probability that actual outcomes for real GDP, unemployment, consumer prices, and the federal funds rate will be in ranges implied by the average size of projection errors made in the past. For more information, see David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip (2017), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook Using Historical Forecasting Errors: The Federal Reserve’s Approach,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-020 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February), https://dx.doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2017.020. 1. Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure that has been most widely used in government and private economic forecasts. Projections are percent changes on a fourth quarter to fourth quarter basis. 3. For Federal Reserve staff forecasts, measure is the federal funds rate. For other forecasts, measure is the rate on 3-month Treasury bills. Projection errors are calculated using average levels, in percent, in the fourth quarter. The economic projections provided by the members of the Board of Governors and the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks inform discussions of monetary policy among policymakers and can aid public understanding of the basis for policy actions. Considerable uncertainty attends these projections, however. The economic and statistical models and relationships used to help produce economic forecasts are necessarily imperfect descriptions of the real world, and the future path of the economy can be affected by myriad unforeseen developments and events. Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, participants consider not only what appears to be the most likely economic outcome as embodied in their projections, but also the range of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of their occurring, and the potential costs to the economy should they occur. Table 2 summarizes the average historical accuracy of a range of forecasts, including those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports and those prepared by the Federal Reserve Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). The projection error ranges shown in the table illustrate the considerable uncertainty associated with economic forecasts. For example, suppose a participant projects that real gross domestic product (GDP) and total consumer prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty attending those projections is similar to that experienced in the past and the risks around the projections are broadly balanced, the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a probability of about 70 percent that actual GDP would expand within a range of 1.5 to 4.5 percent in the current year and 1.0 to 5.0 percent in the second and third years. The corresponding 70 percent confi dence intervals for overall infl ation would be 1.2 to 2.8 percent in the current year and 1.0 to 3.0 percent in the second and third years. Figures 4.A through 4.C illustrate these confi dence bounds in “fan charts” that are symmetric and centered on the medians of FOMC participants’ projections for GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and infl ation. However, in some instances, the risks around the projections may not be symmetric. In particular, the unemployment rate cannot be negative; furthermore, the risks around a particular projection might be tilted to either the upside or the downside, in which case the corresponding fan chart would be asymmetrically positioned around the median projection. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over history, participants provide judgments as to whether the uncertainty attached to their projections of each economic variable is greater than, smaller than, or broadly similar to typical levels of forecast uncertainty seen in the past 20 years, as presented in table 2 and refl ected in the widths of the confi dence intervals shown in the top panels of fi gures 4.A through 4.C. Participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty surrounding their projections are summarized in the bottom-left panels (continued) of those fi gures. Participants also provide judgments as to whether the risks to their projections are weighted to the upside, are weighted to the downside, or are broadly balanced. That is, while the symmetric historical fan charts shown in the top panels of fi gures 4.A through 4.C imply that the risks to participants’ projections are balanced, participants may judge that there is a greater risk that a given variable will be above rather than below their projections. These judgments are summarized in the lower-right panels of fi gures 4.A through 4.C. As with real activity and infl ation, the outlook for the future path of the federal funds rate is subject to considerable uncertainty. This uncertainty arises primarily because each participant’s assessment of the appropriate stance of monetary policy depends importantly on the evolution of real activity and infl ation over time. If economic conditions evolve in an unexpected manner, then assessments of the appropriate setting of the federal funds rate would change from that point forward. The fi nal line in table 2 shows the error ranges for forecasts of short- term interest rates. They suggest that the historical confi dence intervals associated with projections of the federal funds rate are quite wide. It should be noted, however, that these confi dence intervals are not strictly consistent with the projections for the federal funds rate, as these projections are not forecasts of the most likely quarterly outcomes but rather are projections of participants’ individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy and are on an end-of- year basis. However, the forecast errors should provide a sense of the uncertainty around the future path of the federal funds rate generated by the uncertainty about the macroeconomic variables as well as additional adjustments to monetary policy that would be appropriate to offset the effects of shocks to the economy. around the federal funds rate were to extend below zero, it would be truncated at zero for purposes of the fan chart shown in fi gure 5; zero is the bottom of the lowest target range for the federal funds rate that has been adopted by the Committee in the past. This approach to the construction of the federal funds rate fan chart would be merely a convention; it would not have any implications for possible future policy decisions regarding the use of negative interest rates to provide additional monetary policy accommodation if doing so were appropriate. In such situations, the Committee could also employ other tools, including forward guidance and asset purchases, to provide additional accommodation. While fi gures 4.A through 4.C provide information on the uncertainty around the economic projections, fi gure 1 provides information on the range of views across FOMC participants. A comparison of fi gure 1 with fi gures 4.A through 4.C shows that the dispersion of the projections across participants is much smaller than the average forecast errors over the past 20 years. emerging market economy implied volatility for the S&P 500 index The Board of Governors is pleased to submit its Monetary Policy Report pursuant to section 2B of the Federal Reserve Act. Statement on Longer-run goaLS and monetary PoLicy Strategy Adopted effective January 24, 2012; as amended effective January 31, 2017 The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) is firmly committed to fulfilling its statutory mandate from the Congress of promoting maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates. The Committee seeks to explain its monetary policy decisions to the public as clearly as possible. Such clarity facilitates well-informed decisionmaking by households and businesses, reduces economic and financial uncertainty, increases the effectiveness of monetary policy, and enhances transparency and accountability, which are essential in a democratic society. Inflation, employment, and long-term interest rates fluctuate over time in response to economic and financial disturbances. Moreover, monetary policy actions tend to influence economic activity and prices with a lag. Therefore, the Committee’s policy decisions reflect its longer-run goals, its medium- term outlook, and its assessments of the balance of risks, including risks to the financial system that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. The inflation rate over the longer run is primarily determined by monetary policy, and hence the Committee has the ability to specify a longer-run goal for inflation. The Committee reaffirms its judgment that inflation at the rate of 2 percent, as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, is most consistent over the longer run with the Federal Reserve’s statutory mandate. The Committee would be concerned if inflation were running persistently above or below this objective. Communicating this symmetric inflation goal clearly to the public helps keep longer-term inflation expectations firmly anchored, thereby fostering price stability and moderate long-term interest rates and enhancing the Committee’s ability to promote maximum employment in the face of significant economic disturbances. The maximum level of employment is largely determined by nonmonetary factors that affect the structure and dynamics of the labor market. These factors may change over time and may not be directly measurable. Consequently, it would not be appropriate to specify a fixed goal for employment; rather, the Committee’s policy decisions must be informed by assessments of the maximum level of employment, recognizing that such assessments are necessarily uncertain and subject to revision. The Committee considers a wide range of indicators in making these assessments. Information about Committee participants’ estimates of the longer-run normal rates of output growth and unemployment is published four times per year in the FOMC’s Summary of Economic Projections. For example, in the most recent projections, the median of FOMC participants’ estimates of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment was 4.8 percent. In setting monetary policy, the Committee seeks to mitigate deviations of inflation from its longer-run goal and deviations of employment from the Committee’s assessments of its maximum level. These objectives are generally complementary. However, under circumstances in which the Committee judges that the objectives are not complementary, it follows a balanced approach in promoting them, taking into account the magnitude of the deviations and the potentially different time horizons over which employment and inflation are projected to return to levels judged consistent with its mandate. The Committee intends to reaffirm these principles and to make adjustments as appropriate at its annual organizational meeting each January. Does Education Determine Who Climbs the Economic Ladder? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 Productivity Developments in the Advanced Economies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 Developments Related to Financial Stability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24 Recent Developments in Corporate Bond Market Liquidity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26 Monetary Policy Rules and Their Role in the Federal Reserve’s Policy Process . . . . . . . . . . . . 36 Addendum to the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40 Forecast Uncertainty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57 note: This report reflects information that was publicly available as of noon EDT on July 6, 2017. Unless otherwise stated, the time series in the figures extend through, for daily data, July 5, 2017; for monthly data, June 2017; and, for quarterly data, 2017:Q1. In bar charts, except as noted, the change for a given period is measured to its final quarter from the final quarter of the preceding period. For figures 14 and 34, note that the S&P 500 Index and the Dow Jones Bank Index are products of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates and have been licensed for use by the Board. Copyright © 2017 S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC, a division of S&P Global, and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Redistribution, reproduction, and/or photocopying in whole or in part are prohibited without written permission of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC. For more information on any of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC’s indices please visit www.spdji.com. S&P® is a registered trademark of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC, and Dow Jones® is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. Neither S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC, Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC, their affiliates nor their third party licensors make any representation or warranty, express or implied, as to the ability of any index to accurately represent the asset class or market sector that it purports to represent, and neither S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC, Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC, their affiliates nor their third party licensors shall have any liability for any errors, omissions, or interruptions of any index or the data included therein. For figure C in the box “Recent Developments in Corporate Bond Market Liquidity,” J.P. Morgan notes that information has been obtained from sources believed to be reliable, but J.P. Morgan does not warrant its completeness or accuracy. The Index is used with permission. The Index may not be copied, used, or distributed without J.P. Morgan’s prior written approval. Copyright © 2017, J.P. Morgan Chase & Co. All rights reserved. summary Economic activity increased at a moderate pace over the first half of the year, and the jobs market continued to strengthen. Measured on a 12-month basis, inflation has softened some in the past few months. The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) judged that, on balance, current and prospective economic conditions called for a further gradual removal of policy accommodation. At its most recent meeting in June, the Committee boosted the target range for the federal funds rate to 1 to 1¼ percent. The Committee also issued additional information regarding its plans for reducing the size of its balance sheet in a gradual and predictable manner. Labor markets. The labor market has strengthened further so far this year. Over the first five months of 2017, payroll employment increased 162,000 per month, on average, somewhat slower than the average monthly increase for 2016 but still more than enough to absorb new entrants into the labor force. The unemployment rate fell from 4.7 percent in December to 4.3 percent in May—modestly below the median of FOMC participants’ estimates of its longer-run normal level. Other measures of labor utilization are also consistent with a relatively tight labor market. However, despite the broad-based strength in measures of employment, wage growth has been only modest, possibly held down by the weak pace of productivity growth in recent years. Inflation. Consumer price inflation, as measured by the 12-month change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, briefly reached the FOMC’s 2 percent objective earlier this year, but it more recently has softened. The latest reading, for May, was 1.4 percent—still up from a year earlier when falling energy prices restrained overall consumer prices. The 12-month measure of inflation that excludes food and energy items (so-called core inflation), which historically has been a better indicator than the headline figure of where overall inflation will be in the future, was also 1.4 percent over the year ending in May; this reading was a bit lower than it had been one year earlier. Measures of longer- run inflation expectations have been relatively stable, on balance, though some measures remain low by historical standards. Economic growth. Real gross domestic product (GDP) is reported to have risen at an annual rate of about 1½ percent in the first quarter of 2017, but more recent data suggest growth stepped back up in the second quarter. Consumer spending was sluggish in the early part of the year but appears to have rebounded recently, supported by job gains, rising household wealth, and favorable consumer sentiment. Business investment has turned up this year after having been weak for much of 2016, and indicators of business sentiment have been strong. The housing market continues its gradual recovery. Economic growth has also been supported by recent strength in foreign activity. Financial conditions. On balance, domestic financial conditions for businesses and households have continued to support economic growth. Long-term nominal Treasury yields and mortgage rates have decreased so far in 2017, although yields remain somewhat above levels that prevailed last summer. Broad measures of equity prices increased further during the first half of the year. Spreads of yields on corporate bonds over comparable-maturity Treasury securities decreased. Most types of consumer loans remained widely available, while mortgage credit stayed readily available for households with solid credit profiles but was still difficult to access for households with low credit scores or harder-to-document incomes. In foreign financial markets, equity prices increased and risk spreads decreased amid generally firming economic growth and robust corporate earnings. The broad U.S. dollar index depreciated modestly against foreign currencies. Financial stability. Vulnerabilities in the U.S. financial system remained, on balance, moderate. Contributing to the financial system’s improved resilience, U.S. banks have substantial amounts of capital and liquidity. Valuation pressures across a range of assets and several indicators of investor risk appetite have increased further since mid-February. However, these developments in asset markets have not been accompanied by increased leverage in the financial sector, according to available metrics, or increased borrowing in the nonfinancial sector. Household debt as a share of GDP continues to be subdued, and debt owed by nonfinancial businesses, although elevated, has been either flat or falling in the past two years. (See the box “Developments Related to Financial Stability” in Part 1.) Interest rate policy. Over the first half of 2017, the FOMC continued to gradually reduce the amount of monetary policy accommodation. Specifically, the Committee decided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate in March and in June, bringing it to the current range of 1 to 1¼ percent. Even with these rate increases, the stance of monetary policy remains accommodative, supporting some further strengthening in labor market conditions and a sustained return to 2 percent inflation. The FOMC continues to expect that, with gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary policy, economic activity will expand at a moderate pace and labor market conditions will strengthen somewhat further. Inflation on a 12-month basis is expected to remain somewhat below 2 percent in the near term but to stabilize around the Committee’s 2 percent objective over the medium term. The federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some time, below levels that are expected to prevail in the longer run. Consistent with this outlook, in the most recent Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), compiled at the time of the June FOMC meeting, most participants projected that the appropriate level of the federal funds rate would be below its longer- run level through 2018. (The June SEP is presented in Part 3 of this report.) However, as the Committee has continued to emphasize, monetary policy is not on a preset course; the actual path of the federal funds rate will depend on the evolution of the economic outlook as informed by incoming data. In particular, the Committee is monitoring inflation developments closely. Balance sheet policy. To help maintain accommodative financial conditions, the Committee has continued its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities and rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction. In June, the FOMC issued an Addendum to the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans that provides additional details regarding the approach the FOMC intends to follow to reduce the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury and agency securities in a gradual and predictable manner. The Committee currently expects to begin implementing the balance sheet normalization program this year provided that the economy evolves broadly as anticipated. (See the box “Addendum to the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans” in Part 2.) Education and climbing the economic ladder. Education, particularly a college degree, is often seen as a path to improved economic opportunities. However, despite the fact that young blacks and Hispanics have increased their educational attainment over the past quarter-century, their representation in the top 25 percent of the income distribution for young people has not materially increased. In part, this outcome has occurred because educational attainment has increased for young non-Hispanic whites and Asians as well. While education continues to be an important determinant of whether one can climb the economic ladder, sizable differences in economic outcomes across race and ethnicity remain even after controlling for educational attainment. (See the box “Does Education Determine Who Climbs the Economic Ladder?” in Part 1.) The global productivity slowdown. Over the past decade, labor productivity growth both in the United States and in other advanced economies has slowed markedly. This slowdown may reflect a waning of the effects from advances in information technology in the 1990s and early 2000s. Productivity growth may also be low because of the severity of the Global Financial Crisis, in part because spending for research and development was muted. Some of the factors restraining productivity growth may eventually fade, but it is difficult to ascertain whether the recent subdued performance of productivity represents a new normal. (See the box “Productivity Developments in the Advanced Economies” in Part 1.) Liquidity in the corporate bond market. A series of changes, including regulatory reforms, since the Global Financial Crisis have likely altered financial institutions’ incentives to provide liquidity. Many market participants are particularly concerned with liquidity in markets for corporate bonds. However, the available evidence suggests that financial markets have performed well in recent years, with minimal impairment in liquidity, either in the market for corporate bonds or in markets for other assets. (See the box “Recent Developments in Corporate Bond Market Liquidity” in Part 1.) Monetary policy rules. Monetary policymakers consider a wide range of information on current economic conditions and the outlook before deciding on a policy stance they deem most likely to foster the FOMC’s statutory mandate of maximum employment and stable prices. They also routinely consult monetary policy rules that connect prescriptions for the policy interest rate with variables associated with the dual mandate. The use of such rules requires careful judgments about the choice and measurement of the inputs into these rules as well as the implications of the many considerations these rules do not take into account. (See the box “Monetary Policy Rules and Their Role in the Federal Reserve’s Policy Process” in Part 2.) elevated in the first part of the year, while the rate of layoffs remained low; both are signs that firms’ demand for labor is still solid. In addition, the rate of quits stayed high, an indication that workers are confident in their ability to obtain a new job. Another measure, the share of workers who are working part time but would prefer to be employed full time—which is part of the U-6 measure of underutilization from the Bureau of Labor Statistics—fell noticeably further in the first five months of 2017 (figure 3). The labor market tightened further during the first half of the year . . . Labor market conditions continued to strengthen in the first five months of this year. On average, payrolls expanded 162,000 per month between January and May, a little slower than the average monthly employment gain in 2016 but still more than enough to absorb new entrants to the labor force and therefore consistent with a further tightening of the labor market (figure 1). The unemployment rate has declined 0.4 percentage point since December 2016, and in May it stood at 4.3 percent, its lowest level since late 2000 and modestly below the median of Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants’ estimates of its longer- run normal level. . . . though unemployment rates remain elevated for some demographic groups Although the aggregate unemployment rate was at a 16-year low in May, there are substantial disparities across demographic groups (figure 4). Notably, the unemployment rate for whites averaged 4 percent during the first five months of the year, and the rate for Asians was about 3½ percent. However, the unemployment rates for Hispanics (5.4 percent) and African Americans (7.8 percent) were substantially higher. The differences in the unemployment rates across racial and ethnic groups are long-standing, and they also vary over the business cycle. The labor force participation rate (LFPR)— that is, the share of adults either working or actively looking for work—was 62.7 percent in May and is little changed, on net, since early 2014 (figure 2). Along with other factors, the aging of the population implies a downward trend in participation, so the flattening out of the LFPR during the past few years is consistent with an overall picture of improving labor market conditions. The employment- to-population ratio—that is, the share of the population that is working—was 60 percent in May and has been increasing for the past couple of years, reflecting the combination of the declining unemployment rate and the flat LFPR. 1. Net change in payroll employment The strengthening condition of the labor market is evident in other measures as well. The number of people filing initial claims for unemployment insurance has fallen to the lowest level in decades. In addition, as reported in the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey, the rate of job openings remained NOTE: The data extend through May 2017. SOURCE: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2. Labor force participation rate and employment-to-population ratio Indeed, the unemployment rates for blacks and Hispanics both rose considerably more than the rates for whites and Asians during the Great Recession, and their subsequent declines have been more rapid. On balance, however, the differences in unemployment rates across the groups have not narrowed relative to the pre-recession period. (For additional discussion on differences in economic outcomes by race and ethnicity, see the box “Does Education Determine Who Climbs the Economic Ladder?”) NOTE: The data extend through May 2017. Both series are a percentage of Growth of labor compensation has been modest . . . the population aged 16 and over. Indicators of hourly compensation suggest that wage growth has remained modest. Growth of compensation per hour in the business sector—a broad-based measure of wages, salaries, and benefits—has slowed in recent quarters and was 2¼ percent over the four quarters ending in 2017:Q1 (figure 5).1 1. The recent data on compensation per hour reflect a decline in wages and salaries at the end of 2016, which 3. Measures of labor underutilization NOTE: The data extend through May 2017. Unemployment rate measures total unemployed as a percentage of the labor force. U-4 measures total unemployed plus discouraged workers, as a percentage of the labor force plus discouraged workers. Discouraged workers are a subset of marginally attached workers who are not currently looking for work because they believe no jobs are available for them. U-5 measures total unemployed plus all marginally attached to the labor force, as a percentage of the labor force plus persons marginally attached to the labor force. Marginally attached workers are not in the labor force, want and are available for work, and have looked for a job in the past 12 months. U-6 measures total unemployed plus all marginally attached workers plus total employed part time for economic reasons, as a percentage of the labor force plus all marginally attached workers. The shaded bar indicates a period of business recession as defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research. 4. Unemployment rate by race and ethnicity NOTE: The data extend through May 2017. Unemployment rate measures total unemployed as a percentage of the labor force. Persons whose ethnicity is identified as Hispanic or Latino may be of any race. The shaded bar indicates a period of business recession as defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research. This measure can be quite volatile even at annual frequencies (and a smoothed version is shown in figure 5 for that reason). The employment cost index—which also measures both wages and the cost to employers of providing benefits—also was up 2¼ percent in the first quarter relative to its year-ago level, about ½ percentage point faster than its gain of a year earlier. Among measures limited to wages, average hourly earnings growth—at 2½ percent through May—was little changed from a year ago, and a compensation measure computed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta that tracks median 12-month wage growth of individuals reporting to the Current Population Survey was about 3½ percent in May, also similar to its reading from a year earlier. 5. Measures of change in hourly compensation NOTE: Business-sector compensation is the four-quarter percentage change of the four-quarter moving average. For the employment cost index, change is over the 12 months ending in the last month of each quarter; for average hourly earnings, change is from 12 months earlier, and the data extend through May 2017; for the Atlanta Fed’s Wage Growth Tracker, the data are shown as a three-month moving average of the 12-month percent change and extend through May 2017. might be the result of a shifting of bonuses or other types of income into 2017 in anticipation of a possible cut in personal income tax rates. If that is the case, the current estimate of compensation growth in the first quarter might be revised up once full data become available later this summer. and ethnicity in the United States raise important questions about how people ascend the economic ladder. Education, particularly a college degree, is often seen as a path to improved economic opportunities. Past research has shown that human capital in the form of education and experience can explain about one-third of the variation in wages across individuals.1 However, while education continues to be an important determinant of whether one can climb the economic ladder, sizable differences in economic outcomes across race and ethnicity remain even after controlling for educational attainment. allows us to better isolate the effect of education from the influence of other variables, including experience. Furthermore, research has shown that the level of wages received early in an individual’s career persists over time and influences that individual’s wage trajectory for years to come.2 The figure shows the fraction of each group that has reached the top quartile of earnings for young adults as a whole. The black dashed line at 25 percent marks the fraction of each group that would be in this top quartile if each group were equally represented in proportion to its population size.3 Non-Hispanic whites, for example, are Data on earnings for two cohorts of young adult workers (aged 25 to 34) approximately a generation apart confirm both the gaps in economic outcomes and the lack of substantial upward progress for disadvantaged groups over the past quarter-century (figure A). People of this age typically have limited years of work experience, but most have completed their schooling. Therefore, focusing on young adults 1. Pedro Carneiro and James J. Heckman (2003), “Human Capital Policy,” in Benjamin M. Friedman, ed., Inequality in America: What Role for Human Capital Policies? (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press), pp. 77–239. overrepresented in the top 25 percent of the earnings distribution of young adults for both cohorts, with just under 30 percent of the group in the top quartile in both the 1991–95 and 2011–15 periods. Black or African American young adults are underrepresented in the top quartile in both periods, at about 15 percent. Hispanics are likewise underrepresented, and again there has been little improvement over time. Asians stand out in terms of both high representation and changes over time, though these measures obscure the very high levels of inequality within this group.4 2. See, for example, past research that shows that the average starting wage faced by a cohort is correlated with wages later on, such as George Baker, Michael Gibbs, and Bengt Holmstrom (1994), “The Wage Policy of a Firm,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 109 (November), pp. 921–55. Furthermore, research also shows that higher national unemployment rates faced by a cohort are also correlated with lower wages later on; for instance, see Paul Beaudry and John DiNardo (1991), “The Effect of Implicit Contracts on the Movement of Wages over the Business Cycle: Evidence from Micro Data,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 99 (August), pp. 665–88; and Lisa B. Kahn (2010), “The Long-Term Labor Market Consequences of Graduating from College in a Bad Economy,” Labour Economics, vol. 17 (April), pp. 303–16. 3. In other words, if 25 percent of a group reached the top quartile, then that group’s share of the top quartile would be the same as its share in the full population. 4. See, for example, Christian E. Weller and Jeffrey NOTE: Data cover the preceding calendar year. Young adults include those aged 25 to 34. Earnings include wages, salaries, business income, and farm income. Threshold for crossing into the top earnings quartile is based on workers aged 25 to 34 only. The black dashed line marks 25 percent, the fraction of each group that would be in the top quartile if each group were equally represented in proportion to its population size. Thompson (2016), Wealth Inequality among Asian Americans Greater Than among Whites, Center for American Progress (Washington: CFAP, December 20), https://www. americanprogress.org/issues/race/reports/2016/12/20/295359/ wealth-inequality-among-asian-americans-greater-than- among-whites. Note that it is possible for the within-group representation in the top quartile to improve for all groups because the composition of the young adult population by race and ethnicity is itself changing, with whites becoming a much smaller share and all other groups being stable or increasing as a share of the total population. Overall, the representation of black and Hispanic workers in the top earnings quartile continues to lag in the later period. This lag in representation occurs despite the gains in educational attainment—the critical driver of improved incomes—that blacks and Hispanics have achieved over time. For both blacks and Hispanics, the share achieving a bachelor’s degree or higher has doubled over the period of study (figure B). However, even with these improvements, the educational attainment gap between each of those groups and whites persists, because the fraction of whites attaining a bachelor’s degree has also increased substantially in the past quarter-century. Across all groups, it is true that completing a bachelor’s degree or higher roughly doubles one’s chances of reaching the top 25 percent of earners (figure C). This relationship strongly corroborates the conventional wisdom that, for many individuals, a college education can indeed represent a path to improved economic opportunities. However, even within this group, representation is substantially unequal, with college-educated white and Asian people much more likely to achieve the top quartile of income than their black or African American and Hispanic or Latino peers. Here the interpretation of changes over time is a bit more nuanced, because the overall increase in college attainment among young adults implies increased competition for crossing into the top quartile of earnings. In the 1991–95 period, 35 percent of NOTE: Data cover the preceding calendar year. Young adults include those aged 25 to 34. C. Percent of workers with a bachelor’s degree in top quartile of earnings among all young adults NOTE: Data cover the preceding calendar year. Young adults include those aged 25 to 34. Earnings include wages, salaries, business income, and farm income. Threshold for crossing into the top earnings quartile is based on workers aged 25 to 34 only. those in the top income quartile had only a bachelor’s degree, and an additional 14 percent had gone on to receive a graduate degree. By the period from 2011 to 2015, these shares had risen to 42 percent and 24 percent, respectively, suggesting that the average skill level needed to reach the top quartile of income has increased between generations. Taken together, these observations show that educational attainment can help young adults improve their lifetime earning potential. However, increased levels of educational attainment across all groups have created greater competition for positions at the top of the economic ladder. Even among those with college degrees, important differences remain in representation at the top of the income distribution by race and ethnicity. The relationship between educational attainment and economic outcomes is complex and heterogeneous across people, suggesting that the specific nature of that attainment—the types of degrees received and the specific schools attended, among other factors—may matter much more than previously thought.5 5. See, in particular, Raj Chetty, John Friedman, Emmanuel 6. Change in business-sector output per hour NOTE: Changes are measured from Q4 of the year immediately preceding the period through Q4 of the final year of the period. The final period is measured from 2007:Q4 through 2017:Q1. 7. Change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures Excluding food and energy Trimmed mean NOTE: The data extend through May 2017; changes are from one year SOURCE: For trimmed mean, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas; for all else, . . . and likely restrained by slow growth of labor productivity These modest rates of compensation gain likely reflect the offsetting influences of a tightening labor market and persistently weak productivity growth. Since 2008, labor productivity has increased only about 1 percent per year, on average, well below the average pace from 1996 through 2007 and also below the gains in the 1974–95 period (figure 6). For most of the period since 2011, labor productivity growth has been particularly weak, although it has turned up in recent quarters. The longer-term softness in productivity growth may be partly attributable to the sharp pullback in capital investment during the most recent recession and the relatively modest rebound that followed. But there may be other explanations, too, and considerable debate remains about the reasons for the general slowdown in productivity growth. (For a more comprehensive discussion of productivity, see the box “Productivity Developments in the Advanced Economies.”) Price inflation moved up but softened in the spring and remains below 2 percent In the early months of 2017, consumer price inflation, as measured by the 12-month change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), continued its climb from the very low levels that prevailed in 2015 and early 2016 when it was held down by falling oil and import prices. Indeed, consumer price inflation briefly reached the FOMC’s 2 percent objective earlier this year before falling back to 1.4 percent in May (figure 7). Core inflation, which typically provides a better indication than the headline measure of where overall inflation will be in the future, also was 1.4 percent over the 12 months ending in May, a slightly slower rate than a year earlier. As is the case with headline inflation, the 12-month measure of core inflation had been higher earlier this year, reaching 1.8 percent. Both measures of inflation have recently been held down by steep and likely idiosyncratic price declines for a few specific categories, including wireless telephone services and prescription drugs, which do not appear to be related to the overall trends in consumer prices. The 12-month change in the trimmed mean PCE price index—an alternative indicator of underlying inflation produced by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas—slowed by less than overall or core PCE price inflation over the past several months. Oil prices declined somewhat but remain well above their early 2016 lows . . . After rebounding from their early 2016 lows, oil prices leveled off early this year (figure 8). Since then they have declined somewhat, despite OPEC’s decision in late May to renew its November 2016 agreement to reduce its oil production, thereby extending the November production cuts through early 2018. Reflecting lower crude oil prices as well as smaller retail margins, seasonally adjusted retail gasoline prices have also declined since the beginning of the year. Nevertheless, prices of both crude oil and retail gasoline remain above their early 2016 lows, and futures prices suggest that market participants expect oil prices to rise gradually in coming years. . . . while prices of imports other than energy have been bolstered by higher commodity prices Throughout 2015, nonfuel import prices declined because of appreciation of the dollar and declines in nonfuel commodity prices (figure 9). Nonfuel import prices stabilized last year and have risen since then, as the dollar stopped appreciating and supply disruptions boosted world prices of some nonfuel commodities, especially industrial supplies and metals. In recent months, depreciation of the dollar has further pushed up non-oil import prices, which are now slightly higher than in mid-2016. 8. Brent spot and futures prices NOTE: The data are weekly averages of daily data and extend through 9. Nonfuel import prices and U.S. dollar exchange rate NOTE: The data are monthly, and the data for nonfuel import prices extend The slow pace of U.S. productivity growth has attracted much attention of late, with vigorous debate on whether the slowdown represents the lingering, but temporary, effect of the Global Financial Crisis (GFC) or marks the start of an era of prolonged lower economic growth. This discussion reviews recent productivity developments in the United States and the major advanced foreign economies (AFEs) and outlines possible causes of the slowdown.1 in advanced economies has weakened markedly (figure A). Labor productivity growth in the United States has averaged only 1 percent since 2005, about half the pace of the years 1990 to 2004.2 Productivity growth has been even weaker in the AFEs, with the United Kingdom experiencing a meager ½ percent growth. As shown in the table, the widespread slowdown in labor productivity growth reflects weak capital deepening and, more importantly, very poor performance of total factor productivity (TFP)— a measure of how efficiently labor and capital are combined to produce output.3 TFP across the advanced 1. Emerging market economies have also experienced declines in productivity growth in recent years, although not necessarily for the same reasons as in the advanced economies. 2. Here labor productivity is measured as overall gross domestic product per hour, in contrast to the business-sector measure shown in the main text. Productivity growth is faster in the business sector. 3. Capital deepening refers to increases in the amount of Note: Average annual rates. Source: The Conference Board, Total Economy Database. economies has stagnated in the past decade against historical average growth of about ¾ percent. A number of potential explanations have been put forward for the abysmal performance of TFP. Some authors emphasize structural factors that predate the GFC. For example, Gordon (2012) sees recent technological advances such as information technology (IT) as less revolutionary than earlier general-purpose technologies like electricity and internal combustion.4 Relatedly, Fernald (2015) provides evidence that the effects of the IT revolution—an important factor boosting productivity since the 1990s—began to fade in the early 2000s.5 There are signs, however, that the influence of IT is still spreading, as exemplified by the surge in cloud-computing technology investments in recent years, and we may not yet have reaped the full benefits of this major technological innovation. Under this more optimistic view, slow TFP growth may reflect a temporary “productive pause” as firms spend resources on activities such as equipment retooling, reorganization of management practices, and workforce training. After all, it took several decades for the full effect of electricity to materialize.6 4. Robert J. Gordon (2012), “Is U.S. Economic Growth Over? Faltering Innovation Confronts the Six Headwinds,” NBER Working Paper Series 18315 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, August). 5. John G. Fernald (2015), “Productivity and Potential Output before, during, and after the Great Recession,” in Jonathan A. Parker and Michael Woodford, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2014, vol. 29 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), pp. 1–51. NOTE: Labor productivity is constructed as real gross domestic product per hour worked. 6. For a description of the lengthy process of diffusion of electrification, see Paul A. David (1990), “The Dynamo and the Computer: An Historical Perspective on the Modern Productivity Paradox,” American Economic Review, vol. 80 (May), pp. 355–61. Other explanations blame the weak TFP growth on the unusual severity of the GFC. Some empirical evidence suggests that the “Schumpeterian” process in which workers move toward higher-productivity firms—a key source of productivity growth following previous recessions—has been greatly impaired since the GFC.7 In addition, measures of innovation such as research and development (R&D) spending fell sharply during the GFC, as shown in figure B, partly in response to tight financial conditions and weak demand. Declines in R&D tend to induce gradual and persistent declines in TFP, suggesting that the recent low TFP growth may in part be traced to GFC-induced weakness in R&D.8 In this view, the recent pickup in R&D spending could anticipate some normalization in productivity growth. Finally, the slowdown in TFP growth may also be related to the slowdown of global trade in the wake of the GFC. Conventional trade theories suggest that greater trade integration should bring productivity gains by facilitating the diffusion of new technologies and by allowing countries to specialize in the production of goods for which they have a comparative advantage. After decades of steady increases, however, trade integration appears to have plateaued in recent years (figure C). In sum, it is difficult to ascertain whether the recent subdued performance of labor productivity represents a new normal. Some of the GFC-related factors restraining productivity growth may eventually fade, leading to a rise in productivity growth from its anemic post-GFC pace. However, to the extent that longer-run factors—such as the waning effects of the IT revolution—are at work, productivity growth in the future may be noticeably below historical averages. Sustained low rates of productivity growth would greatly restrain the improvement of living standards. In addition, they would put downward pressure on the 7. See Lucia Foster, Cheryl Grim, and John Haltiwanger (2016), “Reallocation in the Great Recession: Cleansing or Not?” Journal of Labor Economics, vol. 34 (S1, January), pp. S293–S331. For an analysis of the role of sectoral labor misallocation in accounting for the productivity slowdown in the United Kingdom, see Christina Patterson, Ayşegül Şahin, Giorgio Topa, and Giovanni L. violante (2016), “Working Hard in the Wrong Place: A Mismatch-Based Explanation to the U.K. Productivity Puzzle,” European Economic Review, vol. 84 (May), pp. 42–56. 8. See Patrick Moran and Albert Queralto (2017), “Innovation and the Productivity Growth Slowdown,” unpublished paper, May, https://sites.google.com/site/ albertqueralto/home/research—-albert-queralto/MQ_ May2017.pdf. long-run neutral interest rate, making the policy rate more likely to reach its effective lower bound and thus constraining the ability of monetary policy to provide economic stimulus, even in the presence of shallow recessions. NOTE: “Advanced foreign economy range” is the min-max range for Canada, Japan, the euro area, and the United Kingdom. U.S. data refer to real research and development (R&D) spending. Advanced foreign economy data refer to nominal R&D spending (in national currency) deflated by the gross domestic product (GDP) deflator. The shaded bars indicate periods of global recession defined as 55 percent of world GDP in recession. NOTE: The shaded bars indicate periods of global recession defined as 10. Median inflation expectations NOTE: The Michigan survey data are monthly. The SPF data for inflation expectations for personal consumption expenditures are quarterly and extend from 2007:Q1 through 2017:Q2. 11. 5-to-10-year-forward inflation compensation NOTE: The data are weekly averages of daily data and extend through June 30, 2017. TIPS is Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities. Survey-based measures of inflation expectations are little changed this year . . . Expectations of inflation likely influence actual inflation by affecting wage- and price- setting decisions. Survey-based measures of inflation expectations at medium- and longer- term horizons have remained relatively stable so far in 2017. In the second-quarter Survey of Professional Forecasters conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, the median expectation for the annual rate of increase in the PCE price index over the next 10 years was 2.1 percent, the same as in the first quarter and little changed from the readings during 2016 (figure 10). In the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers, the median value for inflation expectations over the next 5 to 10 years— which has been drifting downward for the past few years—has held about flat at a low level since late last year. . . . while market-based measures of inflation compensation fell back somewhat Inflation expectations can also be gauged by market-based measures of inflation compensation, though the inference is not straightforward because inflation compensation can be importantly affected by changes in premiums associated with risk and liquidity. Measures of longer-term inflation compensation—derived either from differences between yields on nominal Treasury securities and those on comparable Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS) or from inflation swaps—have fallen back somewhat this year after having moved up in late 2016 (figure 11).2 The TIPS-based measure of 2. Inflation compensation implied by the TIPS breakeven inflation rate is based on the difference, at comparable maturities, between yields on nominal Treasury securities and yields on TIPS, which are indexed to the headline consumer price index (CPI). Inflation swaps are contracts in which one party makes payments of certain fixed nominal amounts in exchange for cash flows that are indexed to cumulative CPI inflation over 5-to-10-year-forward inflation compensation is now 1¾ percent, and the analogous measure of inflation swaps is now about 2 percent. Both measures are well below the 2½ to 3 percent range that persisted for most of the 10 years before 2014. Real gross domestic product growth slowed in the first quarter, but spending by households and businesses appears to have picked up in recent months After having moved up at an annual rate of 2¾ percent in the second half of 2016, real gross domestic product (GDP) is reported to have increased about 1½ percent in the first quarter of this year (figure 12).3 The step-down in first-quarter growth was largely attributable to soft inventory investment and a lull in the growth of consumer spending; in contrast, net exports increased a bit, residential investment grew robustly, and spending by businesses surged. Indeed, business investment was strong enough that overall private domestic final purchases—that is, final purchases by U.S. households and businesses, which tend to carry more signal for future GDP growth than most other components of overall spending— moved up at an annual rate of about 3 percent in the first quarter. For more recent months, indicators of spending by consumers and businesses have been strong and suggest that growth of economic activity rebounded in the second quarter; thus, overall activity appears to have expanded moderately, on average, over the first half of the year. some horizon. Focusing on inflation compensation 5 to 10 years ahead is useful, particularly for monetary policy, because such forward measures encompass market participants’ views about where inflation will settle in the long term after developments influencing inflation in the short term have run their course. 3. Real gross domestic income (GDI), which is conceptually the same as GDP but is constructed from different source data, had been rising at roughly the same rate as real GDP for most of 2016. However, real GDI was held down by the very weak reading for personal income in the fourth quarter of last year, which may prove to have been transitory. 12. Change in real gross domestic product and gross domestic income 13. Change in real personal consumption expenditures and disposable personal income Personal consumption expenditures Disposable personal income NOTE: The values for 2017:H1 are the annualized May/Q4 changes. SOURCE: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis. 14. Prices of existing single-family houses NOTE: The data for the S&P/Case-Shiller index extend through April 2017. The data for the CoreLogic and Zillow indexes extend through May 2017. SOURCE: CoreLogic Home Price Index; Zillow; S&P/Case-Shiller U.S. National Home Price Index. The S&P/Case-Shiller Index is a product of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. (For Dow Jones Indices licensing information, see the note on the Contents page.) 15. Nominal house prices and price–rent ratio NOTE: The data extend through May 2017. The CoreLogic price index is seasonally adjusted by Federal Reserve Board staff. The price–rent ratio is the ratio of nominal house prices to the consumer price index of rent of primary residence. The data are indexed to 100 in January 2000. The economic expansion continues to be supported by accommodative financial conditions, including the low cost of borrowing and easy access to credit for many households and businesses, continuing job gains, rising household wealth, and favorable consumer and business sentiment. Gains in income and wealth continue to support consumer spending . . . After increasing strongly in the second half of 2016, consumer spending in the first quarter of this year was tepid. Unseasonably warm weather depressed spending on energy services, and purchases of motor vehicles slowed from an unusually high pace late last year. However, household spending seems to have picked up in more recent months, as purchases of energy services returned to seasonal norms and retail sales firmed. All told, consumer spending increased at an annual rate of 2 percent over the first five months of this year, only a bit slower than in the past couple of years (figure 13). Beyond spending, other indicators of consumers’ economic well-being have been strong in the aggregate. The ongoing improvement in the labor market has supported further gains in real disposable personal income (DPI), a measure of income after accounting for taxes and adjusting for inflation. Real DPI increased at a solid annual rate of 3 percent over the first five months of this year. Gains in the stock market and in house prices over the first half of the year have boosted household net wealth. Broad measures of U.S. equity prices have continued to increase in recent months after moving up considerably late last year and in the first quarter. House prices have also continued to climb, adding to the balance sheet strength of homeowners (figure 14). Indeed, nominal house price indexes are close to their peaks of the mid- 2000s. However, while the ratio of house prices to rents has edged higher, it remains well below its previous peak (figure 15). As a result of the increases in home and equity prices, aggregate household net worth has risen appreciably. In fact, at the end of the first quarter of 2017, household net worth was more than six times the value of disposable income, the highest- ever reading for that ratio (figure 16). Consumer spending has also been supported by low burdens from debt service payments. The household debt service burden—the ratio of required principal and interest payments on outstanding household debt to disposable income, measured for the household sector as a whole—has remained at a very low level by historical standards. As interest rates rise, the debt burden will move up only gradually, as most household debt is in fixed-interest products. . . . as does credit availability Consumer credit has continued to expand this year but more moderately than in 2016 (figure 17). Financing conditions are generally favorable, with auto and student loans remaining widely available and outstanding balances continuing to expand at a robust, albeit somewhat reduced, pace. Even though delinquency rates on most types of consumer debt have remained low by historical standards, credit card and auto loan delinquencies among subprime borrowers have drifted up some. Possibly in response to this deteriorating credit performance, banks have tightened standards for credit cards and auto lending. Mortgage credit has remained readily available for households with solid credit profiles, but it was still difficult to access for households with low credit scores or harder-to- document incomes. Consumer confidence is strong Consumers have remained optimistic about their financial situation. As measured by the Michigan survey, consumer sentiment was solid through most of 2016, likely reflecting rising income and job gains. Sentiment moved up appreciably after the presidential election last November and has remained at a high level so far this year (figure 18). Furthermore, 16. Wealth-to-income ratio NOTE: The series is the ratio of household net worth to disposable personal 17. Changes in household debt NOTE: Changes are calculated from year-end to year-end except 2017 changes, which are calculated from Q1 to Q1. NOTE: The consumer sentiment data are monthly and are indexed to 100 in 1966. The real income expectations data are calculated as the net percentage of survey respondents expecting family income to go up more than prices during the next year or two plus 100 and are shown as a three-month moving average. 19. New and existing home sales Existing home sales NOTE: The data extend through May 2017. New home sales includes only single-family sales. Existing home sales includes single-family, condo, townhome, and co-op sales. SOURCE: For new home sales, Census Bureau; for existing home sales, 20. Mortgage rates and housing affordability through April 2017, and the mortgage rate data are weekly through July 6, 2017. At an index value of 100, a median-income family has exactly enough income to qualify for a median-priced home mortgage. Housing affordability is seasonally adjusted by Board staff. index data are monthly 21. Private housing starts and permits the share of households expecting real income to rise over the next year or two has gone up markedly in the past few months and is now in line with its pre-recession level. Activity in the housing sector has improved modestly Several indicators of housing activity have continued to strengthen gradually this year. Sales of existing homes have gained, on net, while house prices have continued to rise and mortgage rates have remained low, even though they are up from last year (figures 19 and 20). In addition, single-family housing starts registered a slight increase, on average, in the first five months of the year, although multifamily housing starts have slipped (figure 21). Despite the modest increase in construction activity, the months’ supply of homes for sale has remained near the low levels seen in 2016, and the aggregate vacancy rate has fallen back to levels observed in the mid-2000s. Lean inventories are likely to support further gains in homebuilding activity going forward. Business investment has turned up after a period of weakness . . . Led by a surge in spending on drilling and mining structures, real outlays for business investment—that is, private nonresidential fixed investment—rose robustly at the beginning of the year after having been about flat for 2016 as a whole (figure 22). The sharp gains in drilling and mining in the first quarter mark a turnaround for the sector; energy- sector investment had declined noticeably following the drop in oil prices that began in mid-2014 and ran through early 2016. More recently, rapid increases in the number of drilling rigs in operation suggest that investment in this area remained strong in the second quarter of this year. Moreover, business spending on equipment and intangibles (such as research and development) advanced solidly at the beginning of the year after having been roughly flat in 2016. Furthermore, indicators of business spending are generally upbeat: Orders and shipments of capital goods have posted net gains in recent months, and indexes of business sentiment and activity remain elevated after having improved significantly late last year. . . . while corporate financing conditions have remained accommodative Aggregate flows of credit to large nonfinancial firms have remained solid, supported in part by continued low interest rates (figure 23). The gross issuance of corporate bonds was robust during the first half of 2017, and yields on both speculative- and investment-grade corporate bonds remained low by historical standards (figure 24). Gross equity issuance by nonfinancial firms stayed solid, on average, as seasoned equity offerings continued at a robust pace and the pace of initial public offerings picked up from the low levels seen in 2016. Despite the pickup in business investment, demand for business loans was subdued early this year, and outstanding commercial and industrial (C&I) loans on banks’ books contracted in the first quarter. In the April Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS), banks reported a broad-based decline in demand for C&I loans during the first quarter of 2017 even as lending standards on such loans were reported to be basically unchanged.4 Banks also reported weaker demand for commercial real estate loans as well as a continued tightening of standards on such loans. However, lending to large nonfinancial firms appeared to be strengthening somewhat during the second quarter. Meanwhile, measures of small business credit demand remained weak amid stable supply. 4. The SLOOS is available on the Board’s website at 22. Change in real private nonresidential fixed investment 23. Selected components of net debt financing for nonfinancial businesses 24. Corporate bond yields, by securities rating NOTE: The yields shown are yields on 10-year bonds. SOURCE: BofA Merrill Lynch Global Research, used with permission. 25. Change in real imports and exports of goods and services 26. U.S. trade and current account balances NOTE: GDP is gross domestic product. SOURCE: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis. 27. Change in real government expenditures on consumption and investment U.S. exports grew at a faster pace In the first quarter of 2017, U.S. real exports increased briskly and broadly following moderate growth in the second half of last year that was driven by a surge in agricultural exports (figure 25). At the same time, real import growth declined somewhat from its strong pace in the second half of last year. As a result, real net exports contributed slightly to U.S. real GDP growth in the first quarter. Available trade data through May suggest that the growth of real exports slowed to a modest pace in the second quarter. Nevertheless, the average pace of export growth appears to have stepped up in the first half of 2017 compared with last year, partly reflecting stronger growth abroad and a diminishing drag from earlier dollar appreciation. All told, the available data for the first half of this year suggest that net exports added a touch to U.S. real GDP growth and that the nominal trade deficit widened slightly relative to GDP (figure 26). Federal fiscal policy had a roughly neutral effect on economic growth . . . Federal purchases moved sideways in 2016, and policy actions had little effect on federal taxes or transfers (figure 27). Under currently enacted legislation, federal fiscal policy will likely again have a roughly neutral influence on the growth in real GDP this year. After narrowing significantly for several years, the federal unified deficit has widened from about 2½ percent of GDP in fiscal year 2015 to 3¼ percent currently. Although expenditures as a share of GDP have been relatively stable over this period at a little under 21 percent, receipts moved lower in 2016 and have edged down further so far this year to roughly 17½ percent of GDP (figure 28). The ratio of federal debt held by the public to nominal GDP is quite elevated relative to historical norms. Nevertheless, the deficit remains small enough to roughly stabilize this ratio in the neighborhood of 75 percent (figure 29). . . . and the fiscal position of most state and local governments is stable The fiscal position of most state and local governments is stable, although there is a range of experiences across these governments. Many state governments are experiencing lackluster revenue growth, as income tax collections have been only edging up, on average, in recent quarters. In contrast, house price gains have continued to push up property tax revenues at the local level. Employment growth in the state and local government sector has been anemic so far this year following a pace of hiring in 2016 that was the strongest since 2008. Outlays for construction by these governments have been declining (figure 30). The expected path for the federal funds rate flattened The path for the expected federal funds rate implied by market quotes on interest rate derivatives has flattened, on net, since the end of December, moving higher for 2017 but slightly lower further out (figure 31). The expected policy path moved up at the beginning of the year, reportedly reflecting investor perceptions that expansionary fiscal policy would likely be forthcoming over the near term, but subsequently fell amid some waning of these expectations as well as FOMC communications that were interpreted as signaling a somewhat slower pace of policy rate increases than had been anticipated. Survey-based measures of the expected path of policy also moved up for 2017. Most of the respondents to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s Survey of Primary Dealers and Survey of Market Participants— which were conducted just before the June FOMC meeting—projected an additional 25 basis point increase in the FOMC’s target range for the federal funds rate, relative to what they projected in surveys conducted before the December FOMC meeting, as the most likely outcome for this year. 28. Federal receipts and expenditures NOTE: Through 2016, receipts and expenditures are for fiscal years (October to September); gross domestic product (GDP) is for the four quarters ending in Q3. For 2017, receipts and expenditures are for the 12 months ending in May, and GDP is the average of 2016:Q4 and 2017:Q1. Receipts and expenditures are on a unified-budget basis. 29. Federal government debt held by the public NOTE: The data for gross domestic product (GDP) are at an annual rate. Federal debt held by the public equals federal debt less Treasury securities held in federal employee defined benefit retirement accounts, evaluated at the end of the quarter. 30. State and local employment and structures investment Billions of chained (2009) dollars, annual rate NOTE: The employment data are monthly and extend through May 2017, and the structures data are quarterly. 31. Market-implied federal funds rate NOTE: The federal funds rate path is implied by quotes on overnight index swaps—a derivative contract tied to the effective federal funds rate. The implied path as of July 5, 2017, is compared with that as of December 30, 2016. The path is estimated with a spline approach, assuming a term premium of 0 basis points. The data extend through 2020:Q4. 32. Yields on nominal Treasury securities NOTE: The Treasury ceased publication of the 30-year constant maturity Expectations for the number of rate hikes in 2018 were about unchanged. Market-based measures of uncertainty about the policy rate approximately one to two years ahead decreased slightly, on balance, from their year- end levels. Longer-term nominal Treasury yields remain low After rising significantly during the second half of 2016, yields on medium- and longer- term nominal Treasury securities have decreased 5 to 25 basis points, on net, so far in 2017 (figure 32). The decrease in longer- term nominal yields since the beginning of the year largely reflects declines in inflation compensation due in part to soft incoming data on inflation, with real yields little changed on net. Consistent with the changes in Treasury yields, yields on 30-year agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS)—an important determinant of mortgage interest rates—decreased slightly over the first half of the year (figure 33). Treasury and MBS yields picked up somewhat in late June, driven in part by increases in government yields overseas. However, yields remain quite low by historical standards. Broad equity price indexes increased further . . . Broad U.S. equity indexes continued to increase during the period (figure 34). Equity prices were reportedly supported by lower interest rates and increased optimism that corporate earnings will continue to strengthen this year. Stock prices of companies in the technology sector increased notably on net. After rising significantly toward the end of last year, stock prices of banks performed about in line with the broader market during the first half of 2017. The implied volatility of the S&P 500 index one month ahead—the VIX—decreased, on net, ending the period close to the bottom of its historical range. (For a discussion of financial stability issues, see the box “Developments Related to Financial Stability.”) . . . and risk spreads on corporate bonds decreased Bond spreads for investment- and speculative- grade firms decreased, and spreads for speculative-grade firms now stand near the bottom of their historical ranges. Treasury and mortgage securities markets have functioned well Available indicators of Treasury market functioning remained stable over the first half of 2017. A variety of liquidity metrics—including bid-ask spreads, bid sizes, and estimates of transaction costs— either improved or remained unchanged over the period, displaying no notable signs of liquidity pressures. The agency MBS market also continued to function well. (For a detailed discussion of corporate bond market functioning, see the box “Recent Developments in Corporate Bond Market Liquidity.”) Money market rates have moved up in line with increases in the FOMC’s target range Conditions in domestic short-term funding markets have remained stable so far in 2017. Yields on a broad set of money market instruments moved higher in response to the FOMC’s policy actions in March and June. The effective federal funds rate generally traded near the middle of the target range and was closely tracked by the overnight Eurodollar rate. The spread between the three-month LIBOR (London interbank offered rate) and the OIS (overnight index swap) rate has returned to historical norms over the first half of 2017, declining from the elevated levels that prevailed at the end of last year around the implementation of the Securities and Exchange Commission money market fund reform. 33. Yield and spread on agency mortgage-backed securities NOTE: The data are daily. Yield shown is for the Fannie Mae 30-year current coupon, the coupon rate at which new mortgage-backed securities would be priced at par, or face, value. Spread shown is to the average of the 5- and 10-year nominal Treasury yields. 34. Equity prices SOURCE: Standard & Poor's Dow Jones Indices and NASDAQ index via Bloomberg. (For Dow Jones Indices licensing information, see the note on the Contents page.) A. Selected funding for large banks moderate on balance. Capital and liquidity ratios at most large U.S. banks continue to be at historical highs, and reliance on short-term wholesale funding at these institutions has continued to decline. valuation pressures across a range of assets and several indicators of investor risk appetite have increased further since mid-February, but apparent high risk appetite in asset markets has not led to increased borrowing in the nonfinancial sector. Debt owed by nonfinancial corporations remains elevated, although it has been flat or falling in the past two years. Household debt as a share of gross domestic product has remained subdued, and new borrowing has been driven primarily by households with strong credit histories. The strong capital position of the financial sector has contributed to the improved resilience of the U.S. financial system. Regulatory capital ratios at most bank holding companies have continued to be historically high, mainly as a result of the higher regulatory capital requirements. At the same time, measures of bank profitability have increased modestly on a year-on-year basis. Regulatory capital ratios at insurance companies are also high by historical standards. NOTE: Commercial paper from money market mutual fund data are monthly and extend through May 2017. Federal Home Loan Bank (FHLB) data are quarterly and are seasonally adjusted. FHLB advances data for different subsets of Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review banks depending on their use of each funding source. vulnerabilities stemming from maturity and liquidity transformation in the financial sector remain low. High-quality liquid asset holdings at all large domestic bank holding companies are above regulatory liquidity coverage ratio requirements. Moreover, banks have continued to replace short-term wholesale funding, such as commercial paper held by money market mutual funds (also referred to as money market funds, or MMFs), with relatively more stable core deposits. The use of Federal Home Loan Bank (FHLB) advances as a source of funding for the banks, which had increased notably through 2016, has fallen slightly in the first quarter of 2017 (figure A). The MMF reforms, designed by the Securities and Exchange Commission and fully implemented in October 2016, have led to a shift of about $1.2 trillion in assets from prime funds— which can hold a range of risky instruments, including commercial paper issued by banks—to government funds, which can hold only assets collateralized by Treasury and agency securities. This shift has reduced the risk of runs on MMFs. However, run risk could increase if investors shift out of MMFs into more opaque and fragile alternative vehicles. Thus, continued monitoring of this sector is important. The FHLBs have increased their issuance of short-maturity liabilities, mainly to government funds. However, the FHLBs have not reduced the maturity of their own assets, which increases their liquidity mismatch and potential vulnerability to funding strains. This mismatch has also been highlighted by the Federal Housing Finance Agency, which continues to evaluate ways to formalize its supervisory expectations regarding the appropriate amount of short-term funding of long-term assets by the FHLBs.1 valuation pressures have increased further across a range of assets, including Treasury securities, equities, corporate bonds, and commercial real estate (CRE). 1. See Melvin L. Watt (2017), “Prepared Remarks,” speech Term premiums on Treasury securities continue to be in the lower part of their historical distribution. A sudden rise in term premiums to more normal levels poses a downside risk to long-maturity Treasury prices, which could in turn affect the prices of other assets. Forward equity price-to-earnings ratios rose a bit further and are now at their highest levels since the early 2000s, while a measure of the risk premium embedded in high- yield corporate bond spreads declined a touch from an already low level, implying high asset valuations in this market as well. Prices of CRE have continued to advance at a rapid clip amid slowing rent growth and rising interest rates, though there are signs of tightening credit conditions in CRE markets. In contrast, farmland prices have declined, albeit more slowly than prevailing rents, implying that farmland price-to-rent ratios have continued to move up to very high levels. In derivatives markets, investor compensation for bearing near-term volatility risk has remained low, suggesting a sustained investor risk appetite. The ratio of private nonfinancial (household and nonfinancial business) debt to gross domestic product, shown in figure B, remains below the estimates of its NOTE: The shaded bars indicate periods of business recession as defined by long-term upward trend. The debt-to-income ratio of households has changed little over the past few years and remains at a relatively low level. Moreover, new borrowing is concentrated among borrowers with high credit scores. In contrast, the leverage of nonfinancial corporations continues to be notably elevated. New borrowing is concentrated among firms with stronger balance sheets, and the total outstanding amount of speculative-grade bonds and leveraged loans edged down, especially in the oil sector. As part of its effort to reduce regulatory burden while promoting the financial stability of the United States, the Federal Reserve Board has taken two key steps since mid-February. First, member agencies of the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council, including the Board, issued a joint report to the Congress under the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act of 1996 detailing their review of regulations affecting smaller financial institutions, such as community banks, and describing burden- reducing actions the agencies plan to take.2 Second, the Board and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation jointly announced the completion of their evaluation of the 2015 resolution plans of 16 domestic banks and separately issued resolution plan guidance to 4 foreign banks.3 The agencies identified shortcomings in one domestic firm’s resolution plan, which must be satisfactorily addressed in the firm’s 2017 plan by December 31. For foreign banking organizations, resolution plans are focused on their U.S. operations, and guidance issued to these organizations reflects the significant restructuring they have undertaken to form intermediary holding companies. 2. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 3. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2017), “Agencies Complete Resolution Plan Evaluation of 16 Domestic Firms; Provide Resolution Plan Guidance to Four Foreign Banking Organizations,” press release, March 24, https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/ bcreg20170324a.htm. Market liquidity refers to the extent to which investors can rapidly execute sizable securities transactions at a low cost and with a limited price effect. A high degree of market liquidity facilitates informationally efficient market pricing and lowers the returns required by investors to hold financial assets; it therefore decreases the cost of valuable economic projects and so contributes to the efficient allocation of capital. Moreover, liquidity conditions that are resilient in the face of economic and financial shocks reduce the risk of excess volatility and fire sale losses, thus helping mitigate systemic risk. Financial institutions that serve as “market makers,” by posting prices and standing ready to buy or sell, are critical to healthy liquidity in the markets for certain assets, including corporate bonds. A series of changes, including regulatory reforms, since the Global Financial Crisis have likely altered financial institutions’ incentives to provide liquidity, raising concerns about decreased liquidity in these markets, especially during periods of market stress. However, the available evidence does not point to any substantial impairment in liquidity in major financial markets in recent years. In addition, financial markets have generally performed well during recent episodes of financial stress.1 Even in instances in which liquidity conditions in certain markets appear to have deteriorated, the effects have been mild and suggest limited economic consequences. In the remainder of this discussion, we illustrate these points with emphasis on the market for corporate bonds. In recent years, market participants have been particularly concerned with liquidity conditions in the corporate bond market because the securities are traded less frequently, and the liquidity provision has relied more heavily on dealer intermediation, than in many other markets. However, a range of conventional metrics of liquidity indicate that liquidity strains in corporate bond markets have been minimal. Figure A 1. For a discussion of the behavior of bond prices during recent flash events (that is, extremely rapid and large price moves during very short periods), see Jerome H. Powell (2015), “Structure and Liquidity in Treasury Markets,” speech delivered at the Brookings Institution, Washington, August 3, https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/ powell20150803a.htm. NOTE: The data are daily. The bid-ask spread is the 21-day moving average of the difference between trade size weighted-average dealer bid prices and ask prices of non-defaulted bonds on the secondary market, scaled by the midprice. Price effect data are the 21-day moving average of the Amihud (2002) measure (see footnote 2), which is defined as the daily average of the ratio of the absolute value of the percentage price changes to transaction volume for non-defaulted bonds on the secondary market that traded at least 10 times between 10:30 a.m. and 3:30 p.m. Excludes 144a bonds. shows that the estimated mean effective bid-ask spread for U.S. corporate bonds has remained low in recent years. Before the financial crisis, bid-ask spreads averaged about 1 percent of the price of the bond. This measure of trading costs skyrocketed during the financial crisis but has returned to the range seen before the crisis. Measures of the effect of trades on prices follow a similar pattern and have been fairly stable in recent years.2 In addition, other measures related to factors associated with market liquidity, such as trends in average trade size and turnover, also suggest market liquidity conditions are benign.3 That said, some recent work suggests that these traditional measures of transaction costs might exaggerate the degree of liquidity in part because dealers have increasingly shifted from acting as principals to acting as agents to reduce their risk exposure, resulting in tighter bid-ask spreads.4 Indeed, many market participants have expressed a concern that declines in dealer inventories may reflect in part a reduced willingness or capacity of the primary dealers to make markets, which may in turn lead to lower liquidity. Figure B shows that primary dealers’ inventories of corporate bonds (including foreign bonds issued in the United States), which are predominantly used for market making, indeed began to decline sharply following the Bear Stearns collapse in March 2008 and fell further after Lehman Brothers failed in October 2008. Such a sharp decline in dealer inventories may be the result of dealers’ actions on their own, reflecting changes in risk preferences in reaction to the financial crisis. In addition, changing (continued on next page) 2. See yakov Amihud (2002), “Illiquidity and Stock Returns: 4. See Jaewon Choi and yesol Huh (2016), “Customer Cross-Section and Time-Series Effects,” Journal of Financial Markets, vol. 5 (January), pp. 31–56. The Amihud price effect measure is defined as the ratio of the percentage change in price (in absolute value) and the daily trading volume. 3. For detailed definitions of trade size and turnover in the context of corporate bond markets, see Francesco Trebbi and Kairong Xiao (2015), “Regulation and Market Liquidity,” NBER Working Paper Series 21739 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, November). Liquidity Provision: Implications for Corporate Bond Transaction Costs,” unpublished paper, July (revised January 2017), https://sites.google.com/site/yesolhuh/research/ Choi_Huh_CLP.pdf. The authors suggest that transactions in which dealers act simply as brokers (that is, agents), rather than as intermediaries that hold assets on their balance sheets (principals), could reflect price concessions that dealers make to entice counterparties into the other side of a trade so that the dealers will not need to hold the traded assets. regulations—such as the volcker rule and the supplementary leverage ratio, which aimed to make the financial system safer and sounder—and changes in technology may have contributed to the continued trend of lower dealer inventories.5 The factors affecting a dealer’s willingness or capacity to facilitate trading may also affect other activities such as arbitrage trading, which equates prices for financing arrangements with economically similar risks. Therefore, impediments in arbitrage may also indicate market illiquidity. One widely studied no-arbitrage relationship is the so-called CDS–bond basis, the difference between bonds’ credit default swap (CDS) spreads and bond-implied credit spreads.6 Figure C shows that the CDS–bond basis for corporate bonds was close to zero before the crisis, widened dramatically during the crisis (indicating a significant unrealized arbitrage opportunity), and has returned to a level closer to, but still below, zero in recent years. More recently, the CDS–bond basis has narrowed further. NOTE: Data extend through December 30, 2016. The figure plots the CDS–bond basis for investment-grade and high-yield bonds. The CDS–bond basis is from J.P. Morgan and is computed for investment-grade and high-yield corporate bonds as the average difference between each bond's market CDS spread (interpolated to the bond maturity) and the theoretical CDS spread implied by the bond yield. See Boyarchenko and others (2016) in footnote 6 for details. constraints affect corporate bond market liquidity depends not only on dealers’ capacity and willingness to provide liquidity, but also on the extent to which nonbank financial institutions such as hedge funds, mutual funds, and insurance companies fill any lost market-making capacity. Other factors such as changes in technology, risk preferences, and investor composition also interact to shape the trading 5. See Tobias Adrian, Nina Boyarchenko, and Or Shachar (forthcoming), “Dealer Balance Sheets and Bond Liquidity Provision,” Journal of Monetary Economics. They find that dealers subject to stricter regulations after the crisis are less able to intermediate customer trades in the corporate bond market. Also see Jack Bao, Maureen O’Hara, and Alex Zhou (2016), “The volcker Rule and Market-Making in Times of Stress,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-102 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, December), https://www.federalreserve.gov/ econresdata/feds/2016/files/2016102pap.pdf. They show that recently downgraded bonds trade with a higher price effect after the introduction of the volcker rule, although Anderson and Stulz find no such effects. See Mike Anderson and René M. Stulz (2017), “Is Post-Crisis Bond Liquidity Lower?” NBER Working Paper Series 23317 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, April). 6. For a more detailed discussion of the CDS–bond basis, SOURCE: J.P. Morgan, CDS Data. (For additional information about the data from J.P. Morgan, see the note on the Contents page.) environment.7 There are indications that market structure has changed in recent years, and trades in certain situations and market segments might have been more costly at times. But markets have also adjusted, and some measures of dislocation have lessened with these adjustments. In summary, liquidity conditions have been quite good overall since the Global Financial Crisis. The sharp deterioration of market liquidity during 2007 and 2008 illustrates clearly that the most significant risk has been distress at financial institutions. Any modest potential effects of regulation on liquidity should be balanced with the gains to resilience at large financial institutions associated with regulation. 7. See Darrell Duffie (2012), “Market Making under the Proposed volcker Rule,” Working Paper 3118 (Stanford, Calif.: Stanford Graduate School of Business, January), available at https://www.gsb.stanford.edu/faculty-research/ working-papers/market-making-under-proposed-volcker- rule. He argues that the negative effect the volcker rule may have on market liquidity in the short run may disappear in the long run as nonbanks step in to provide liquidity. See also Hendrik Bessembinder, Stacey E. Jacobsen, William F. Maxwell, and Kumar venkataraman (2016), “Capital Commitment and Illiquidity in Corporate Bonds,” unpublished paper, March, http://finance.bus.utk.edu/UTSMC/documents/ BillMaxwellPapertopresent042016.pdf. The authors find that bank dealers are less willing to provide liquidity now than in the recent past, while nonbank dealers are now more willing. Bank credit continued to expand, though at a slower pace than in 2016, and bank profitability improved Aggregate credit provided by commercial banks continued to increase through the first quarter of 2017, though at a slower pace than in 2016, leaving the ratio of total commercial bank credit to nominal GDP slightly lower (figure 35). The expansion of core loans slowed during 2017, consistent with banks’ reports in the April SLOOS of weakened demand for most loan categories and tighter lending standards for commercial real estate loans. However, the growth of core loans appeared to be picking up somewhat during the second quarter. Measures of bank profitability have continued to improve so far this year but remained below their historical averages (figure 36). Credit conditions in municipal bond markets have generally been stable Credit conditions in municipal bond markets have generally remained stable since year-end. Over that period, yield spreads on 20-year general obligation municipal bonds over comparable-maturity Treasury securities were little changed on balance. Puerto Rico filed to enter a court-supervised process to restructure its debt after it failed to reach an agreement with bondholders, and several credit rating agencies downgraded the bond ratings of the state of Illinois. However, these events have had no noticeable effect on broader municipal bond markets. Foreign financial market conditions eased Financial market conditions in both the advanced foreign economies (AFEs) and the emerging market economies (EMEs) have generally eased since January. Better-than- expected data releases, robust corporate earnings, and the passage of risk events— such as national elections in some European countries—boosted investor confidence. Broad 35. Ratio of total commercial bank credit to nominal gross domestic product 36. Profitability of bank holding companies NOTE: The data are quarterly and are seasonally adjusted. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Board, Form FR Y-9C, Consolidated Financial 37. Equity indexes for selected foreign economies Emerging market economies NOTE: The data are weekly averages of daily data and extend through 38. Emerging market mutual fund flows and spreads Bond fund flows (right axis) Equity fund flows (right axis) EMBI+ (left axis) NOTE: The EMBI+ data are weekly averages of daily data and extend through July 5, 2017. The EPFR data are monthly sums of weekly data. The fund flows data exclude funds located in China. SOURCE: For bond and equity fund flows, EPFR Global; for EMBI+, J.P. 39. Nominal 10-year government bond yields in selected advanced economies NOTE: The data are weekly averages of daily benchmark yields and extend equity indexes in advanced and emerging foreign economies rose further (figure 37). In addition, spreads of emerging market sovereign bonds over U.S. Treasury securities narrowed, and capital flows into emerging market mutual funds picked up (figure 38). Government bond yields in the AFEs generally remained very low, partly reflecting investor expectations that substantial monetary policy accommodation would be required for some time (figure 39). In the United Kingdom, softer macroeconomic data and uncertainty about future policies and growth as the country begins the process of exiting the European Union also weighed on yields. However, AFE government bond yields picked up somewhat in late June, partly reflecting investors’ focus on remarks by officials from some AFE central banks suggesting possible shifts toward less accommodative policy stances. In the euro area, bank supervisors intervened to prevent the disorderly failure of a few small to medium-sized lenders in Italy and Spain; business disruptions were minimal, and spillovers to other European banks were limited. The dollar depreciated somewhat Since the start of the year, the broad dollar index—a measure of the trade-weighted value of the dollar against foreign currencies—has depreciated about 5 percent, on balance, after rising more than 20 percent between mid- 2014 and late 2016 (figure 40). The weakening since the start of the year partly reflected growing uncertainty about prospects for more expansionary U.S. fiscal policy as well as mounting confidence in the foreign economic outlook. The euro rose against the dollar following the French presidential election, and the Mexican peso appreciated substantially as the Mexican central bank tightened monetary policy and as investor concerns about the potential for substantial disruptions of U.S.–Mexico trade appeared to ease. Economic activity in the AFEs grew at a solid pace In the first quarter, real GDP grew at a solid pace in Canada, the euro area, and Japan, partly reflecting robust growth in fixed investment in all three economies (figure 41). In contrast, economic growth slowed to a tepid pace in the United Kingdom, reflecting weaker consumption growth and a decline in exports. In most AFEs, economic survey indicators, such as purchasing manager surveys, generally remained consistent with continued economic growth at a solid pace during the second quarter. Inflation leveled off in most AFEs . . . In late 2016, consumer price inflation (measured as a 12-month percent change) rose substantially in most AFEs, partly reflecting increases in energy prices (figure 42). Since then, inflation has leveled off in Japan and declined somewhat in the euro area as upward pressure from energy prices eased, core inflation stayed low, and wage growth was subdued even as unemployment rates declined further in both economies. In contrast, in the United Kingdom, headline inflation rose well above the Bank of England’s (BOE) 2 percent target, largely reflecting upward pressure from the substantial sterling depreciation since the Brexit referendum in June 2016. . . . and AFE central banks maintained highly accommodative monetary policies AFE central banks kept their policy rates at historically low levels, and the Bank of Japan kept its target range for 10-year government bond yields near zero. The European Central Bank (ECB) maintained its asset purchase program, though it slightly reduced the pace of purchases, and the BOE completed the bond purchase program it announced last August. However, the Bank of Canada, BOE, and ECB have recently suggested that if growth continues to reduce resource slack, some policy accommodation could be withdrawn. The ECB remarked that the forces 40. U.S. dollar exchange rate indexes NOTE: The data, which are in foreign currency units per dollar, are weekly averages of daily data and extend through July 5, 2017. 41. Real gross domestic product growth in selected advanced foreign economies Inflation in selected advanced foreign economies NOTE: The data for the euro area incorporate the flash estimate for June 2017. The data for Canada, Japan, and the United Kingdom extend through May 2017. 43. Real gross domestic product growth in selected emerging market economies NOTE: The data for China are seasonally adjusted by Board staff. The data for Korea, Mexico, and Brazil are seasonally adjusted by their respective government agencies. holding down inflation could be temporary. The BOE indicated that some monetary accommodation might need to be removed if the tradeoff between supporting employment and expediting the return of inflation to its target is reduced. In EMEs, Asian growth was solid . . . Chinese economic activity was robust in the first quarter of 2017 as a result of solid domestic and external demand (figure 43). More recent indicators suggest that growth moderated in the second quarter as Chinese authorities tightened financial conditions and as export growth slowed. In some other emerging Asian economies, growth picked up in early 2017 as a result of stronger external demand and manufacturing activity. However, growth of the region’s exports, especially to China, slowed so far in the second quarter. . . . and many Latin American economies continue their tepid recovery In Mexico, growth decelerated a touch in the first quarter of 2017, partly reflecting a slowdown in private consumption following sharp hikes in domestic fuel prices. These price hikes, together with the effects of earlier peso depreciation on import prices, contributed to a sharp rise in Mexican inflation, which prompted the Bank of Mexico to further tighten monetary policy. Following a prolonged period of contraction, the Brazilian economy posted solid growth in the first quarter of 2017, partly reflecting a surge in exports and a strong harvest. However, domestic demand has remained very weak amid high unemployment and heightened political tensions, and indicators of economic activity have stepped down recently. In Brazil and some other South American economies, declining inflation has led central banks to reduce their policy interest rates. The Federal Open Market Committee raised the federal funds rate target range in March and June Over the past year and a half, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has been gradually increasing its target range for the federal funds rate as the economy continued to make progress toward the Committee’s objectives of maximum employment and price stability. After having raised the target range for the federal funds rate last December, the Committee decided to raise the target range again in March and in June, bringing it to 1 to 1¼ percent (figure 44).5 The FOMC’s decisions reflected the progress the economy has made, and is expected to make, toward the Committee’s objectives. When the Committee met in March, it decided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to ¾ to 1 percent. Available information suggested that the labor market had continued 5. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2017), “Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement,” press release, March 15, https:// www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/ monetary20170315a.htm; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2017), “Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement,” press release, June 14, https:// www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/ monetary20170614a.htm. to strengthen even as growth in economic activity slowed during the first quarter. Inflation measured on a 12-month basis had moved up appreciably and was close to the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run objective. Core inflation, which excludes volatile energy and food prices, continued to run somewhat below 2 percent. The data available at the time of the June FOMC meeting suggested a rebound in economic activity in the second quarter, leaving the projected average pace of growth over the first half of the year at a moderate level. The labor market had continued to strengthen, with the unemployment rate falling nearly ½ percentage point since the beginning of the year to 4.3 percent in May, a low level by historical standards and modestly below the median of FOMC participants’ estimates of its longer-run normal level. Inflation measured on a 12-month basis had declined over the previous few months but was still up significantly since last summer. Like the headline inflation measure, core inflation was running somewhat below 2 percent. With employment expected to remain near its maximum sustainable level, the Committee continued to expect that inflation would move up and stabilize around 2 percent over the next couple of years, in line with the Committee’s 44. Selected interest rates NOTE: The 2-year and 10-year Treasury rates are the constant-maturity yields based on the most actively traded securities. SOURCE: Department of the Treasury; Federal Reserve Board. longer-run objective. In view of realized and expected labor market conditions and inflation, the Committee decided to raise the target another ¼ percentage point to a range of 1 to 1¼ percent. Monetary policy continues to support economic growth Even with the gradual reductions in the amount of policy accommodation to date, the Committee judges that the stance of monetary policy remains accommodative, thereby supporting some further strengthening in labor market conditions and a sustained return to 2 percent inflation. In particular, the federal funds rate appears to remain somewhat below its neutral level—that is, the level of the federal funds rate that is neither expansionary nor contractionary. In evaluating the stance of monetary policy, policymakers routinely consult prescriptions from a variety of policy rules, which can serve as useful benchmarks. However, the use and interpretation of such prescriptions require careful judgments about the choice and measurement of the inputs to these rules as well as the implications of the many considerations these rules do not take into account (see the box “Monetary Policy Rules and Their Role in the Federal Reserve’s Policy Process”). Future changes in the federal funds rate will depend on the economic outlook as informed by incoming data The FOMC has continued to emphasize that, in determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, it will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. This assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. The Committee will carefully monitor actual and expected inflation developments relative to its symmetric inflation goal. The Committee currently expects that the ongoing strength in the economy will warrant gradual increases in the federal funds rate, and that the federal funds rate will likely remain, for some time, below the levels that the Committee expects to prevail in the longer run. Consistent with this outlook, in the most recent Summary of Economic Projections, which was compiled at the time of the June FOMC meeting, most FOMC participants projected that the appropriate level of the federal funds rate would be below its longer- run level through 2018.6 The size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet has remained stable so far this year To help maintain accommodative financial conditions, the Committee has continued its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities and rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction. Consequently, the Federal Reserve’s total assets have held steady at around $4.5 trillion, with holdings of U.S. Treasury securities at $2.5 trillion and holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities at approximately $1.8 trillion (figure 45). Total liabilities on the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet were also mostly unchanged over the first half of 2017. The Committee intends to implement a balance sheet normalization program In June, policymakers augmented the Committee’s Policy Normalization Principles and Plans issued in September 2014 by providing additional details regarding the approach the FOMC intends to use to reduce 6. See the June 2017 Summary of Economic Projections, which appeared as an addendum to the minutes of the June 13–14, 2017, meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and is included as Part 3 of this report. 45. Federal Reserve assets and liabilities Treasury securities held outright NOTE: “Credit and liquidity facilities” consists of primary, secondary, and seasonal credit; term auction credit; central bank liquidity swaps; support for Maiden Lane, Bear Stearns, and AIG; and other credit facilities, including the Primary Dealer Credit Facility, the Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility, the Commercial Paper Funding Facility, and the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility. “Other assets” includes unamortized premiums and discounts on securities held outright. “Capital and other liabilities” includes reverse repurchase agreements, the U.S. Treasury General Account, and the U.S. Treasury Supplementary Financing Account. The data extend through June 28, 2017. the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury and agency securities once normalization of the federal funds rate is well under way.7 The Committee intends to gradually reduce the Federal Reserve’s securities holdings by decreasing its reinvestment of the principal payments it receives from the securities held in the System Open Market Account. Specifically, such payments will be reinvested only to the extent that they exceed gradually rising caps. Initially, these caps will be set at relatively low levels to limit the volume of securities that private investors will have to absorb. The Committee currently expects that, provided the economy evolves broadly as anticipated, it would likely begin to implement the program this year. In addition, the Committee affirmed that changing the target range for the federal funds rate remains its primary means of adjusting the stance of monetary policy (see the box “Addendum to the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans”). The Federal Reserve’s implementation of monetary policy has continued smoothly The Federal Reserve successfully raised the effective federal funds rate in March and June of 2017 by increasing the interest rate paid on reserve balances along with the interest rate offered on overnight reverse repurchase agreements (ON RRPs). Specifically, the Federal Reserve increased the interest rate paid on required and excess reserve balances to 1.00 percent in March and 1.25 percent in June while increasing the ON RRP offering rate to 0.75 percent in March and 1.00 percent in June. In addition, the Board of Governors approved ¼ percentage point increases in the discount rate (the primary credit rate) in March and June. In both March and June, the effective federal funds rate rose near the middle of its new target range amid orderly trading conditions in money markets, closely tracked by most other overnight money market rates. 7. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2017), “FOMC Issues Addendum to the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans,” press release, June 14, https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/ pressreleases/monetary20170614c.htm. Usage of the ON RRP facility, which had increased late last year as a result of higher demand by government money market funds in the wake of last October’s money fund reform, has declined some, on average, in recent months. However, usage has remained somewhat above its levels of one year ago. rate of unemployment in the longer run (uLR) and the current unemployment rate.3 Unlike the other rules, the first-difference rule considers the change in the unemployment gap rather than its level. Monetary policy rules are formulas that prescribe a tight link between a small number of economic variables—typically including the gap between actual and target inflation along with an estimate of resource slack in the economy—and the setting of a policy rate, such as the federal funds rate.1 While policy rules can provide helpful guidance for policymakers, their interpretation requires careful judgment about the measurement of the inputs to these rules and the implications of the many considerations these rules do not take into account. The Taylor (1993), balanced-approach, and adjusted Taylor (1993) rules provide prescriptions for the level of the federal funds rate and require an estimate of the neutral real interest rate in the longer run (rLR)— that is, the level of the real federal funds rate that is expected to be consistent with sustaining maximum employment and stable inflation in the longer run.4 In contrast, the change and first-difference rules prescribe how the level of the federal funds rate at a given time should be altered from its previous level—that is, they indicate how the existing rate should change over time. The adjusted Taylor (1993) rule recognizes that the federal funds rate cannot be reduced materially below zero, implying that interest rate policy alone may not be able to provide enough policy accommodation during periods when the unadjusted Taylor (1993) rule prescribes setting the federal funds rate below zero. To make up for the cumulative shortfall in accommodation (Zt), the adjusted rule prescribes only a gradual return of the policy rate to the (positive) levels prescribed by the unadjusted Taylor (1993) rule as the economy recovers. Policy rules can incorporate key principles of good monetary policy. One key principle is that monetary policy should respond in a predictable way to changes in economic conditions. A second key principle is that monetary policy should be accommodative when inflation is below the desired level and employment is below its maximum sustainable level; conversely, monetary policy should be restrictive when the opposite holds. A third key principle is that, to stabilize inflation, the policy rate should be adjusted by more than one-for-one in response to persistent increases or decreases in inflation. Economists have analyzed many monetary policy rules, including the well-known Taylor (1993) rule as well as other rules discussed later: the “balanced approach” rule, the “adjusted Taylor (1993)” rule, the “change” rule, and the “first difference” rule (figure A).2 These policy rules generally embody the three key principles of good monetary policy noted earlier. Each rule takes into account two gaps— the difference between inflation and its objective (2 percent as measured by the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), in the case of the Federal Reserve) as well as the difference between the 1. There is a lengthy academic and intellectual debate about using rules to guide monetary policy; prominent examples of rules heavily discussed in the literature and influential on policymaking in earlier periods include the gold standard and Milton Friedman’s constant money growth rule. 2. The Taylor (1993) rule was first suggested in John B. Taylor (1993), “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 39 (December), pp. 195–214. The balanced-approach rule was analyzed in John B. Taylor (1999), “A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules,” in John B. Taylor, ed., Monetary Policy Rules (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), pp. 319–41. The adjusted Taylor (1993) rule was studied in David Reifschneider and John C. Williams (2000), “Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Era,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, vol. 32 (November), pp. 936–66. The change rule was discussed in John B. Taylor (1999), “The Robustness and Efficiency of Monetary Policy Rules as Guidelines for The small number of variables involved in policy rules makes them easy to use. However, the U.S. Interest Rate Setting by the European Central Bank,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 43 (June), pp. 655–79. Finally, the first-difference rule was introduced by Athanasios Orphanides (2003), “Historical Monetary Policy Analysis and the Taylor Rule,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 50 (July), pp. 983– 1022. A comprehensive review of policy rules is in John B. Taylor and John C. Williams (2011), “Simple and Robust Rules for Monetary Policy,” in Benjamin M. Friedman and Michael Woodford, eds., Handbook of Monetary Economics, vol. 3B (Amsterdam: North-Holland), pp. 829–59. The same volume of the Handbook of Monetary Economics also discusses approaches other than policy rules for deriving policy rate prescriptions. 3. The Taylor (1993) rule represented slack in resource utilization using an output gap (the difference between the current level of real gross domestic product (GDP) and what GDP would be if the economy was operating at maximum employment). The rules in figure A represent slack in resource utilization using the unemployment gap instead, because that gap better captures the Federal Open Market Committee’s statutory goal to promote maximum employment. Movements in these alternative measures of resource utilization are highly correlated. For more information, see the note below figure A. 4. Taylor-type rules—including John Taylor’s original rule—have often been estimated assuming that the value of the neutral real interest rate in the longer run, rLR, is equal to 2 percent, which roughly corresponds to the average historical value of the real federal funds rate before the financial crisis. Taylor (1993) rule, adjusted represent the values of the nominal federal funds rate prescribed by the (1993), balanced-approach, adjusted Taylor (1993), change, and first-difference rules, respectively. is four-quarter price inflation for quarter t, and is the level of the neutral real federal funds rate in the longer run that, on average, is expected to be consistent with sustaining maximum employment and inflation at its 2 percent longer- run objective, is the cumulative sum of past deviations of the federal funds rate from the prescriptions of the Taylor (1993) rule when that rule prescribes setting the federal funds rate below zero. denotes the actual nominal federal funds rate for quarter t, is the unemployment rate in quarter t. is the rate of unemployment in the longer run. The Taylor (1993) rule and other policy rules are generally written in terms of the deviation of real output from its full capacity level. In these equations, the output gap has been replaced with the gap between the rate of unem- ployment in the longer run and its actual level (using a relationship known as Okun’s law) in order to represent the rules in terms of the FOMC’s statutory goals. Historically, movements in the output and unemployment gaps have been highly correlated. Footnote 2 provides references for the policy rules. economy is highly complex, and these rules, by their very nature, do not capture that complexity. For example, while the unemployment rate is an important measure of the state of the labor market, it often lags business cycle developments and does not provide a complete measure of slack or tightness. In practice, Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) policymakers examine a great deal of information about the labor market to gauge its health; this information includes broader measures of labor underutilization, the labor force participation rate, employment, hours worked, and the rates of job openings, hiring, layoffs, and quits, as well as anecdotal information not easily reduced to numerical indexes.5 Another issue related to the implementation of rules involves the measurement of the variables that drive the prescriptions generated by the rules. For example, there are many measures of inflation, and they do not always move together or by the same amount. The broadest measure of inflation, shown by the percent change in the gross domestic product price index, displays notable differences from measures that gauge changes in consumer prices (figure B). Even measures that focus (continued on next page) 5. For a discussion of these and other metrics of the labor market, see Hess Chung, Bruce Fallick, Christopher Nekarda, on the prices paid by consumers differ importantly. For example, inflation as measured by the consumer price index (or CPI) has generally been somewhat higher historically than inflation measured using the PCE price index (the index to which the FOMC’s 2 percent longer- run inflation objective refers). Core inflation, meaning inflation excluding changes in food and energy prices, is less volatile than headline inflation and is often used in estimating monetary policy rules because it has historically been a good predictor of future headline inflation (figure C). routinely assess risks to financial stability. Furthermore, over the past few years, with the federal funds rate still close to zero, the FOMC has recognized that it would have limited scope to respond to an unexpected weakening in the economy by lowering short-term interest rates. This asymmetric risk has, in recent years, provided a sound rationale for following a more gradual path of rate increases than that prescribed by policy rules. (Asymmetric risk need not always provide a rationale for a more gradual path; if the risks were strongly tilted toward substantial and persistent overheating and too-high inflation, the asymmetric In addition, both the level of the neutral real interest rate in the longer run and the level of the unemployment rate that is sustainable in the longer run are difficult to estimate precisely, and estimates made in real time may differ substantially from estimates made later on, after the relevant economic data have been revised and additional data have become available.6 For example, since 2000, respondents to the Blue Chip survey have markedly reduced their projections of the longer-run level of the real short- term interest rate (figure D). Survey respondents have also made considerable changes over time to their estimates of the rate of unemployment in the longer run, with consequences for the unemployment gap. Revisions of this magnitude to the neutral real interest rate and the rate of unemployment in the longer run can have important implications for the federal funds rate prescribed by monetary policy rules. Sensible estimation of policy rules requires that policymakers take into account these changes in the projected values of longer-run rates as they occur over time. Excluding food and energy (core) federal funds rate to its determinants differs across policy rules. For example, the sensitivity of the federal funds rate to the unemployment gap in the balanced- approach rule is twice as large as it is in the Taylor (1993) rule. The fact that the policy interest rate responds differently to the inflation and unemployment gaps in the different policy rules means that the rules provide different tradeoffs between stabilizing inflation and stabilizing unemployment. Finally, monetary policy rules do not take account of broader risk considerations. For example, policymakers 6. The change and first-difference rules shown in figure A reduce the need for good estimates of longer-run rates because they do not require an estimate of the neutral real interest rate in the longer run. However, these rules have their own shortcomings. For example, research suggests that such rules will result in greater volatility in employment and inflation relative to what would be obtained under the Taylor (1993) and balanced-approach rules unless the estimates of the neutral real federal funds rate in the longer run and the rate of unemployment in the longer run are sufficiently far from their true values. rate and the unemployment rate in the longer run Estimated neutral real interest rate in the longer run Estimated unemployment rate in the longer run NOTE: The data for the estimated neutral real interest rate in the longer run and the estimated unemployment rate in the longer run are biannual and have been interpolated to yield quarterly values. The estimated neutral real interest rate in the longer run equals the three-month Treasury bill rate projected in the long run deflated by the long-run projected annual change in the price index for gross domestic product. risk could argue for higher rates than prescribed by simple rules.) How does the FOMC use monetary policy rules? In the briefing materials prepared for FOMC meetings, Federal Reserve staff regularly report prescriptions for the current setting of the federal funds rate from a number of monetary policy rules.7 FOMC policymakers discussed prescriptions from monetary policy rules as long ago as 1995 and have consulted them routinely since 2004. The materials that FOMC policymakers see also include forecasts of how the federal funds rate and key macro indicators would evolve, under each of the rules, several years into the future. Policymakers weigh this information, along with other information bearing on the economic outlook.8 Different monetary policy rules often offer quite different prescriptions for the federal funds rate; moreover, there is no obvious metric for favoring one rule over another. While monetary policy rules 7. Prescriptions from monetary policy rules are included in the Board staff’s Tealbook (previously the Bluebook); the precise set of rules presented has changed from time to time. The transcripts and briefing materials for FOMC meetings through 2011 are available on the Board’s website at https:// www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomc_historical. htm. In the materials from 2011, the policy rule prescriptions are contained in the Monetary Policy Strategies section of Tealbook B. 8. The briefing materials that FOMC policymakers review regularly include the Board staff’s baseline forecast for the economy and model simulations of a variety of alternative scenarios intended to provide a sense of the effects of other plausible developments that were not included in the staff’s baseline forecast. often agree about the direction (up or down) in which policymakers should move the federal funds rate, they frequently disagree about the appropriate level of that rate. Historical prescriptions from policy rules differ from one another and also differ from the Committee’s target for the federal funds rate, as shown in figure E. (These prescriptions are calculated using both the actual data and the estimates of the neutral real interest rate in the longer run and of the rate of unemployment in the longer run—data and estimates that were available to FOMC policymakers at the time.) Moreover, the rules sometimes prescribe setting short-term interest rates well below zero—a setting that is not feasible. With the exception of the adjusted Taylor (1993) rule, which imposes a lower limit of zero, all of the rules shown in figure E called for the federal funds rate to turn negative in 2009 and to stay below zero for several years thereafter. Thus, these rules indicated that the Federal Reserve should provide more monetary stimulus than could be achieved by setting the federal funds rate at zero. While all of the policy rules have called for higher values of the federal funds rate in recent years, the pace of tightening that the rules prescribe has varied widely. Prescriptions from these rules for the level of the federal funds rate in the first quarter of 2017 ranged from 37 basis points (change rule) to 2.5 percent (balanced-approach rule).9 9. As noted earlier, the adjusted rule limits increases in the federal funds rate for a time during economic recoveries to make up for past shortfalls in accommodation caused by the zero lower limit on interest rates. This principle can also be applied to the prescriptions of the other rules. If applied to the balanced-approach rule, for example, it would have called for the federal funds rate to have remained at zero at least through the first quarter of 2017. Taylor (1993) rule, adjusted NOTE: The rules use real-time historical values of inflation, the federal funds rate, and the unemployment rate. Inflation is measured as the four-quarter percent change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures excluding food and energy. Quarterly projections of long-run values for the federal funds rate and the unemployment rate are derived through interpolations of biannual projections from Blue Chip Economic Indicators. The long-run value for inflation is taken as 2 percent. All participants agreed to augment the Committee’s Policy Normalization Principles and Plans by providing the following additional details regarding the approach the FOMC intends to use to reduce the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury and agency securities once normalization of the level of the federal funds rate is well under way.1 The Committee intends to gradually reduce the Federal Reserve’s securities holdings by decreasing its reinvestment of the principal payments it receives from securities held in the System Open Market Account. Specifically, such payments will be reinvested only to the extent that they exceed gradually rising caps. {{ For payments of principal that the Federal Reserve receives from maturing Treasury securities, the Committee anticipates that the cap will be $6 billion per month initially and will increase in steps of $6 billion at three-month intervals over 12 months until it reaches $30 billion per month.  {{The Committee also anticipates that the caps will remain in place once they reach their respective maximums so that the Federal Reserve’s securities holdings will continue to decline in a gradual and predictable manner until the Committee judges that the Federal Reserve is holding no more securities than necessary to implement monetary policy efficiently and effectively. Gradually reducing the Federal Reserve’s securities holdings will result in a declining supply of reserve balances. The Committee currently anticipates reducing the quantity of reserve balances, over time, to a level appreciably below that seen in recent years but larger than before the financial crisis; the level will reflect the banking system’s demand for reserve balances and the Committee’s decisions about how to implement monetary policy most efficiently and effectively in the future. The Committee expects to learn more about the underlying demand for reserves during the process of balance sheet normalization. Reserve receives from its holdings of agency debt and mortgage-backed securities, the Committee anticipates that the cap will be $4 billion per month initially and will increase in steps of $4 billion at three-month intervals over 12 months until it reaches $20 billion per month. 1. The Committee’s Policy Normalization Principles and Plans were adopted on September 16, 2014, and are available at www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_ PolicyNormalization.pdf. On March 18, 2015, the Committee adopted an addendum to the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans, which is available at www.federalreserve.gov/ monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_PolicyNormalization.20150318. pdf.  The Committee affirms that changing the target range for the federal funds rate is its primary means of adjusting the stance of monetary policy. However, the Committee would be prepared to resume reinvestment of principal payments received on securities held by the Federal Reserve if a material deterioration in the economic outlook were to warrant a sizable reduction in the Committee’s target for the federal funds rate. Moreover, the Committee would be prepared to use its full range of tools, including altering the size and composition of its balance sheet, if future economic conditions were to warrant a more accommodative monetary policy than can be achieved solely by reducing the federal funds rate. The following material appeared as an addendum to the minutes of the June 13–14, 2017, meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee. In conjunction with the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting held on June 13–14, 2017, meeting participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real output growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for each year from 2017 to 2019 and over the longer run.8 Each participant’s projection was based on information available at the time of the meeting, together with his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy, including a path for the federal funds rate and its longer- run value, and assumptions about other factors likely to affect economic outcomes.9 The longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the value to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy.10 “Appropriate monetary policy” is defined as the future path of policy that each participant deems most likely to foster outcomes for economic activity and inflation that best satisfy his or her individual interpretation of the Federal Reserve’s objectives of maximum employment and stable prices. All participants who submitted longer-run projections expected that, under appropriate monetary policy, growth in real gross domestic product (GDP) this year would run somewhat above their individual estimates of its longer- run rate. Over half of these participants expected that economic growth would slow a bit in 2018, and almost all of them expected that in 2019 economic growth would run at or near its longer-run level. All participants who submitted longer-run projections expected that the unemployment rate would run below their estimates of its longer-run normal level in 2017 and remain below that level through 2019. The majority of participants also lowered their estimates of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment by 0.1 to 0.2 percentage point. All participants projected that inflation, as measured by the four-quarter percentage change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), would run below 2 percent in 2017 and then step up in the next two years; over half of them projected that inflation would be at the Committee’s 2 percent objective in 2019, and all judged that inflation would be within a couple of tenths of a percentage point of the objective in that year. Table 1 and figure 1 provide summary statistics for the projections. 8. Four members of the Board of Governors, one fewer than in March 2017, were in office at the time of the June 2017 meeting and submitted economic projections. The office of the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond was vacant at the time of this FOMC meeting; First Vice President Mark L. Mullinix submitted economic projections. 9. All participants submitted their projections in advance of the FOMC meeting; no projections were revised following the release of economic data on the morning of June 14. 10. One participant did not submit longer-run As shown in figure 2, participants generally expected that evolving economic conditions would likely warrant further gradual increases in the federal funds rate to achieve and sustain maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. Although some participants raised or lowered their federal funds rate projections since March, the median projections for the federal funds rate in 2017 and 2018 were essentially unchanged, and the median projection in 2019 was slightly lower; the median projection for the longer-run federal funds rate was Table 1. Economic projections of Federal Reserve Board members and Federal Reserve Bank presidents under their individual assessments of projected appropriate monetary policy, June 2017 Percent Longer run Longer run Longer run Core PCE inflation4 . . . . . . . March projection . . . . . . . . Memo: Projected appropriate policy path Note: Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP) and projections for both measures of inflation are percent changes from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. PCE inflation and core PCE inflation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) and the price index for PCE excluding food and energy. Projections for the unemployment rate are for the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. Each participant’s projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy. Longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. The projections for the federal funds rate are the value of the midpoint of the projected appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the projected appropriate target level for the federal funds rate at the end of the specified calendar year or over the longer run. The March projections were made in conjunction with the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on March 14–15, 2017. One participant did not submit longer-run projections for the change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, or the federal funds rate in conjunction with the March 14–15, 2017, meeting, and one participant did not submit such projections in conjunction with the June 13–14, 2017, meeting. 1. For each period, the median is the middle projection when the projections are arranged from lowest to highest. When the number of projections is even, the median is the average 2. The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each year. 3. The range for a variable in a given year includes all participants’ projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year. 4. Longer-run projections for core PCE inflation are not collected. unchanged. However, the economic outlook is uncertain, and participants noted that their economic projections and assessments of appropriate monetary policy could change in response to incoming information. In general, participants viewed the uncertainty attached to their projections as broadly similar to the average of the past 20 years, although a couple of participants saw the uncertainty associated with their real GDP growth forecasts as higher than average. Most participants judged the risks around their projections for economic growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation as broadly balanced. Figures 4.A through 4.C for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation, respectively, present “fan charts” as well as charts of participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks surrounding the economic projections. The fan charts (the panels at the top of these three figures) show the median projections surrounded by confidence intervals that are computed from the forecast errors of various private and government projections made over the past 20 years. The width of the confidence interval for each variable at a given point is a measure of forecast uncertainty at that horizon. For all three macroeconomic variables, these charts illustrate that forecast uncertainty is substantial and generally increases as the forecast horizon lengthens. Reflecting, in part, the uncertainty about the future evolution of GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation, participants’ assessments of appropriate monetary policy are also subject to considerable uncertainty. To illustrate the uncertainty regarding the appropriate path for monetary policy, figure 5 shows a comparable fan chart around the median projections for the federal funds rate.11 As with the 11. The fan chart for the federal funds rate depicts the uncertainty about the future path of appropriate monetary policy and is closely connected with the uncertainty about the future value of economic variables. In contrast, the dot plot shown in figure 2 displays the Figure 1. Medians, central tendencies, and ranges of economic projections, 2017–19 and over the longer run Longer run Longer run Longer run Longer run Note: Definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. The data for the actual values of the variables are annual. Longer run Note: Each shaded circle indicates the value (rounded to the nearest 1/8 percentage point) of an individual participant’s judgment of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the appropriate target level for the federal funds rate at the end of the specified calendar year or over the longer run. One participant did not submit longer-run projections for the federal funds rate. macroeconomic variables, forecast uncertainty for the federal funds rate is substantial and increases at longer horizons. The median of participants’ projections for the growth rate of real GDP, conditional on their individual assumptions about appropriate monetary policy, was 2.2 percent in 2017, 2.1 percent in 2018, and 1.9 percent in 2019; the median of projections for the longer-run normal rate of real GDP growth was 1.8 percent. Compared with the March Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), the medians of the forecasts for real GDP growth over the period from 2017 to 2019, as well as the median assessment of the longer-run growth rate, were mostly unchanged. Fewer than half of the participants incorporated expectations of fiscal stimulus into their projections, and a couple indicated that they had marked down the magnitude of expected fiscal stimulus relative to March. All participants revised down their projections for the unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of 2017 and of 2018, and almost all also revised down their projections for the unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of 2019. Many who did so cited recent lower- than-expected readings on unemployment. The median of the projections for the unemployment rate was 4.3 percent in 2017 and 4.2 percent in each of 2018 and 2019, 0.2 percentage point and 0.3 percentage point lower than in the March projections, respectively. The majority of participants also revised down their estimates of the longer- run normal rate of unemployment by 0.1 or 0.2 percentage point, and the median longer- run level was 4.6 percent, down 0.1 percentage point from March. Figures 3.A and 3.B show the distributions of participants’ projections for real GDP growth and the unemployment rate from 2017 to 2019 and in the longer run. The distribution of individual projections for real GDP growth for this year shifted up, with some participants now expecting real GDP growth between 2.4 and 2.5 percent and none seeing it below 2 percent. The distributions of projected real GDP growth in 2018, 2019, and in the longer run were broadly similar to the distributions of the March projections. The distributions of individual projections for the unemployment rate shifted down noticeably for 2017 and 2018. Most participants projected an unemployment rate of 4.2 or 4.3 percent at the end of this year, and the majority anticipated an unemployment rate between 4.0 and 4.3 percent at the end of 2018. Participants’ projections also shifted down in 2019 but were more dispersed than the distributions of their projected unemployment rates in the two earlier years. The distribution of projections for the longer-run normal unemployment rate shifted down modestly. The median of projections for headline PCE price inflation this year was 1.6 percent, down 0.3 percentage point from March. As in March, median projected inflation was 2.0 percent in 2018 and 2019. About half of the participants anticipated that inflation would continue to run a bit below 2 percent in 2018, while only one participant expected inflation above 2 percent in that year—and, in that case, just modestly so. More than half projected that inflation would be equal to the Committee’s objective in 2019. A few participants projected that inflation would run slightly below 2 percent in that year, while several projected that it would run a little above 2 percent. The median of projections for core PCE price inflation was 1.7 percent in 2017, a decline of 0.2 percentage point from March; the median projection for 2018 and 2019 was 2.0 percent, as in the March projections. Figures 3.C and 3.D provide information on the distributions of participants’ views about the outlook for inflation. The distributions of projections for headline PCE price inflation and for core PCE price inflation in 2017 shifted down noticeably from March, while the distributions for both measures of inflation in 2018 shifted down slightly. Many participants cited recent surprisingly low readings on inflation as a factor contributing to the revisions in their inflation forecasts. Figure 3.E provides the distribution of participants’ judgments regarding the appropriate target or midpoint of the target range for the federal funds rate at the end of each year from 2017 to 2019 and over the longer run.12 The distribution for 2017 was less dispersed than that in March, while the distribution for 2018 was slightly less 12. One participant’s projections for the federal funds rate, real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation were informed by the view that there are multiple possible medium-term regimes for the U.S. economy, that these regimes are persistent, and that the economy shifts between regimes in a way that cannot be forecast. Under this view, the economy currently is in a regime characterized by expansion of economic activity with low productivity growth and a low short-term real interest rate, but longer-term outcomes for variables other than inflation cannot be usefully projected. Figure 3.A. Distribution of participants’ projections for the change in real GDP, 2017 –19 and over the longer run Longer run Note: Definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Figure 3.B. Distribution of participants’ projections for the unemployment rate, 2017 –19 and over the longer run Longer run Note: Definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Figure 3.C. Distribution of participants’ projections for PCE inflation, 2017 –19 and over the longer run Longer run Note: Definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Note: Definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Figure 3.E. Distribution of participants’ judgments of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the appropriate target level for the federal funds rate, 2017–19 and over the longer run Longer run Note: Definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. dispersed. The distributions in 2019 and in the longer run were broadly similar to those in March. The median projections of the federal funds rate continued to show gradual increases, with the median assessment for 2017 standing at 1.38 percent, consistent with three 25 basis point increases this year. Thereafter, the medians of the projections were 2.13 percent at the end of 2018 and 2.94 percent at the end of 2019; the median of the longer-run projections of the federal funds rate was 3.00 percent. In discussing their June projections, many participants continued to express the view that the appropriate upward trajectory of the federal funds rate over the next few years would likely be gradual. That anticipated pace reflected a few factors, such as a neutral real interest rate that was currently low and was expected to move up only slowly as well as a gradual return of inflation to the Committee’s 2 percent objective. Several participants judged that a slightly more accommodative path of monetary policy than in their previous projections would likely be appropriate, citing an apparently slower rate of progress toward the Committee’s 2 percent inflation objective. In their discussions of appropriate monetary policy, half of the participants commented on the Committee’s reinvestment policy; all of those who did so expected a change in reinvestment policy before the end of this year. Projections of economic variables are subject to considerable uncertainty. In assessing the path of monetary policy that, in their view, is likely to be most appropriate, FOMC participants take account of the range of possible outcomes, the likelihood of those outcomes, and the potential benefits and costs to the economy should they occur. Table 2 provides one measure of forecast uncertainty for the change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, and total consumer price inflation—the root mean squared error (RMSE) for forecasts made over the past 20 years. This measure of Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges Note: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root mean squared error of projections for 1997 through 2016 that were released in the summer by var- ious private and government forecasters. As described in the box “Forecast Uncer- tainty,” under certain assumptions, there is about a 70 percent probability that actual outcomes for real GDP, unemployment, consumer prices, and the federal funds rate will be in ranges implied by the average size of projection errors made in the past. For more information, see David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip (2017), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook Using Historical Forecasting Errors: The Federal Reserve’s Approach,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-020 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February), avail- able at www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/feds/2017/files/2017020pap.pdf. 1. Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure that has been most widely used in government and private economic forecasts. Projection is percent change, fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. 3. For Federal Reserve staff forecasts, measure is the federal funds rate. For other forecasts, measure is the rate on 3-month Treasury bills. Historical projections are the average level, in percent, in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. forecast uncertainty is incorporated graphically in the top panels of figures 4.A, 4.B, and 4.C, which display fan charts plotting the median SEP projections for the three variables surrounded by symmetric confidence intervals derived from the RMSEs presented in table 2. If the degree of uncertainty attending these projections is similar to the typical magnitude of past forecast errors and if the risks around the projections are broadly balanced, future outcomes of these variables would have about a 70 percent probability of occurring within these confidence intervals. For all three variables, this measure of forecast uncertainty is substantial and generally increases as the forecast horizon lengthens. FOMC participants may judge that the width of the historical fan charts shown in figures 4.A through 4.C does not adequately capture their current assessments of the degree of uncertainty that surrounds their economic projections. Participants’ assessments of the current level of uncertainty surrounding their economic projections are shown in the bottom- left panels of figures 4.A, 4.B, and 4.C. All or nearly all participants viewed the uncertainty attached to their economic projections as broadly similar to the average of the past 20 years, with three fewer participants than in March seeing uncertainty about GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation as higher than its historical average.13 In their discussion of the uncertainty attached to their current projections, most participants again expressed the view that, at this point, uncertainty surrounding prospective changes in fiscal and other government policies is very large or that there is not yet enough information to make reasonable assumptions about the timing, nature, and magnitude of the changes. The fan charts—which are constructed so as to be symmetric around the median projections— also may not fully reflect participants’ current assessments of the balance of risks to their economic projections. Participants’ assessments of the balance of risks to their economic projections are shown in the bottom- right panels of figures 4.A, 4.B, and 4.C. As in March, most participants judged the risks to their projections of real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, headline inflation, and core inflation as broadly balanced—in other words, as broadly consistent with a symmetric fan chart. Three participants judged the risks to the unemployment rate as weighted to the downside, and one participant judged the risks as weighted to the upside (as shown in the lower-right panel of figure 4.B). In addition, the balance of risks to participants’ inflation projections shifted down slightly from March (shown in the lower-right panels of figure 4.C), as two fewer participants judged the risks to inflation to be weighted to the upside and two more viewed the risks as weighted to the downside. 13. At the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty” discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty in the economic forecasts and explains the approach used to assess the uncertainty and risks attending the participants’ projections. Participants’ assessments of the future path of the federal funds rate consistent with appropriate policy are also subject to considerable uncertainty, reflecting in part uncertainty about the evolution of GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation over time. The final line in table 2 shows the RMSEs for forecasts of short-term interest rates. These RMSEs are not strictly consistent with the SEP projections for the federal funds rate, in part because the SEP projections are not forecasts of the likeliest outcomes but rather reflect each participant’s individual assessment of appropriate monetary policy. However, the associated confidence intervals provide a sense of the likely uncertainty around the future path of the federal funds rate generated by the uncertainty about the macroeconomic variables and additional adjustments to monetary policy that may be appropriate to offset the effects of shocks to the economy. Figure 5 shows a fan chart plotting the median SEP projections for the appropriate path of the federal funds rate surrounded by confidence intervals derived from the results presented in table 2. As with the macroeconomic variables, forecast uncertainty is substantial and increases at longer horizons.14 14. If at some point in the future the confidence interval around the federal funds rate were to extend below zero, it would be truncated at zero for purposes of the chart shown in figure 5; zero is the bottom of the lowest target range for the federal funds rate that has been adopted by the Committee in the past. This approach to the construction of the federal funds rate fan chart would be merely a convention and would not have any implication for possible future policy decisions regarding the use of negative interest rates to provide additional monetary policy accommodation if doing so were appropriate. Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the percent change in real gross domestic product (GDP) from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The confidence interval around the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the confidence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reflect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections; these current assessments are summarized in the lower panels. Generally speaking, participants who judge the uncertainty about their projections as “broadly similar” to the average levels of the past 20 years would view the width of the confidence interval shown in the historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise, partici- pants who judge the risks to their projections as “broadly balanced” would view the confidence interval around their projec- tions as approximately symmetric. For definitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The confidence interval around the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the confidence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reflect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections; these current assessments are summarized in the lower panels. Generally speaking, participants who judge the uncertainty about their projections as “broadly similar” to the average levels of the past 20 years would view the width of the confidence interval shown in the historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise, participants who judge the risks to their projections as “broadly balanced” would view the confidence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For definitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Risks to core PCE inflation June projections March projections Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the percent change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The confidence interval around the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the confidence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reflect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections; these current assessments are summarized in the lower panels. Generally speaking, participants who judge the uncertainty about their projections as “broadly similar” to the average levels of the past 20 years would view the width of the confidence interval shown in the historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise, participants who judge the risks to their projections as “broadly balanced” would view the confidence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For definitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors Note: The blue and red lines are based on actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the Committee’s target for the federal funds rate at the end of the year indicated. The actual values are the midpoint of the target range; the median projected values are based on either the midpoint of the target range or the target level. The confidence interval around the median projected values is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years. The confidence interval is not strictly consistent with the projections for the federal funds rate, primarily because these projections are not forecasts of the likeliest outcomes for the federal funds rate, but rather projections of participants’ individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy. Still, historical forecast errors provide a broad sense of the uncertainty around the future path of the federal funds rate generated by the uncertainty about the macroeconomic variables as well as additional adjustments to monetary policy that may be appropriate to offset the effects of shocks to the economy. The confidence interval is assumed to be symmetric except when it is truncated at zero—the bottom of the lowest target range for the federal funds rate that has been adopted in the past by the Committee. This truncation would not be intended to indicate the likelihood of the use of negative interest rates to provide additional monetary policy accommodation if doing so was judged appropriate. In such situations, the Committee could also employ other tools, including forward guidance and large-scale asset purchases, to provide additional accommodation. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the confidence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reflect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections. * The confidence interval is derived from forecasts of the average level of short-term interest rates in the fourth quarter of the year indicated; more information about these data is available in table 2. The shaded area encompasses less than a 70 percent confidence interval if the confidence interval has been truncated at zero. The economic projections provided by the members of the Board of Governors and the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks inform discussions of monetary policy among policymakers and can aid public understanding of the basis for policy actions. Considerable uncertainty attends these projections, however. The economic and statistical models and relationships used to help produce economic forecasts are necessarily imperfect descriptions of the real world, and the future path of the economy can be affected by myriad unforeseen developments and events. Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, participants consider not only what appears to be the most likely economic outcome as embodied in their projections, but also the range of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of their occurring, and the potential costs to the economy should they occur. Table 2 summarizes the average historical accuracy of a range of forecasts, including those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports and those prepared by the Federal Reserve Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). The projection error ranges shown in the table illustrate the considerable uncertainty associated with economic forecasts. For example, suppose a participant projects that real gross domestic product (GDP) and total consumer prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty attending those projections is similar to that experienced in the past and the risks around the projections are broadly balanced, the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a probability of about 70 percent that actual GDP would expand within a range of 1.6 to 4.4 percent in the current year, 1.0 to 5.0 percent in the second year, and 0.8 to 5.2 percent in the third year. The corresponding 70 percent confidence intervals for overall inflation would be 1.2 to 2.8 percent in the current year, and 1.0 to 3.0 percent in the second and third years. Figures 4.A through 4.C illustrate these confidence bounds in “fan charts” that are symmetric and centered on the medians of FOMC participants’ projections for GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation. However, in some instances, the risks around the projections may not be symmetric. In particular, the unemployment rate cannot be negative; furthermore, the risks around a particular projection might be tilted to either the upside or the downside, in which case the corresponding fan chart would be asymmetrically positioned around the median projection. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over history, participants provide judgments as to whether the uncertainty attached to their projections of each economic variable is greater than, smaller than, or broadly similar to typical levels of forecast uncertainty seen in the past 20 years, as presented in table 2 and reflected in the widths of the confidence intervals shown in the top panels of figures 4.A through 4.C. Participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty surrounding their projections are summarized in the bottom-left panels of those figures. Participants also provide judgments as to whether the risks to their projections are weighted to the upside, are weighted to the downside, or are broadly balanced. That is, while the symmetric historical fan charts shown in the top panels of figures 4.A through 4.C imply that the risks to participants’ projections are balanced, participants may judge that there is a greater risk that a given variable will be above rather than below their projections. These judgments are summarized in the lower-right panels of figures 4.A through 4.C. As with real activity and inflation, the outlook for the future path of the federal funds rate is subject to considerable uncertainty. This uncertainty arises primarily because each participant’s assessment of the appropriate stance of monetary policy depends importantly on the evolution of real activity and inflation over time. If economic conditions evolve in an unexpected manner, then assessments of the appropriate setting of the federal funds rate would change from that point forward. The final line in table 2 shows the error ranges for forecasts of short-term interest rates. They suggest that the historical confidence intervals associated with projections of the federal funds rate are quite wide. It should be noted, however, that these confidence intervals are not strictly consistent with the projections for the federal funds rate, as these projections are not forecasts of the most likely quarterly outcomes but rather are projections of participants’ individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy and are on an end-of-year basis. However, the forecast errors should provide a sense of the uncertainty around the future path of the federal funds rate generated by the uncertainty about the macroeconomic variables as well as additional adjustments to monetary policy that would be appropriate to offset the effects of shocks to the economy. If at some point in the future the confidence interval around the federal funds rate were to extend below zero, it would be truncated at zero for purposes of the fan chart shown in figure 5; zero is the bottom of the lowest target range for the federal funds rate that has been adopted by the Committee in the past. This approach to the construction of the federal funds rate fan chart would be merely a convention; it would not have any implications for possible future policy decisions regarding the use of negative interest rates to provide additional monetary policy accommodation if doing so were appropriate. In such situations, the Committee could also employ other tools, including forward guidance and asset purchases, to provide additional accommodation. While figures 4.A through 4.C provide information on the uncertainty around the economic projections, figure 1 provides information on the range of views across FOMC participants. A comparison of figure 1 with figures 4.A through 4.C shows that the dispersion of the projections across participants is much smaller than the average forecast errors over the past 20 years. emerging market economy London interbank offered rate The Board of Governors is pleased to submit its Monetary Policy Report pursuant to section 2B of the Federal Reserve Act. statement on Longer-run goaLs and monetary PoLicy strategy Adopted effective January 24, 2012; as amended effective January 26, 2016 The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) is firmly committed to fulfilling its statutory mandate from the Congress of promoting maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates. The Committee seeks to explain its monetary policy decisions to the public as clearly as possible. Such clarity facilitates well-informed decisionmaking by households and businesses, reduces economic and financial uncertainty, increases the effectiveness of monetary policy, and enhances transparency and accountability, which are essential in a democratic society. Inflation, employment, and long-term interest rates fluctuate over time in response to economic and financial disturbances. Moreover, monetary policy actions tend to influence economic activity and prices with a lag. Therefore, the Committee’s policy decisions reflect its longer-run goals, its medium- term outlook, and its assessments of the balance of risks, including risks to the financial system that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. The inflation rate over the longer run is primarily determined by monetary policy, and hence the Committee has the ability to specify a longer-run goal for inflation. The Committee reaffirms its judgment that inflation at the rate of 2 percent, as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, is most consistent over the longer run with the Federal Reserve’s statutory mandate. The Committee would be concerned if inflation were running persistently above or below this objective. Communicating this symmetric inflation goal clearly to the public helps keep longer-term inflation expectations firmly anchored, thereby fostering price stability and moderate long-term interest rates and enhancing the Committee’s ability to promote maximum employment in the face of significant economic disturbances. The maximum level of employment is largely determined by nonmonetary factors that affect the structure and dynamics of the labor market. These factors may change over time and may not be directly measurable. Consequently, it would not be appropriate to specify a fixed goal for employment; rather, the Committee’s policy decisions must be informed by assessments of the maximum level of employment, recognizing that such assessments are necessarily uncertain and subject to revision. The Committee considers a wide range of indicators in making these assessments. Information about Committee participants’ estimates of the longer-run normal rates of output growth and unemployment is published four times per year in the FOMC’s Summary of Economic Projections. For example, in the most recent projections, the median of FOMC participants’ estimates of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment was 4.9 percent. In setting monetary policy, the Committee seeks to mitigate deviations of inflation from its longer-run goal and deviations of employment from the Committee’s assessments of its maximum level. These objectives are generally complementary. However, under circumstances in which the Committee judges that the objectives are not complementary, it follows a balanced approach in promoting them, taking into account the magnitude of the deviations and the potentially different time horizons over which employment and inflation are projected to return to levels judged consistent with its mandate. The Committee intends to reaffirm these principles and to make adjustments as appropriate at its annual organizational meeting each January. Effects of Movements in Oil Prices and the Dollar on Inflation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 Developments Related to Financial Stability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 Monetary Policy Divergence in the Advanced Economies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24 The Neutral Federal Funds Rate in the Longer Run . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32 Monetary Policy Implementation following the December 2015 FOMC Meeting . . . 34 Forecast Uncertainty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47 Note: Unless stated otherwise, the time series in the figures extend through, for daily data, February 4, 2016; for monthly data, January 2016; and, for quarterly data, 2015:Q4. In bar charts, except as noted, the change for a given period is measured to its final quarter from the final quarter of the preceding period. Indices LLC and/or its affiliates and have been licensed for use by the Board. Copyright © 2016 S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC, a subsidiary of the McGraw Hill Financial Inc., and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Redistribution, reproduction and/or photocopying in whole or in part are prohibited without written permission of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC. For more information on any of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC’s indices please visit www.spdji.com. S&P® is a registered trademark of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones® is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. Neither S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC, Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC, their affiliates nor their third party licensors make any representation or warranty, express or implied, as to the ability of any index to accurately represent the asset class or market sector that it purports to represent and neither S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC, Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC, their affiliates nor their third party licensors shall have any liability for any errors, omissions, or interruptions of any index or the data included therein. summary Labor market conditions continued to improve during the second half of 2015 and into early 2016. Payroll employment has increased at a solid average pace of 225,000 per month since June. The unemployment rate, which had reached a high of 10 percent in late 2009, declined from 5.3 percent last June to 4.9 percent in January. Although the unemployment rate now equals the median of Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants’ estimates of its longer-run normal level, other considerations suggest that some further improvement in labor market conditions is needed to achieve the Committee’s maximum employment mandate. The labor force participation rate remains somewhat below most assessments of its trend, and an unusually large number of people continue to work part time when they would prefer full-time employment. Inflation remains below the FOMC’s longer- run goal of 2 percent: The price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) rose only ½ percent over the 12 months ending in December. The PCE price index excluding food and energy items, which often provides a better indication of future inflation, also remained subdued, rising 1½ percent over that period. Inflation has been held down substantially by the drop in energy prices; declines in the prices of non-oil imported goods have contributed as well. Meanwhile, survey-based measures of longer-run inflation expectations have drifted down a little since the middle of last year and generally stand near the lower ends of their historical ranges; market-based measures of inflation compensation have fallen and are at low levels. Real gross domestic product (GDP) is reported to have increased at an annual rate of about 1¼ percent over the second half of the year, slower than the first-half pace. The expansion in economic activity reflected continued increases in private domestic final demand, supported by ongoing job gains and accommodative monetary policy. Government purchases rose modestly. By contrast, the rise in the foreign exchange value of the dollar over the past year and a half and the sluggish pace of economic activity abroad have continued to weigh on exports. In addition, the pace of inventory accumulation slowed markedly from its elevated first-half pace, thereby reducing overall GDP growth in the second half of 2015. Domestic financial conditions have become somewhat less supportive of economic growth since mid-2015. Recent months have been marked by bouts of turbulence in financial markets that largely reflected concerns about the global economic outlook and developments in oil markets. Broad measures of U.S. equity prices have declined, on net, roughly returning these indexes to levels that prevailed during the first half of 2014. And the dollar has strengthened further, on balance, since the summer of 2015. Corporate risk spreads have widened, particularly for lower- rated issuers. Nonetheless, interest rates for investment-grade issuers are generally still low, reflecting declines in yields on longer- term Treasury securities. Moreover, although debt issuance by lower-rated firms has slowed, credit flows to nonfinancial businesses have remained solid since the middle of last year, supported by continued strong bond issuance of higher-rated firms and by bank lending. Household access to credit was mixed, with mortgages and credit cards still difficult to access for some borrowers while student and auto loans remained broadly available, even to borrowers with lower credit scores. Overall, debt growth in the household sector has remained modest and continues to be concentrated among borrowers with strong credit histories. The U.S. financial system overall has been resilient to the stresses that have emerged since mid-2015, and financial vulnerabilities remain moderate. Regulatory capital ratios and holdings of liquid assets at large banking firms are at historically high levels. Usage of short-term wholesale funding in the financial system is relatively low, and the use of leverage to finance securities purchases has declined somewhat. The ratio of aggregate private nonfinancial credit to GDP is below most estimates of its long-run trend, although leverage of speculative-grade nonfinancial corporations has risen further since the middle of last year and is relatively high. Risk premiums for many asset classes have increased. For instance, the rise in spreads on corporate debt has been larger than would be expected given the evolution of expected defaults. The direct exposures of the largest U.S. banking firms to the oil sector and to emerging market economies are limited. If conditions in those sectors worsen, however, wider stresses could emerge and be transmitted to the United States through indirect global financial linkages. In December, after holding the federal funds rate near zero for seven years, the FOMC raised the target range for that rate to ¼ to ½ percent. The decision to increase the federal funds rate reflected the Committee’s assessment that there had been considerable improvement in the labor market last year and that the Committee was reasonably confident that inflation would move back to 2 percent over the medium term; thus, the criteria set out by the Committee in March 2015 had been met. The Committee anticipates that economic conditions will evolve in a manner that will warrant only gradual increases in the federal funds rate. This expectation is consistent with the view that the neutral nominal federal funds rate—defined as the value of the federal funds rate that would be neither expansionary nor contractionary if the economy was operating at its productive potential—is currently low by historical standards and is likely to rise only gradually over time, as headwinds to economic growth dissipate slowly and as inflation rises toward the Committee’s goal of 2 percent. Consistent with this outlook, in the most recent Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), which was compiled at the time of the December FOMC meeting, FOMC partic- ipants projected that the appropriate level of the federal funds rate would be below its longer-run level through 2018. (The December SEP is included as Part 3 of this report.) With respect to its securities holdings, the Committee will continue to reinvest principal payments from its securities portfolio, and it expects to maintain this reinvestment policy until normalization of the level of the federal funds rate is well under way. This policy, by keeping the Committee’s holdings of longer- term securities at sizable levels, should help maintain accommodative financial conditions. The Committee has emphasized that the actual path of monetary policy will depend on how incoming data affect the economic outlook. In determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range of the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. Stronger growth or a more rapid increase in inflation than the Committee currently anticipates would likely call for faster increases in the federal funds rate; conversely, if conditions prove weaker, a lower path of the federal funds rate would likely be appropriate. To move the federal funds rate into the new target range announced in December, the Federal Reserve raised the rate of interest paid on required and excess reserve balances and also employed an overnight reverse repurchase agreement facility. The effective federal funds rate was moved successfully into the increased target range. The FOMC remains confident that it has the tools it needs to adjust short- term interest rates as appropriate. The labor market continued to improve during the second half of last year and early this year. Payroll employment has increased 225,000 per month, on average, since June. The unemployment rate fell from 5.3 percent in June to 4.9 percent in January and thus has reached the median estimate among Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants of the level of unemployment that is considered to be normal in the longer run. Even so, the relatively low labor force participation rate and the unusually large number of people working part time who would prefer full-time employment suggest that some cyclical weakness is still present in the labor market. Since mid-2014, a steep drop in crude oil prices has exerted significant downward pressure on overall inflation, and declines in the prices of non-oil imported goods have held down inflation as well. The price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) increased only ½ percent during the 12 months ending in December, a rate that is well below the FOMC’s longer-run objective of 2 percent; the index excluding food and energy prices rose 1½ percent over the same period. Both survey- and market-based measures of inflation expectations have moved down since June. Meanwhile, real gross domestic product (GDP) increased at an annual rate of 1¼ percent over the second half of 2015, slower than in the first half. The growth in GDP has been supported by accommodative monetary policy, favorable consumer confidence, and the boost to household purchasing power from lower oil prices. However, lower oil prices have also exerted downward pressure on domestic investment in the energy sector. In addition, sluggish growth abroad and the higher foreign exchange value of the dollar have weighed on exports, and financial conditions more generally have become somewhat less supportive of economic growth. Concerns about economic conditions abroad and the energy sector have contributed to lower equity prices and higher borrowing rates for some businesses. The labor market has continued to improve . . . Labor market conditions strengthened further across a variety of dimensions over the second half of 2015 and early this year. Payroll employment gains remained robust, averaging about 235,000 per month over the second half of last year, similar to the gains over the first half; factoring in the January increase of about 150,000, monthly gains since June have averaged about 225,000 (figure 1). The increase in 2015 followed an even faster pace of job gains in 2014, and, in total, some 5¾ million jobs were added over the two years. In addition, the unemployment rate—which had reached 10 percent in late 2009—declined from 5.3 percent in June 2015 to 4.9 percent in January of this year; this level is ¾ percentage point lower than a year earlier and is equal to 1. Net change in payroll employment 2. Measures of labor underutilization NOTE: U-4 measures total unemployed plus discouraged workers, as a percent of the labor force plus discouraged workers. Discouraged workers are a subset of marginally attached workers who are not currently looking for work because they believe no jobs are available for them. U-5 measures total unemployed plus all marginally attached to the labor force, as a percent of the labor force plus persons marginally attached to the labor force. Marginally attached workers are not in the labor force, want and are available for work, and have looked for a job in the past 12 months. U-6 measures total unemployed plus all marginally attached workers plus total employed part time for economic reasons, as a percent of the labor force plus all marginally attached workers. The shaded bar indicates a period of business recession as defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research. 3. Labor force participation rate and employment-to-population ratio the median of FOMC participants’ estimates of its longer-run normal level (figure 2). Broader measures of labor underutilization, such as those including individuals who are classified as marginally attached to the labor force, declined by similar amounts. (A “marginally attached” individual is defined as someone who is not looking for work currently and therefore treated as not in the labor force, but who wants and is available for work and has looked for a job in the past 12 months.) . . . though some labor market slack likely remains . . . NOTE: Both series are a percent of the population aged 16 and over. SOURCE: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. While payroll employment and the unemployment rate have improved further since mid-2015, the labor force participation rate fell from an average of 62.7 percent of the working-age population during the second quarter of 2015 to 62.5 percent in the fourth quarter; the participation rate moved back up to 62.7 percent in January (figure 3). Changing demographics—most notably the increasing share of older people in the population, who are less likely to be in the labor force—and other longer-run structural changes in the labor market have continued to push down the participation rate even as cyclical forces have been pushing it up. That said, labor force participation appears to remain a little weaker than can be explained by structural factors alone, pointing to the likelihood that some slack remains in this dimension of labor utilization. In addition, although the share of workers who are employed part time but would like to work full time has fallen noticeably since June, it is still relatively high, indicating some scope for improvement on this dimension as well. . . . while labor compensation has shown some tentative signs of accelerating . . . As the labor market has continued to improve, the rates of increase in some measures of hourly labor compensation have begun to pick up while others remain relatively subdued. For example, average hourly earnings for all employees increased 2½ percent over the 12 months ending in January, above the 2 percent pace seen throughout most of the recovery (figure 4). In addition, compensation per hour in the business sector—a volatile measure derived from the labor compensation data in the national income and product accounts, or NIPA—is reported to have increased more quickly in 2015 than its average pace throughout most of the recovery. In contrast, the employment cost index for private industry workers, which measures both wages and the cost to employers of providing benefits, increased about 2 percent over the 12 months ending in December, similar to the pace seen throughout most of the recovery. All of these measures of compensation are increasing at slower rates than those seen prior to the recession. This deceleration probably reflects a variety of factors, including the slower growth of productivity, the slower pace of inflation, and perhaps some remaining slack in the labor market. Despite the continued relatively small increases in nominal wages, the recent very low inflation led to a noticeably 4. Measures of change in hourly compensation NOTE: The average hourly earnings data series begins in March 2007 and extends through January 2016. The compensation per hour and employment cost index data extend through 2015:Q4. For business-sector compensation, change is over four quarters; for the employment cost index, change is over the 12 months ending in the last month of each quarter; for average hourly earnings, change is from 12 months earlier. 5. Change in business sector output per hour NOTE: Changes are measured from Q4 of the year immediately preceding 6. Brent spot and futures prices NOTE: The data are weekly averages of daily data and extend through larger wage gain last year on a purchasing- power-adjusted (or so-called real) basis than had been evident earlier in the expansion. . . . and productivity growth has been lackluster Over time, increases in productivity are a key determinant of the rise in real wages and living standards. Labor productivity in the business sector increased at an annual rate of just ½ percent in 2015 and at an average annual rate of just 1 percent since the last business cycle peak in 2007 (figure 5). The average pace since 2007 is a little below the 1974–95 average and well below the pace during the period from the mid-1990s to 2007. The reasons behind the slower productivity performance in recent years are not well understood, but one factor seems to be the slower pace of capital accumulation. Falling oil prices continue to hold down overall consumer prices . . . Consumer price increases have remained muted and below the FOMC’s longer-run objective of 2 percent. As discussed in the box “Effects of Movements in Oil Prices and the Dollar on Inflation,” crude oil prices have plummeted since June 2014, and the dollar has moved appreciably higher; both factors have contributed importantly to the low inflation readings of the past year. Since July, the price of crude oil has fallen appreciably further, on net, with the spot price of Brent crude oil dropping below $35 per barrel, a level last seen more than a decade ago (the blue line in figure 6). Futures prices have also dropped significantly and indicate that market participants expect only modest price increases over the next few years. Although concerns about global growth have contributed to the fall in prices, much of the recent decline can be attributed to the abundance of global supply. Reductions in U.S. production have been slower and smaller than expected, and OPEC has abandoned its official production target in favor of maintaining robust production despite declining prices and the likely increase in Iranian oil exports in the coming months. The drop in crude oil prices continues to pass through to gasoline prices: The national average of retail gasoline prices (on a seasonally adjusted basis) moved down from more than $2.50 per gallon in June to about $2.00 per gallon in January. Largely because of the decline in energy prices, overall consumer price inflation, as measured by the PCE price index, was running at just ¼ percent for the 12 months ending in June 2015; the 12-month change remained near that pace until year-end, when it edged up to ½ percent as some of the sharpest declines from a year earlier fell out of the 12-month calculation (figure 7). Food prices were little changed over the past six months after edging down during the first half of 2015. Consumer food prices were held down in 2015 by falling food commodity prices, but futures markets suggest that these commodity prices will flatten out, implying that this source of downward pressure on consumer food price inflation is likely to wane. . . . but even outside of the energy and food categories, inflation has remained subdued As is also discussed in the box “Effects of Movements in Oil Prices and the Dollar on Inflation,” another important factor holding down inflation has been the behavior of import prices. After declining sharply in the first half of 2015, non-oil import prices continued to fall in the second half, albeit at a slightly more modest pace; the further declines in the second half reflected lower commodity prices as well as additional increases in the foreign exchange value of the dollar (figure 8). In addition, slack in labor and product markets likely placed downward pressure on inflation, although this factor has probably waned significantly. For all of these reasons, inflation for items other than food and energy (so-called core inflation) remained modest. Core PCE prices rose about 1½ percent over the 12 months ending in December, similar to the increase in 2014. 7. Change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures Excluding food and energy NOTE: The data extend through December 2015; changes are from one year 8. Non-oil import prices and U.S. dollar exchange rate NOTE: The data for non-oil import prices extend through December 2015. SOURCE: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics; Federal Reserve Over the past year, inflation has continued to run well below the Federal Open Market Committee’s longer-run objective of 2 percent (text figure 7). The 12-month change in the personal consumption expenditures (PCE) price index, which was about ½ percent in 2015, was held down most clearly by falling prices for oil and farm commodities. Falling prices for other commodities and the rise in the foreign exchange value of the dollar have also contributed importantly to continued low rates of inflation. Indeed, reflecting these influences, inflation for items other than food and energy remained relatively low, with core PCE price inflation at slightly under 1½ percent last year. Since the middle of 2014, crude oil prices have tumbled, with the spot price of the global benchmark Brent crude oil falling from over $115 per barrel to under $35 per barrel in recent weeks; prices for a wide variety of other commodities have also declined considerably. The pass-through of falling oil prices into lower gasoline prices is typically relatively rapid, and the drop in consumer energy prices held down overall PCE inflation directly by more than ½ percentage point in 2015. Falling farm commodity prices also reduced consumer food price inflation over the past year, although the pass-through of these commodity price changes into overall PCE inflation tends to be somewhat smaller and more gradual than with oil prices. Additionally, the sustained reduction in both oil and non-oil commodity prices has likely lowered core inflation somewhat by holding down firms’ production and distribution costs. Empirical estimates of the pass- through of energy costs into core inflation are generally quite small, with long and variable lags. Nonetheless, even with a small degree of pass-through, the very large declines in energy prices since the middle of 2014 have likely been holding down core consumer price inflation somewhat. The broad dollar has appreciated more than 20 percent since the middle of 2014, reflecting both heightened concerns about the global outlook, which have resulted in safe-haven flows toward dollar assets, and diverging expectations regarding domestic and foreign monetary policy (figure A). A stronger dollar makes foreign goods cheaper for U.S. consumers. An extensive literature, however, has found that the pass- through of exchange rate changes to U.S. import prices is incomplete—that is, less than proportionate—as foreign exporters prefer to absorb part of the exchange rate change by narrowing profit margins. For example, a typical estimate is that a 10 percent appreciation of the dollar causes the prices of non-oil imported goods to decline about 3 percent after one year.1 Roughly one-third of this effect occurs through the effect on imported commodities, as an increase in the value of the dollar tends to lower commodity prices proportionately. Because imported goods and services make up only a modest share of U.S. consumption, a given percentage decline in import prices causes a much smaller percentage reduction in core PCE prices. Figure B uses a simple econometric model to illustrate how a 10 percent appreciation of the dollar might affect core PCE inflation through this channel.2 According to this model, core PCE inflation dips in the two quarters following the appreciation before gradually returning to the baseline, leading to a four-quarter decline in core PCE inflation of about ¼ percentage point relative to the baseline in the first year following the shock. Given the size of the dollar’s appreciation since the middle of 2014, this model suggests that falling import prices depressed core PCE inflation about ½ percentage point last year. Although the exact magnitude of the dollar’s effect on inflation depends on the specific model used, 1. For more detail, see Joseph Gruber, Andrew McCallum, 2. This model was discussed in a recent speech by Chair yellen and is described in its appendix. See Janet L. yellen (2015), “Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy,” speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Mass., September 24, www. federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/yellen20150924a.htm. this exercise suggests that the stronger dollar has played a material role in holding down PCE inflation. Although further declines in energy prices or a further rise in the exchange value of the dollar are certainly possible, those movements will eventually stop. As these prices stabilize, the drag on consumer price inflation from oil and import prices will dissipate. Moreover, with margins of resource utilization having already diminished appreciably and longer-run inflation expectations reasonably stable, both core and overall inflation are likely to rise gradually toward 2 percent over the medium term as these transitory factors fade and the labor market improves further. NOTE: The x-axis represents the quarters following the 10 percent SOURCE: Federal Reserve Board staff calculations based on an econometric model described in the appendix to Janet L. Yellen (2015), “Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy,” speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Mass., September 24, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/yellen20150924a.htm. 9. Median inflation expectations NOTE: The Michigan survey data are monthly. The SPF data for inflation expectations for personal consumption expenditures are quarterly and extend from 2007:Q1 through 2015:Q4. 10. 5-to-10-year-forward inflation compensation NOTE: The data are weekly averages of daily data and extend through February 3, 2016, for inflation swaps, and February 4, 2016, for TIPS breakevens. TIPS is Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities. 11. Change in real gross domestic product, gross domestic income, and private domestic final purchases Survey- and market-based measures of inflation expectations have moved down since June Wage- and price-setting decisions are likely influenced by expectations for inflation. Survey measures of longer-term inflation expectations have been quite stable over the past 15 years but appear to have moved down some lately, including over the past 6 months, to the lower end of their historical ranges. This decline has occurred both for the measure of inflation expectations over the next 5 to 10 years as reported in the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers and for the median expectation for the annual rate of increase in the PCE price index over the next 10 years from the Survey of Professional Forecasters, conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia (figure 9). Market-based measures of medium- (5-year) and longer-term (5-to- 10-year-ahead) inflation compensation derived from the difference between yields on nominal Treasury securities and Treasury Inflation- Protected Securities moved down further, on net, over the second half of the year after having declined notably between mid-2014 and mid-2015 (figure 10). Although changes in inflation compensation could reflect changes in expected inflation, they also may reflect a variety of other considerations, including an inflation risk premium, liquidity premiums, and other factors.1 Economic activity expanded at a moderate pace in the second half of 2015 Real GDP is reported to have increased at an annual rate of 1¼ percent in the second half of last year, slower than the first-half pace (figure 11). As in the first half of the year, economic activity during the second half was supported by solid gains in private 1. For further discussion of inferring inflation domestic final purchases—that is, final purchases by households and businesses— and by modest increases in government purchases of goods and services. By contrast, aggregate demand continued to be held down by weak export performance, reflecting the rise in the foreign exchange value of the dollar and sluggish foreign economic growth. In addition, inventory investment slowed markedly from its ele vated first-half pace, thereby reducing overall GDP growth in the second half of 2015. Gains in income and wealth are supporting consumer spending . . . Real personal consumption expenditures rose at an annual rate of 2½ percent in the second half of 2015, about the same as the first-half pace (figure 12). These increases have been supported by income gains from the improving labor market as well as the fall in gasoline and other energy prices, which has bolstered consumers’ purchasing power. As a result, real disposable income—that is, income after taxes and adjusted for price changes—rose a robust 3½ percent in 2015 after a similar gain in 2014. Consumer spending last year was also likely supported by further increases in household net worth. Although the value of corporate equities edged down last year, prices of houses—which are owned much more widely than are corporate equities—posted significant gains, and the wealth-to-income ratio remained elevated relative to its historical average (figure 13). In nominal terms, national house price indexes are now close to their peaks of the mid-2000s, but relative to rents, house price valuations are much lower than a decade ago (figure 14). Coupled with low interest rates, the rise in incomes has lowered debt payment burdens for many households. The household debt service burden—the ratio of required principal and interest payments on outstanding household debt to disposable income, measured for the household sector as a whole—has remained at a very low level by historical standards 12. Change in real personal consumption expenditures and disposable personal income Personal consumption expenditures Disposable personal income 13. Wealth-to-income ratio NOTE: The data extend through 2015:Q3. The series is the ratio of 14. Nominal house prices and price-rent ratio NOTE: The data extend through December 2015. The CoreLogic price index is seasonally adjusted by Federal Reserve Board staff. The price-rent ratio is the ratio of nominal house prices to the consumer price index of rent of primary residence. The data are indexed to 100 in January 2000. 15. Household debt service NOTE: The data extend through 2015:Q3. Debt service payments consist of estimated required payments on outstanding mortgage and consumer debt. 16. Changes in household debt NOTE: Changes are calculated from year-end to year-end, except 2015 changes, which are calculated from Q3 to Q3. NOTE: The data are three-month moving averages and extend through January 2016. Consumer sentiment is indexed to 100 in 1966. Real income expectations are calculated as the net percent of survey respondents expecting family income to go up more than prices during the next year or two. (figure 15). As interest rates rise, the debt burden will move up only gradually, as most household debt is in fixed-interest products. . . . as is credit availability Consumer credit continued to expand moderately through late 2015, as lending standards for both auto lending and student loans remained accommodative (figure 16). In addition, credit card lending has been rebounding since early last year. Standards and terms on credit cards are still relatively tight for riskier borrowers, although there has been some modest increase in access for borrowers with subprime credit histories. Delinquencies on credit card and auto loans are still near historical lows, in part due to the tight standards. Consumer confidence remains high Household spending has also been supported by favorable consumer sentiment. For the past year or so, the overall index of consumer sentiment from the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers has registered levels comparable to those that prevailed before the recession (figure 17). Rising real incomes, partly driven by falling energy prices and improvements in the labor market, have likely driven up consumer confidence. These same factors are probably behind the more upbeat expectations that households report for real income changes over the next year or two, which are now near pre-recession levels. Residential construction has improved modestly The gradual recovery in residential construction activity continued over the second half of last year. Both single- and multifamily housing starts registered moderate increases in 2015 (figure 18). Sales of new and existing homes also rose moderately, abstracting from the temporary plunge in existing home sales in November, which reportedly reflected a lengthening in closing times due to new mortgage disclosure rules (figure 19). But while multifamily starts have recovered to their pre-recession level, single-family construction continues to be well below its earlier pace. The level of housing starts is still being held down by a meager pace of household formation, tighter-than-average mortgage credit supply, and shortages of skilled labor and other inputs in the construction sector. Although the October 2015 and January 2016 Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS) reports suggest that a gradual easing of bank lending standards has continued over the past six months, mortgage credit is still difficult to access for borrowers with low credit scores, undocumented income, or high debt-to- income ratios.2 For borrowers who can obtain credit, interest rates on mortgages remain near their historical lows, although they inched up, on net, over the second half of the year (figure 20). In 2015, outstanding mortgage debt rose for the first time since the recession as mortgage originations for home purchases increased and write-downs of mortgage debt continued to ebb. Overall business investment has slowed as a result of a sharp drop in investment in the energy sector Business investment (private nonresidential fixed investment) rose at an annual rate of only ½ percent during the second half of 2015 after increasing at a 3 percent pace during the first half of the year (figure 21). Spending on equipment rose modestly, and a bit faster than during the first half of 2015, but spending on intangibles, such as research and development, and investment in structures outside of drilling and mining flattened out after posting strong gains during the first half of the year. Investment in structures used in the energy sector continued to fall precipitously, as the drop in oil prices has scuttled investment in higher-cost oil and gas wells. For the year as a whole, the pace of overall business investment 2. The SLOOS is available on the Board’s website at 18. Private housing starts and permits NOTE: The data extend through December 2015. SOURCE: Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. 19. New and existing home sales Existing home sales NOTE: The data extend through December 2015. “Existing home sales” includes single-family, condo, townhome, and co-op sales. SOURCE: For new single-family home sales, Census Bureau; for existing 20. Mortgage rates and housing affordability through November 2015 and the mortgage rate data are weekly through February 3, 2016. At an index value of 100, a median-income family has exactly enough income to qualify for a median-priced home mortgage. Housing affordability is seasonally adjusted by Board staff. index data are monthly 21. Change in real private nonresidential fixed investment 22. Selected components of net financing for nonfinancial businesses NOTE: The data for the components except bonds are seasonally adjusted. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Board, Statistical Release Z.1, “Financial 23. Corporate bond yields, by securities rating NOTE: The yields shown are yields on 10-year bonds. SOURCE: BofA Merrill Lynch Global Research, used with permission. slowed compared with 2014, mostly as a result of the drop in the energy sector. Investment has been supported by low interest rates and financing conditions that are still generally accommodative, though somewhat less so than earlier. Corporate financing conditions have become somewhat less supportive Domestic financial conditions for nonfinancial firms have become somewhat less supportive of growth since last June, particularly for non-investment-grade firms. Equity prices have declined and bond spreads have widened amid concerns about the global economic outlook and oil prices. Downgrades of bonds issued by nonfinancial companies have increased, and the leverage of these companies is near the top end of its range over the past few decades. Nonetheless, profitability has remained high outside the energy sector. Against a backdrop of low interest rates, investment-grade nonfinancial businesses have continued to raise substantial amounts of funds in bond and loan markets since last June, in part to finance mergers and acquisitions activity (figure 22). Speculative-grade bond issuance also was solid for much of 2015 but diminished toward the end of the year as spreads widened notably, particularly for firms in the energy sector (figure 23). Loan demand remained strong across most major categories through the end of 2015. Of note, demand for commercial real estate (CRE) loans strengthened further and issuance of commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) remained robust. Credit conditions tightened for this sector as concerns about credit quality led to wider spreads on CMBS and, according to the results of the October and January SLOOS reports, a moderate number of banks had tightened lending standards for CRE loans, particularly for construction and land development. A modest fraction of banks also reported having tightened lending standards for commercial and industrial loans to firms of all sizes since the second quarter. The drag from federal fiscal policy has ended . . . After being a drag on aggregate demand during much of the expansion, federal fiscal policy has shifted to a more neutral stance as fiscal consolidation efforts have abated. During 2015, policy actions had little effect on taxes and transfers, and real federal purchases of goods and services edged up (figure 24). The federal budget deficit narrowed further in fiscal year 2015 to 2½ percent of GDP, largely reflecting the increase in tax receipts owing to the ongoing economic expansion as well as the modest increase in purchases (figure 25). A deficit of this size is small enough to stabilize the ratio of the debt held by the public to nominal GDP; that said, the current level of that ratio is elevated relative to its average over the post–World War II period (figure 26). The Congressional Budget Office projects the deficit to move up to about 3 percent of GDP in fiscal 2016. . . . and state and local government expenditures are rising moderately Fiscal conditions of most state and local governments continue to improve gradually. Tax revenues have been rising moderately, supported by the expansion of economic activity and increasing house prices. These governments boosted spending at a moderate rate in 2015. In particular, real state and local purchases of goods and services rose 1½ percent last year, as employment posted another modest gain and real construction spending rose markedly for the first time since the recession (figure 27). In contrast, net exports still held down growth in gross domestic product slightly Exports held about flat in the second half of 2015, weighed down by the appreciation of the dollar and by soft foreign economic growth (figure 28). Although the stronger dollar made imports more affordable, import growth was also relatively subdued. Imports for inputs related to oil exploration and production 24. Change in real government expenditures on consumption and investment 25. Federal receipts and expenditures NOTE: The receipts and expenditures data are on a unified-budget basis and are for fiscal years (October through September); gross domestic product (GDP) data are for the four quarters ending in Q3. SOURCE: Office of Management and Budget. 26. Federal government debt held by the public NOTE: The data extend through 2015:Q3. The data for gross domestic product (GDP) are at an annual rate. Federal debt held by the public equals federal debt less Treasury securities held in federal employee defined benefit retirement accounts, evaluated at the end of the quarter. 27. State and local employment and structures investment Billions of chained (2009) dollars, annual rate NOTE: The employment data are monthly, and the structures data are 28. Change in real imports and exports of goods and services 29. U.S. trade and current account balances NOTE: The current account data extend through 2015:Q3. GDP is gross were particularly weak, consistent with steep declines in that industry. In all, real net trade continued to be a drag on real GDP growth in the second half of 2015. Although the real trade balance deteriorated, the nominal trade balance was little changed in 2015 in part because the value of imports declined, largely because of the decline in oil prices. Still, the current account deficit widened a bit to near 3 percent of nominal GDP as U.S. net investment income declined (figure 29). The expected path for the federal funds rate over the next several years declined Despite further strengthening in labor market conditions and a range of other indicators that market participants viewed as consistent with continued expansion in the U.S. economy, market-based measures of the expected path of the federal funds rate over the next several years have moved down, on balance, since the middle of last year. Contributing to this shift were concerns about the foreign economic outlook and global disinflationary pressures, as well as Federal Reserve communications anticipating that economic conditions will warrant only gradual increases in the federal funds rate. Survey-based measures of the expected path of policy also moved down. According to the results of the most recent Survey of Primary Dealers, conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York just prior to the January FOMC meeting, respondents’ expectations for the federal funds rate target at the end of this year and next year were lower than those reported last June. Market- based measures of uncertainty about the policy rate approximately one to two years ahead declined, on balance, from their mid- 2015 levels. Longer-term Treasury yields decreased Yields on longer-term nominal Treasury securities have declined since the middle of last year on net (figure 30). The decreases in nominal yields largely reflected reductions in inflation compensation; yields on long- term inflation-protected Treasury securities were little changed. Participants in the U.S. Treasury market reportedly were particularly attentive to developments abroad, especially turbulence in Chinese financial markets, and to fluctuations in oil prices. Consistent with the changes in yields on Treasury securities, yields on 30-year agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS)—an important determinant of mortgage interest rates—decreased, on balance, over the second half of 2015 and early 2016 (figure 31). Broad equity price indexes decreased . . . Since the middle of last year, amid considerable volatility, broad measures of U.S. equity prices have decreased notably, on net, as concerns about the foreign economic outlook appeared to weigh on risk sentiment and the outlook for corporate earnings growth (figure 32). Stock prices for companies in the energy and basic materials sectors dropped sharply, reflecting the continued fall in oil and other commodity prices. Implied volatility for the overall S&P 500 index, as calculated from options prices, increased, on balance, since the middle of last year; at times, its movement was notable. . . . and risk spreads on speculative-grade corporate bonds moved up substantially, particularly for firms in the energy sector Credit spreads in the corporate sector have widened across the credit spectrum. The spread of yields on investment-grade corporate bonds to yields on Treasury securities of comparable maturity rose moderately, and credit spreads on speculative-grade bonds widened substantially. Spreads for firms in the energy sector increased particularly sharply, reflecting the further drops in the price of oil since late June. Mutual funds investing in speculative-grade bonds experienced significant outflows over the second half of 2015 and early 2016, and, in December, redemptions from one such fund were suspended. During the second half of last year, the respondents 30. Yields on nominal Treasury securities NOTE: The Treasury ceased publication of the 30-year constant maturity series on February 18, 2002, and resumed that series on February 9, 2006. 31. Yield and spread on agency mortgage-backed securities NOTE: The data are daily. Yield shown is for the Fannie Mae 30-year current coupon, the coupon rate at which new mortgage-backed securities would be priced at par, or face, value. Spread shown is to the average of the 5- and 10-year nominal Treasury yields. 32. Equity prices NOTE: For Dow Jones Indices licensing information, see the note on the to the Senior Credit Officer Opinion Survey on Dealer Financing Terms reported a moderate deterioration in liquidity and market functioning in speculative-grade corporate bonds and some tightening of the terms under which dealers were willing to provide financing to clients against such bonds.3 In addition, some metrics of corporate bond market liquidity suggest a slight deterioration over the second half of 2015 and early 2016, though most indicators remain at levels comparable with those seen prior to the crisis. For further discussion of corporate bond markets and other financial stability issues, see the box “Developments Related to Financial Stability.” Short-term funding markets continued to function well Short-term dollar funding markets have functioned smoothly during the second half of 2015 and early 2016. Markets for unsecured offshore dollar funding and repurchase agreements, or repos, generally did not exhibit signs of stress. Year-end funding pressures were modest. Money market participants continued to focus on the Federal Reserve’s use of its monetary policy tools. These tools proved effective in raising the federal funds rate following the FOMC’s decision to increase the target range in December, while other money market rates also moved up broadly in line with the increase in the federal funds target range. For a detailed discussion, see the box “Monetary Policy Implementation following the December 2015 FOMC Meeting” in Part 2. Treasury market functioning and liquidity conditions in the mortgage-backed securities market were generally stable Indicators of Treasury market functioning have remained broadly stable over the second half of 2015 and early 2016. A variety of 3. More information on the Senior Credit Officer Opinion Survey on Dealer Financing Terms is available on the Board’s website at www.federalreserve.gov/ econresdata/releases/scoos.htm. liquidity metrics—including bid-asked spreads and bid sizes—have displayed no notable signs of liquidity pressures over the same period. In addition, Treasury auctions generally continued to be well received by investors. Liquidity conditions in the agency MBS market were also generally stable. Dollar- roll-implied financing rates for production coupon MBS—an indicator of the scarcity of agency MBS for settlement—suggested limited settlement pressures over the second half of 2015 and early 2016. Bank credit has continued to expand and bank profitability rose further Aggregate credit provided by commercial banks increased at a solid pace in the second half of 2015 (figure 33). The expansion in bank credit was mainly driven by strong growth in loans coupled with an increase in banks’ holdings of agency MBS. The growth of loans on banks’ books was generally consistent with the SLOOS reports of increased loan demand for many loan categories. Measures of bank profitability remained below their historical averages but improved slightly during the third quarter of 2015 (the latest available data), supported by lower noninterest expenses (figure 34). Net interest margins were about unchanged, on average, during the third quarter. Delinquency and charge-off rates for most major loan types were generally stable, near or at their lowest levels since the financial crisis. Among large bank holding companies (BHCs), despite generally positive third- and fourth- quarter earnings reports, equity prices have decreased markedly, on balance, since the middle of last year. The decline in bank equity prices likely reflected concerns about global growth, the effects of a flatter yield curve on the outlook for bank profitability, and potential losses due to the decrease in energy prices. Credit default swap (CDS) spreads for large BHCs increased on net. 33. Ratio of total commercial bank credit to nominal gross domestic product 34. Profitability of bank holding companies NOTE: The data, which are seasonally adjusted, are quarterly and extend Financial vulnerabilities in the U.S. financial system overall have continued to be moderate since mid-2015. Regulatory capital and liquidity ratios at large banking firms are at historically high levels, and the use of short-term wholesale funding remains relatively low. Debt growth in the household sector continues to be modest and concentrated among borrowers with strong credit histories. Some areas where valuation pressures were a concern have cooled recently; in particular, risk premiums for below-investment-grade debt have widened. However, high leverage of nonfinancial corporations makes some firms highly vulnerable to adverse developments, such as lower oil prices or slowing global growth. vulnerabilities owing to leverage and maturity transformation in the financial sector remain low. Regulatory capital ratios at U.S. banking firms increased further in the third quarter of 2015, and holdings of high-quality liquid assets at banking firms also remain at very high levels. In addition, some of the largest domestic banks have reduced their reliance on potentially less stable types of short-term funding. The aggregate delinquency rate on bank loans declined to its lowest level since 2006, though delinquency rates on loans to the oil and gas industry, which account for a small share of most banks’ portfolios, have increased. Bank underwriting practices in the leveraged loan market have improved, on balance, over the past year but occasionally still fall short of supervisory expectations. Moreover, domestic banking firms have only limited exposure to emerging market economies. However, developments in foreign economies and financial markets, particularly an escalation of recent volatility or a worsening of the outlook for China, could transmit risks through indirect financial linkages. NOTE: The spread is the 10-year yield for corporate bonds less the 10-year Treasury yield; bond yields are estimated from a smoothed curve fit to bond yields, and Treasury yields are estimated from a smoothed curve fit to off-the-run Treasury securities. Research, used with permission. of speculative-grade bonds and leveraged loans has slowed significantly, which also could reflect, in part, an increase in investors’ risk aversion. Despite the volatility, most indicators of liquidity conditions in corporate bond markets, such as trading volumes and bid-asked spreads, deteriorated only slightly. Nonetheless, the suspension of redemptions in December by a high-yield bond mutual fund that had a high concentration of very low-rated debt and had experienced persistent outflows highlighted a vulnerability at open-end mutual funds that offer daily redemptions to investors while holding less-liquid assets. Net secured borrowing by dealers, primarily used to finance their own portfolios of securities, continued to decrease and is near historical lows, while securities financing activities aimed at facilitating clients’ transactions also remain at low levels. The latter is consistent with reports that dealers have tightened price terms for securities financing and derivatives. The volume of margin loans outstanding—an important component of overall leverage used by hedge funds— appears to have moderated. Short-term funding levels remain relatively low, though reforms aimed at reducing structural vulnerabilities in those markets are still being implemented. Commercial real estate prices continued to rise, supported in part by improved fundamentals, and commercial real estate lending by banks accelerated in recent quarters. However, spreads on securities backed by commercial mortgages widened further and bank lending standards reportedly have tightened since July, suggesting that financing conditions have become a little less accommodative. In addition, late last year, federal banking regulators issued a joint statement reinforcing existing guidance for prudent risk management in that sector.1 Residential home prices also continued to increase. However, price-to-rent ratios do not suggest that valuations are notably above Overall asset valuation pressures have eased. Corporate bond spreads increased notably and are now above their historical norms (figure A). Those spreads appear to have risen by more than the compensation required for higher expected losses, suggesting risk premiums have also increased. Issuance 1. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, historical norms, and residential mortgage debt growth remains minimal. Broad equity indexes have declined significantly since July 2015, and forward price-to-earnings ratios have fallen to a level closer to their averages of the past three decades. yields on longer-term Treasury securities decreased over that period, and estimates of term premiums remained low. Because many assets are priced based on Treasury yields, their low level continues to pose a risk to valuations of assets that have lower-than- average earnings yields. However, in December, the Federal Reserve’s increase in the target range for the federal funds rate did not result in significant changes in longer-term interest rates or their volatility. The ratio of private nonfinancial sector credit to gross domestic product remains below estimates of its long-term upward trend, reflecting subdued levels of household debt. Debt growth in the nonfinancial business sector has slowed in recent months, particularly among speculative-grade and unrated firms. However, leverage of such firms has risen to historical highs, especially among those in the oil industry, a development that points to somewhat elevated risks of distress for some business borrowers. As part of its effort to improve the resilience of financial institutions and overall financial stability, the Federal Reserve Board has taken several further regulatory steps. First, the Board finalized a rule that increases risk-based capital requirements for U.S. global systemically important bank holding companies (G-SIBs).2 The applicable surcharges are calibrated based on the systemic footprint of each U.S. G-SIB so that the amount of additional capital a firm must hold increases with the costs that its failure would impose in terms of U.S. financial stability. The G-SIB surcharge rule is designed to ensure that U.S. G-SIBs either hold substantially more capital, reducing the likelihood that they will fail, or choose to shrink their systemic footprint, reducing the harm that their failure would do to the financial system. Second, the Board announced that it is seeking public comment on its proposed framework for setting the Countercyclical Capital Buffer (CCyB) and voted to affirm the CCyB amount at the current level of 0 percent—consistent with the continued moderate level of financial vulnerabilities.3 The 2. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2015), “Federal Reserve Board Approves Final Rule Requiring the Largest, Most Systemically Important U.S. Bank Holding Companies to Further Strengthen Their Capital Positions,” press release, July 20, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/ bcreg/20150720a.htm. 3. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System buffer is a macroprudential tool that can be used to increase the resilience of the financial system by raising capital requirements on internationally active banking organizations when there is an elevated risk of above-normal losses in the future. The CCyB would then be available to help those banking organizations absorb shocks associated with worsening credit conditions, and it may also help moderate fluctuations in the supply of credit. In releasing the framework for comment, the Board consulted with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. Should the Board decide to increase the CCyB amount in the future, banking organizations would have 12 months before the change became effective, unless the Board established an earlier effective date. Third, the Board issued for public comment a proposed rule that would impose total loss-absorbing capacity and long-term debt requirements on U.S. G-SIBs and on the U.S. operations of certain foreign G-SIBs.4 The proposal would require each covered firm to maintain a minimum amount of unsecured long-term debt that could be converted into equity in a resolution of the firm, thereby recapitalizing the firm without putting public money at risk. The proposal would diminish the threat that a G-SIB’s failure would pose to financial stability and is an important step in addressing the perception that certain institutions are “too big to fail.” Finally, the Board, acting in conjunction with other federal regulatory agencies, issued a final rule imposing minimum margin requirements on certain derivatives transactions that are not centrally cleared.5 The swap margin rule will reduce the risk that derivatives transactions would act as a channel for financial contagion and, by imposing higher margin requirements on uncleared swaps than apply to cleared swaps, will incentivize market participants to shift derivatives activity to central clearinghouses. 4. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 5. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 35. U.S. dollar exchange rate indexes Emerging market economies NOTE: The data, which are in foreign currency units per dollar, are weekly averages of daily data and extend through February 4, 2016. The M2 measure of the money stock has increased at an average annualized rate of about 6 percent since last June, about the same pace registered in the first half of 2015 and faster than nominal GDP growth. Demand for liquid deposits has continued to boost M2 growth. Municipal bond markets functioned smoothly, but some issuers remained strained Credit conditions in municipal bond markets have generally remained stable since the middle of last year. Over that period, the MCDX—an index of CDS spreads for a broad portfolio of municipal bonds—and ratios of yields on 20-year general obligation municipal bonds to those on longer-term Treasury securities edged up on net. Nevertheless, significant financial strains were still evident for some issuers. In particular, Puerto Rico, which continued to face challenges from subdued economic performance, severe indebtedness, and other fiscal pressures, defaulted on some bond issues not backed by guarantees from the commonwealth and is seeking to restructure its debt. The dollar continued to strengthen . . . The foreign exchange value of the dollar rose further, on net, since the middle of last year, bringing its increase since mid- 2014, when the most recent run-up began, to over 20 percent by the beginning of 2016 (figure 35). Expectations that the Federal Reserve would soon start increasing its policy interest rates, even while most foreign central banks maintained or expanded monetary policy accommodation, boosted the value of the dollar. (For more discussion, see the box “Monetary Policy Divergence in the Advanced Economies.”) The dollar has also appreciated against the renminbi since last summer, when the People’s Bank of China (PBOC) announced it was changing its policy to allow market forces to play a greater role in determining the renminbi’s exchange rate. The PBOC allowed the renminbi to depreciate 3 percent against the dollar in August and another 1½ percent after the turn of the year. These developments, which contributed to intensified uncertainty about China’s exchange rate policy and the prospects for its economy, fostered episodes of global market turbulence that further boosted the dollar. Investors became more focused on downside risks to prospects for growth in China and, by implication, global growth. These concerns about growth, along with still-strong oil production and high inventories, contributed to a sharp drop in commodity prices, which in turn weighed on the currencies of several commodity-exporting countries. . . . while equity prices and foreign sovereign bond yields have declined Triggered in part by the unexpected devaluation of the renminbi and an ensuing increase in concerns about global economic growth, equity indexes have dropped, on net, in most emerging market economies (EMEs) and advanced foreign economies (AFEs) since the beginning of the summer (figure 36). In particular, Chinese stock prices tumbled more than 40 percent despite official interventions, including circuit breakers and bans on stock sales, that were intended to mute some of the downward pressure. The fall in Brazilian stock prices was also very sharp, as global market turbulence as well as domestic developments, including a corruption scandal, declining output, and persistent high inflation, prompted stock prices to fall nearly 25 percent since last summer. As in the United States, 10-year sovereign yields declined in most AFEs, likely in part because of increasing concerns about potential deflationary pressure amid falling commodity prices (figure 37). In the euro area, Greek sovereign yields, which had risen sharply in the first half of the year, declined substantially 36. Equity indexes for selected foreign economies Emerging markets NOTE: The data are weekly averages of daily data and extend through February 4, 2016. For Dow Jones Indices licensing information, see the note on the Contents page. 37. 10-year nominal benchmark yields in selected advanced economies NOTE: The data are weekly averages of daily data and extend through As recovery has gradually taken hold in the U.S. economy over the past few years, both activity and inflation in the advanced foreign economies (AFEs) have remained persistently weak. This divergence in the economic outlooks for the United States and the AFEs has led to expectations of divergence in their monetary policies. Although the Federal Reserve raised its target for the federal funds rate in December, policy rates in most AFEs are near zero (and negative for several economies) and are expected to remain low for several years. Furthermore, the European Central Bank (ECB) and Bank of Japan are providing further monetary accommodation through sizable asset purchase programs, and both of these central banks have indicated that asset purchases will continue, given that inflation remains well below target. Given this ongoing monetary easing, the average policy rate expected by market participants over the next 24 months has declined in the euro area and Japan since 2014, while that of the federal funds rate gradually increased over this period as “liftoff” approached (figure A). Two effects of these policy divergences that operate through financial markets have important consequences for the economies involved.1 First, and most obviously, monetary policy divergences have given rise to changes in exchange rates: Portfolio rebalancing by international investors toward economies and currencies with higher interest rates has put downward pressure on AFE currencies, and the dollar has appreciated significantly against these currencies since mid-2014 (text figure 35). This dollar appreciation has contributed to the drag that U.S. net exports have exerted on U.S. economic growth in recent quarters, but the stronger dollar also has contributed to cyclical stabilization abroad as expenditures have shifted toward weaker economies. This effect on international trade is also a consideration for U.S. and foreign monetary policies: All else being equal, a smaller contribution to the U.S. economy from the external sector likely points to a more gradual pace of policy normalization in the United States. By the same token, the economic stimulus from more- depreciated currencies abroad may allow AFE central banks to provide less monetary accommodation—or to start removing it earlier—than would otherwise be the case. A. Two-year overnight index swap rates in selected are observed between U.S. and German yields on days when the Federal Reserve has made policy announcements. In the context of economic and policy divergences, these monetary policy spillovers may alter financial conditions in other countries in ways that are not necessarily consistent with their cyclical stabilization needs. For example, recent monetary easing abroad likely has had a tempering effect on longer-term U.S. interest rates that partially offsets the effect of our own policy normalization. Analogously, reduced monetary accommodation in the United States likely will partially offset the effect of greater monetary accommodation abroad. However, the implications of current policy divergences for monetary spillovers should not be exaggerated: U.S. policy remains accommodative and, on net, likely continues to contribute to accommodative conditions abroad. Second, the effect of monetary policy actions on financial conditions may spill over to interest rates in other countries. For example, on ECB policy announcement days, changes in U.S. and German long-term sovereign yields historically have been highly correlated (figure B); similarly large correlations 1. For more detail, see John Ammer, Michiel De Pooter, Christopher Erceg, and Steven Kamin (2016), “International Spillovers of Monetary Policy,” IFDP Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 8), www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/notes/ ifdp-notes/2016/international-spillovers-of-monetary- policy-20160208.html. 25 -20 -15 -10 5 NOTE: Each point represents the one-day change in U.S. and German 10-year yields on the day of an ECB policy announcement between March 1999 and April 2015. The line indicates the line of best fit. as an agreement was reached last summer between the European Union and Greece. In contrast, bond spreads in a number of EMEs rose modestly, on net, in the second half of the year before moving up more steeply after the start of 2016 amid a widespread increase in risk aversion. Growth in the emerging market economies moved back up from earlier in 2015 . . . Following weak growth in the first half of 2015, economic activity in the EMEs improved in the second half, as the pace of growth picked up in Asia and Latin America (figure 38). However, growth has been held back in part by exports from EMEs, which declined appreciably early in 2015 and remain subdued on average. Economic activity in most of emerging Asia, which had been restrained in the first half of the year by soft external demand and by the outbreak of MERS (Middle East Respiratory Syndrome) in South Korea, picked up in the second half, as the drag from these pressures subsided. In China, GDP growth is reported to have held steady around 7 percent in the second half of the year, boosted in part by relatively strong growth in services. However, weak manufacturing, as well as the financial market volatility noted previously, led to a pronounced heightening of concerns about the economy during the second half of the year. In Latin America, the decline in commodity prices, along with other macroeconomic challenges, continued to weigh on the economic activity of several countries. In Mexico, the economy continued to grow at a moderate pace in the second half of 2015, supported by improving household demand. However, low oil prices have pressured public finances, and manufacturing exports faltered toward the end of the year. In Brazil, the economy is undergoing its most severe recession in decades. Tight monetary policy in response to high inflation, low commodity 38. Real gross domestic product growth in selected emerging market economies Gross domestic product of Brazil is not yet available for 2015:Q4. NOTE: The data for Mexico incorporate the flash estimate for 2015:Q4. The data for China are seasonally adjusted by staff. The data for Mexico, Brazil, and Korea are seasonally adjusted by their respective government agencies. SOURCE: For China, China National Bureau of Statistics; for Korea, Bank of Korea; for Mexico, Instituto Nacional de Estadistica Geografia e Informatica; for Brazil, Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estadistica; all via Haver Analytics. 39. Real gross domestic product growth in selected advanced foreign economies Gross domestic products of the euro area, Japan, and Canada are not yet prices, and the fallout from a high-profile corruption scandal eroded business confidence and contributed to a collapse in investment. Inflation remained subdued in many EMEs, as the continuing decline in commodity prices contributed to a moderation of headline inflation. Consequently, some central banks, including those of Korea and India, loosened monetary policy to support growth. In China, the PBOC also lowered its benchmark rate and cut the reserve requirement ratio in August and October to address weakness in the economy. In contrast, faced with inflationary pressures stemming partly from their depreciating currencies, Brazil, Chile, and Colombia raised their policy rates in the second half of 2015. . . . and in the advanced foreign economies, economic activity expanded at a moderate pace In Canada, where low oil prices induced a mild contraction earlier in the year, economic activity rebounded in the third quarter as exports recovered and business-sector investment contracted at a slower pace. That said, more recent indicators of growth weakened markedly during the fourth quarter. In contrast, in the euro area, Japan, and the United Kingdom, economic activity grew moderately in the third quarter, and recent indicators for fourth-quarter growth, such as purchasing managers indexes, have largely held steady (figure 39). As in the United States, inflation remained low in most advanced foreign economies. Further declines in commodity prices weighed on inflation in the AFEs; in the euro area, Japan, and the United Kingdom, consumer prices changed little in 2015. Over the same period, consumer prices rose about 1½ percent in Canada, reflecting the boost to import prices from the sharp depreciation of the Canadian dollar over the past year. With inflation low, AFE central banks maintained highly accommodative monetary policies, and some signaled their intention to maintain large balance sheets well into the future. The European Central Bank, in addition to lowering its deposit rate further into negative territory, announced an extension of the intended duration of its asset purchase program through at least March 2017 and that it would reinvest principal payments for as long as necessary. The Bank of England announced that it will start shrinking its balance sheet only after its policy rate rises to about 2 percent from its current level of ½ percent. Meanwhile, in response to weak economic performance earlier in 2015, the Bank of Canada cut its policy rate further. More recently, the Bank of Japan cut the interest rate that it pays on a portion of banks’ current account deposits to negative 0.1 percent. In December, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) raised the target range for the federal funds rate by ¼ percentage point after seven years in which that rate had been held near zero. The FOMC’s decision reflected the considerable improvement in the labor market last year and the Committee’s assessment that, even with the modest reduction in policy accommodation, the labor market would continue to strengthen and inflation would return over the medium term to the FOMC’s 2 percent objective. Monetary policy remains accommodative, and the Committee expects that economic conditions will warrant only gradual increases in the federal funds rate. However, the actual path of the federal funds rate will depend on the economic outlook as informed by incoming data. The FOMC raised the federal funds rate target range in December . . . Since last March, the FOMC had anticipated that it would be appropriate to increase the federal funds rate when it had seen further improvement in the labor market and was reasonably confident that inflation would move back to 2 percent over the medium term. In December, the FOMC, judging that these criteria had been met, raised the target range for the federal funds rate to ¼ to ½ percent (figure 40).4 The Committee’s decision to raise the federal funds rate recognized the time it takes for policy actions to affect future economic outcomes; if the FOMC delayed the start of policy normalization for too long, a relatively abrupt tightening of policy might eventually be needed to keep the economy from overheating and inflation from significantly overshooting the Committee’s 2 percent objective. Such an abrupt tightening could disrupt financial markets and perhaps even inadvertently push the economy into recession. 4. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Sys- tem (2015), “Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement,” press release, December 16, www.federalreserve.gov/news events/press/monetary/20151216a.htm. . . . but monetary policy remains accommodative 40. Selected interest rates NOTE: The 2-year and 10-year Treasury rates are the constant-maturity yields based on the most actively traded securities. The dates on the horizontal axis are those of regularly scheduled Federal Open Market Committee meetings. policy remains accommodative. The FOMC anticipates that economic conditions will evolve in a manner that will warrant only gradual increases in the federal funds rate, and that the federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some time, below the levels that are expected to prevail in the longer run. This expectation is consistent with the view that the neutral nominal federal funds rate— defined as the value of the federal funds rate that would be neither expansionary nor contractionary if the economy was operating at its productive potential—is currently low by historical standards and is likely to rise only gradually over time. One indication that the neutral federal funds rate is low is that U.S. economic growth has been only moderate in recent years despite the very low level of the federal funds rate and the Federal Reserve’s very large holdings of longer-term securities. Had the neutral rate been running closer to the average level estimated to have prevailed in recent decades, these policy actions would have been expected to foster a much more rapid economic expansion. An array of persistent economic headwinds have weighed on aggregate demand since the financial crisis; these headwinds included, at various times, limited access to credit for some borrowers, contractionary fiscal policy, and weak growth abroad coupled with a significant appreciation of the dollar. Although the overall restraint imposed by such headwinds has declined over the past few years, the effects of some headwinds have remained significant. As these effects abate further, the neutral federal funds rate should gradually move higher over time. (For a discussion of how the neutral federal funds rate is likely to evolve over time, see the box “The Neutral Federal Funds Rate in the Longer Run.”) Another reason that the Committee expects only a gradual increase in the federal funds rate will be warranted is that, with the federal funds rate near zero, the FOMC can respond more readily to upside surprises to inflation, economic growth, and employment than to downside shocks. This asymmetry suggests that it is appropriate to be more cautious in normalizing the stance of monetary policy than would be the case if short-term nominal interest rates were appreciably above zero. In part reflecting this concern, the FOMC continued to reinvest principal payments from its securities portfolio, and the Committee expects that this reinvestment policy will be maintained until normalization of the level of the federal funds rate is well under way. Maintaining sizable holdings of longer-term securities should help support accommodative financial conditions and reduce the risk that the Committee would not be able to deliver sufficient accommodation by lowering the federal funds rate in the event of future adverse shocks. The FOMC expects that, supported by an accommodative monetary policy, economic activity will continue to expand at a moderate pace and the labor market will continue to strengthen. Inflation is expected to remain low in the near term, in part because of recent further declines in energy prices, but to rise to 2 percent over the medium term as the transitory effects of declines in energy and import prices dissipate and the labor market strengthens further. In light of the current shortfall of inflation from 2 percent, the Committee is carefully monitoring actual and expected progress toward its inflation goal. The FOMC’s policy decisions will continue to be data dependent Although the Committee expects that economic conditions will warrant only gradual increases in the federal funds rate, the Committee has emphasized that the actual path of monetary policy will depend on how incoming data affect the economic outlook. In determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. Stronger growth or a more rapid increase in inflation than the Committee currently anticipates would likely call for faster increases in the federal funds rate; conversely, if conditions prove weaker, a lower path of the federal funds rate would likely be appropriate. Similarly, the timing of a change in the reinvestment policy will depend on economic developments and their implications for progress toward the FOMC’s goals of maximum employment and price stability. In assessing realized changes in economic conditions and forming its outlook, the Committee will take into account a wide range of measures, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. The size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet has remained stable mortgage-backed securities at approximately $1.8 trillion. Consequently, total liabilities on the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet were largely unchanged. Given the Federal Reserve’s large securities holdings, interest income on the SOMA portfolio has continued to support substantial remittances to the U.S. Treasury Department. Preliminary results indicate that the Reserve Banks provided for payments of $97.7 billion of their estimated 2015 net income to the Treasury. In addition, the Reserve Banks transferred to the Treasury $19.3 billion from their capital surplus as required by an amendment to the Federal Reserve Act contained in the Fixing America’s Surface Transportation Act of 2015. Remittances from 2008 through 2015 total about $600 billion on a cumulative basis—an average of about $75 billion a year, compared with about $25 billion a year, on average, over the decade prior to 2008. With the continuation of the Committee’s reinvestment policy, the Federal Reserve’s total assets have held steady at around $4.5 trillion (figure 41). Holdings of U.S. Treasury securities in the System Open Market Account (SOMA) have remained at $2.5 trillion, and holdings of agency debt and agency The Committee continued to focus on the implementation of monetary policy Consistent with the FOMC’s Policy Normalization Principles and Plans published on September 17, 2014, the Federal Reserve used interest paid on reserve balances 41. Federal Reserve assets and liabilities Treasury securities held outright NOTE: “Credit and liquidity facilities” consists of primary, secondary, and seasonal credit; term auction credit; central bank liquidity swaps; support for Maiden Lane, Bear Stearns, and AIG; and other credit facilities, including the Primary Dealer Credit Facility, the Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility, the Commercial Paper Funding Facility, and the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility. “Other assets” includes unamortized premiums and discounts on securities held outright. “Capital and other liabilities” includes reverse repurchase agreements, the U.S. Treasury General Account, and the U.S. Treasury Supplementary Financing Account. The data extend through February 3, 2016. As discussed in the main text, economic growth has been only moderate in recent years despite the very low level of the federal funds rate and the Federal Reserve’s large-scale purchases of longer-term securities. This observation suggests that headwinds have lowered the “neutral” federal funds rate—defined as the value of the federal funds rate that would be neither expansionary nor contractionary if the economy was operating at its productive potential—to historically low levels. As economic disturbances dissipate, the neutral federal funds rate should rise to its expected longer-run level. This longer-run value of the neutral rate plays an important role in monetary policy analysis: It is a key determinant of the longer-run level of the federal funds rate and other nominal interest rates. When expressed on a real basis, it also corresponds to the intercept of simple policy rules such as those studied in Taylor (1993).1 Like the current neutral rate, the longer- run value of the neutral rate is not directly observed and must be estimated using the available data and potentially imperfect models of the economy. Since 2012, the median of the projections of the longer-run level of the federal funds rate in the Federal Open Market Committee’s Summary of 1. See John B. Taylor (1993), “Discretion versus Policy Rules Economic Projections has fallen from 4.25 percent to 3.50 percent.2 In addition, several econometric studies have estimated a decline in the longer-run value of the neutral rate by statistically modeling the co-movements between variables like inflation, interest rates, output, and unemployment.3 Figure A shows estimates from 2. See the December 2015 Summary of Economic Projections, which appeared as an addendum to the minutes of the December 15–16, 2015, meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and is included as Part 3 of this report. 3. See, for example, Benjamin K. Johannsen and Elmar Mertens (forthcoming), “The Expected Real Interest Rate in the Long Run: Time Series Evidence with the Effective Lower Bound,” FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System); Michael T. Kiley (2015), “What Can the Data Tell Us about the Equilibrium Real Interest Rate?” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-077 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August), www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/ feds/2015/files/2015077pap.pdf; Thomas Laubach and John Williams (2015), “Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest Redux,” Hutchins Center Working Papers 15 (Washington: Brookings Institution, November), www.brookings.edu/~/ media/Research/Files/Papers/2015/10/30-laubach-williams/ WP15-Laubach-Williams-natural-interest-rate-redux-2. pdf?la=en; and Thomas A. Lubik and Christian Matthes (2015), “Calculating the Natural Rate of Interest: A Comparison of Two Alternative Approaches,” Economic Brief 15-10 (Richmond: Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, October), https://www. richmondfed.org/~/media/richmondfedorg/publications/ research/economic_brief/2015/pdf/eb_15-10.pdf. In these in Practice,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 39 (December), pp. 195–214. and also employed an overnight reverse repurchase agreement (ON RRP) facility to implement its decision in December to raise the target range for the federal funds rate.5 Specifically, the Board of Governors raised the interest rate paid on required and excess reserve balances to ½ percent, while the FOMC authorized ON RRP operations at an offering rate of ¼ percent. (For further information, see the box “Monetary Policy 5. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Implementation following the December 2015 FOMC Meeting.”) In addition, the Board of Governors approved an increase in the discount rate (the primary credit rate) to 1 percent. Along with the decision to increase the target range for the federal funds rate, the FOMC also temporarily suspended the aggregate cap on ON RRP transactions, indicating that ON RRP operations would be undertaken in amounts limited only by the value of Treasury securities held outright in the SOMA that are available for such operations and by a per-counterparty limit of $30 billion per day. Nonetheless, total reverse repurchase two time-series models of the longer-run value of the neutral rate, expressed on a real basis. One is from Johannsen and Mertens (forthcoming), and the other is from Laubach and Williams (2015).4 The figure includes the uncertainty bands for the Johannsen and Mertens estimates, which indicate that the uncertainty surrounding the longer-run value of the neutral rate is substantial (as it is in other model frameworks). Uncertainty about the longer-run value of the neutral rate implies uncertainty about the expected cumulative rise in policy rates during the policy normalization process. The risk that the longer-run value of the neutral rate going forward could be lower than currently estimated is especially pertinent, because such a scenario would likely increase the probability that monetary policy will be constrained by the effective lower bound on nominal interest rates in the future, with adverse consequences for macroeconomic outcomes. studies, the longer-run value of the neutral rate is sometimes referred to as the longer-run value of the “natural” rate or the longer-run “equilibrium” federal funds rate. 4. The estimates from the Johannsen-Mertens and Laubach- Williams models are not the same because the models use different data to infer slack in the economy and because the model restrictions and estimation methods are different. agreement transactions with the Federal Reserve have remained near levels observed prior to the increase in the target range for the federal funds rate and the suspension of the aggregate cap. The Committee intends to phase out this facility when it is no longer needed to help control the federal funds rate. The Federal Reserve also continued to test the operational readiness of other policy A. Estimates of the neutral real rate in the longer run NOTE: The data extend through 2015:Q3. For the Johannsen-Mertens model, at each date, the parameters of the model and the longer-run equilibrium real rate are jointly estimated using data up to that date. For the Laubach-Williams model, the parameters are estimated on the entire data sample, but estimates of the longer-run equilibrium real rate use data only up to the date of interest. Shaded regions are 50 and 90 percent uncertainty bands from the Johannsen-Mertens model. The shaded bars indicate periods of business recession as defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research. tools. Three Term Deposit Facility operations were conducted in the second half of 2015. The operations offered either 7- or 14-day deposits at a floating rate of 1 basis point over the interest rate on excess reserves. In these operations, deposit volumes declined slightly from previous tests with similar parameters. At its December 2015 meeting, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) increased the target range for the federal funds rate from between 0 and ¼ percent to between ¼ and ½ percent, effective December 17.1 In order to implement the monetary policy stance announced in December, the Board of Governors also voted to raise the interest rate paid on required and excess reserve balances to 0.50 percent. Moreover, the FOMC authorized an increase in the overnight reverse repurchase agreement (ON RRP) facility offering rate to 0.25 percent and indicated that the aggregate amount of the ON RRP operations would be constrained only by the value of Treasury securities held outright in the System Open Market Account that are available for such operations.2 Each of these monetary policy decisions is consistent with the guidance provided in the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans outlined in the July 2015 Monetary Policy Report.3 1. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 2. In a related action, the Board of Governors voted to approve a ¼ percentage point increase in the discount rate to 1 percent. 3. See the box “Policy Normalization Principles and Plans: The effective federal funds rate rose to 0.37 percent at the time of the change to the target range for the federal funds rate amid orderly trading conditions in money markets (figure A). Since the increase in the target range, the effective federal funds rate has traded in a relatively narrow range of 0.35 to 0.38 percent, with the exception of month-ends, when the rate fell temporarily in typical fashion. Increases in interest rates in other money markets were similar to the rise in the federal funds rate following the December meeting, with overnight Eurodollar rates closely tracking the effective federal funds rate and the general collateral repurchase agreement (or repo) rate maintaining spreads to unsecured rates similar to those observed before the December meeting. Total volume in the ON RRP facility was virtually unchanged on the day after the December meeting (figure B). In the weeks following the December meeting, the total amount of Federal Reserve reverse repurchase agreement (RRP) operations reflected typical calendar-related effects. On year-end, volume in the ON RRP facility was nearly $475 billion, roughly in line with aggregate RRP operations seen on recent quarter-ends. Following year-end, usage of the ON RRP facility rapidly returned to—and has remained at— levels that prevailed before year-end, consistent with recent quarter-end patterns. NOTE: ON RRP is overnight reverse repurchase agreement; term RRP is term reverse repurchase agreement. Data are daily. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Bank of New York. The following material appeared as an addendum to the minutes of the December 15–16, 2015, meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee. In conjunction with the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting held on December 15–16, 2015, meeting participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real output growth, the unemployment rate, inflation, and the federal funds rate for each year from 2015 to 2018 and over the longer run.6 Each participant’s projection was based on information available at the time of the meeting, together with his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy and assumptions about the factors likely to affect economic outcomes. The longer- run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the value to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. “Appropriate monetary policy” is defined as the future path of policy that each participant deems most likely to foster outcomes for economic activity and inflation that best satisfy his or her individual interpretation of the Federal Reserve’s objectives of maximum employment and stable prices. 2018 the unemployment rate would remain somewhat below their individual judgments of its longer-run normal rate. Participants projected that inflation, as measured by the four-quarter change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), would pick up in 2016 and 2017 from the very low rate seen in 2015. Almost all participants projected inflation in 2018 to be at or very near the Committee’s 2 percent objective. As shown in figure 2, all but two participants thought that it would be appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate before the end of 2015. Most participants expected that it would be appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate gradually over the projection period as headwinds to economic growth dissipate slowly over time and as inflation rises toward the Committee’s goal of 2 percent. Consistent with this outlook, most participants projected that the appropriate level of the federal funds rate would be below its longer-run level through 2018. FOMC participants generally expected that, under appropriate monetary policy, real gross domestic product (GDP) growth in 2016 and 2017 would be at or somewhat above their individual estimates of the longer-run growth rate and would converge toward its longer-run rate in 2018 (table 1 and figure 1). All participants projected that the unemployment rate would decline further in 2016. Most participants expected that in 6. The president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis did not participate in this FOMC meeting, and the incoming president is scheduled to assume office on January 1, 2016. James M. Lyon, First Vice President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, submitted economic projections. Almost all participants viewed the levels of uncertainty associated with their outlooks for economic growth and the unemployment rate as broadly similar to the norms of the previous 20 years. Nearly all also viewed the levels of uncertainty associated with their inflation forecasts as broadly similar to historical norms. Most participants saw the risks to their outlooks for real GDP growth and the unemployment rate as broadly balanced. A majority viewed the risks attending their projections for both PCE and core PCE inflation as broadly balanced, but many saw these risks as weighted to the downside. Among those who saw the risks to their inflation outlook as tilted to the downside, Table 1. Economic projections of Federal Reserve Board members and Federal Reserve Bank presidents, under their individual assessments of projected appropriate monetary policy, December 2015 Percent Longer run Longer run Longer run Memo: Projected appropriate policy path Note: Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP) and projections for both measures of inflation are percent changes from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. PCE inflation and core PCE inflation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) and the price index for PCE excluding food and energy. Projections for the unemployment rate are for the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. Each participant’s projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy. Longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. The projections for the federal funds rate are the value of the midpoint of the projected appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the projected appropriate target level for the federal funds rate at the end of the specified calendar year or over the longer run. The September projections were made in conjunction with the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on September 16–17, 2015. 1. For each period, the median is the middle projection when the projections are arranged from lowest to highest. When the number of projections is even, the median is the average of the two middle projections. 2. The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each year. 3. The range for a variable in a given year includes all participants’ projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year. 4. Longer-run projections for core PCE inflation are not collected. several highlighted the continued strength of the dollar and some recent indications that inflation expectations had declined as contributing to those risks. Participants generally projected that, conditional on their individual assumptions about appropriate monetary policy, real GDP would increase in 2016 and 2017 at a pace somewhat above their estimates of its longer- run rate. Real GDP growth would then slow in 2018 to a rate at or near their individual estimates of the longer-run normal rate. Participants pointed to a number of factors that they expect will contribute to moderate output growth over the next few years, including labor market conditions that are supportive of economic expansion, household and business balance sheets that had improved significantly since the financial crisis, and a stance of monetary policy that was expected to remain accommodative. Compared with their contributions to the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) in September, participants’ projections of real GDP growth from 2016 to 2018 were generally little changed. The median value of participants’ projections for real GDP growth in 2016 was revised up slightly to 2.4 percent; some participants cited the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2015, which was passed in late October, as adding support to economic growth in the near term. Very few participants changed their forecasts for real GDP growth in the longer run, resulting in an unchanged median. All participants projected that the unemployment rate would be at or below their individual judgments of its longer-run normal level from 2016 through 2018. Compared with the September SEP, most participants’ projected paths for the unemployment rate were revised down a little over those three years, with the median of the projections in the fourth quarter of each year at 4.7 percent. Many also revised down slightly their Figure 1. Medians, central tendencies, and ranges of economic projections, 2015–18 and over the longer run Longer run Longer run Longer run Longer run Note: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. The data for the actual values of the variables are annual. Longer run Note: Each shaded circle indicates the value (rounded to the nearest ⅛ percentage point) of an individual participant’s judgment of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the appropriate target level for the federal funds rate at the end of the specified calendar year or over the longer run. estimates of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment, although the median forecast of 4.9 percent was unchanged since September. Participants generally cited stronger-than- expected labor market data in recent months as a factor explaining the downward revisions to their unemployment rate forecasts. Figures 3.A and 3.B show the distribution of participants’ views regarding the likely outcomes for real GDP growth and the unemployment rate through 2018 and in the longer run. The distributions of the projections for real GDP growth over the next several years and in the longer run narrowed some since the September SEP. The diversity of views across participants on the outlook for GDP growth reflected, in part, differences in their individual assessments of the size and persistence of the effects of lower energy prices and a stronger dollar on real activity; the time it would take for the headwinds that have been restraining the pace of the economic expansion, such as financial and economic conditions abroad, to dissipate; and the appropriate path of monetary policy. With regard to the unemployment rate, the distributions of projections over the next three years shifted modestly to lower values since September. Nearly all participants saw PCE price inflation picking up in 2016, rising further in 2017, and then reaching a rate in 2018 at or very Figure 3.A. Distribution of participants’ projections for the change in real GDP, 2015–18 and over the longer run Longer run Note: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. Figure 3.B. Distribution of participants’ projections for the unemployment rate, 2015–18 and over the longer run 4.2 4.3       - 4.4 4.5 4.2 4.3       - 4.4 4.5 4.2 4.3       - 4.4 4.5 4.2 4.3       - 4.4 4.5 Longer run 4.2 4.3       - 4.4 4.5 Note: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. close to the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run objective. However, relative to the September SEP, almost all participants marked down their projections for PCE price inflation in 2016, observing that recent declines in energy prices and the continued strength in the dollar could exert additional downward pressure on inflation in the near term. Revisions to participants’ inflation forecasts in 2017 were more mixed, while the projections for inflation in 2018 were little changed. Most participants also marked down their projections for core PCE price inflation in 2016, although almost all still expected core inflation to rise gradually over the projection period and to be at or very close to 2 percent by 2018. Factors cited by participants as contributing to their outlook that inflation will rise over the medium term included recent signs of a pickup in wage growth, their expectation of tighter resource utilization, their expectation that the effects of recent appreciation in the dollar and declines in oil prices on inflation will fade, their anticipation that inflation expectations will remain at levels consistent with the FOMC’s longer-run objective, and still-accommodative monetary policy. Figures 3.C and 3.D provide information on the distribution of participants’ views about the outlook for inflation. The distribution of participants’ projections for PCE price inflation in 2016 and 2017 shifted to the left compared with the September SEP, while the distributions of projections for 2018 and in the longer run were little changed. The distributions of projections for core PCE price inflation moved lower for 2016 and 2017 compared with September but did not change for 2018. Figure 3.E provides the distribution of participants’ judgments regarding the appropriate level of the target federal funds rate at the end of each calendar year from 2015 to 2018 and over the longer run. Relative to September, the projections of the appropriate levels of the federal funds rate over the next three years generally shifted to lower values. The median projection for next year was unchanged, but the medians for 2017 and 2018 declined slightly. The median projection now stands at 1.4 percent at the end of 2016, 2.4 percent at the end of 2017, and 3.3 percent at the end of 2018. Given their expectations that economic headwinds will persist and that inflation will rise gradually to 2 percent over the next three years, most participants judged that it would be appropriate for the federal funds rate to remain below its longer-run normal level from 2016 to 2018. Participants projected that a gradual rise in the federal funds rate over that period would be appropriate as some of those headwinds, such as sluggish foreign economic growth, diminish and the temporary factors holding down inflation dissipate. Some participants noted that a gradual increase in the federal funds rate would be consistent with their expectation that the neutral short-term real interest rate will rise slowly over the next few years. Both the median and the range of participants’ projections of the federal funds rate in the longer run, at 3.5 percent and 3 to 4 percent, respectively, were unchanged since September. However, several participants revised their projections for the longer-run federal funds rate slightly lower. All participants judged that inflation in the longer run would be equal to the Committee’s objective of 2 percent, implying that their individual judgments regarding the appropriate longer-run level of the real federal funds rate, in the absence of further shocks to the economy, ranged from 1 to 2 percent, the same as in September. Participants’ views of the appropriate path for monetary policy were informed by their judgments about the state of the economy and the outlook for labor markets and inflation. One important consideration for many participants was their estimate of the extent of slack remaining in the labor market, as informed by the incoming data on various labor market indicators. Another Figure 3.C. Distribution of participants’ projections for PCE inflation, 2015–18 and over the longer run Longer run Note: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. Note: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. Figure 3.E. Distribution of participants’ judgments of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the appropriate target level for the federal funds rate, 2015–18 and over the longer run Longer run Note: The midpoints of the target ranges for the federal funds rate and the target levels for the federal funds rate are measured at the end of the specified calendar year or over the longer run. was prospects for inflation to return to the Committee’s objective of 2 percent; in making such assessments, participants considered a range of factors, including measures of inflation compensation and longer-run inflation expectations as well as the likely persistence and size of the effects from low energy prices and the strong dollar. Participants also emphasized the potential for international developments to continue to have important implications for domestic economic activity and inflation and thus for appropriate monetary policy. Several participants discussed potential interactions between policy normalization and risks to financial stability. In addition, given the continued proximity of short-term interest rates to their effective lower bound, asymmetric risks around the outlook for employment and inflation were noted as one reason why a gradual approach to raising the federal funds rate may be appropriate. As in the September SEP, nearly all participants continued to judge the levels of uncertainty around their projections for real GDP growth and the unemployment rate as broadly similar to the average level of the past 20 years (figure 4).7 Most participants saw the risks to their outlooks for real GDP growth and unemployment as broadly balanced, as the number of participants who viewed the 7. Table 2 provides estimates of the forecast uncertainty for the change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, and total consumer price inflation over the period from 1995 through 2014. At the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty” discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty in the economic forecasts and explains the approach used to assess the uncertainty and risks attending the participants’ projections. Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges Percentage points Note: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root mean squared error of projections for 1995 through 2014 that were released in the winter by various private and government forecasters. As described in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain assumptions, there is about a 70 percent probability that actual outcomes for real GDP, unemployment, and consumer prices will be in ranges implied by the average size of projection errors made in the past. For more information, see David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip (2007), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook from Historical Forecasting Errors,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2007-60 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November), available at www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/ feds/2007/200760/200760abs.html; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Division of Research and Statistics (2014), “Updated Historical Forecast Errors,” memorandum, April 9, www.federalreserve.gov/foia/files/20140409-historical- forecast-errors.pdf. 1. Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure that has been most widely used in government and private economic forecasts. Projection is percent change, fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. risks to economic growth as weighted to the downside and the risks to the unemployment rate as weighted to the upside fell appreciably since September. Diminished risks to domestic economic activity from developments abroad and the strength of recent labor market data were among the reasons noted for the more upbeat assessment of risks. As in the September SEP, participants generally agreed that the levels of uncertainty associated with their inflation forecasts were broadly similar to the average level over the past 20 years. The number of participants who viewed the risks to their inflation forecasts as weighted to the downside declined slightly since September, and a majority now viewed the risks to both PCE and core PCE inflation as broadly balanced. Among those who saw risks to inflation as tilted to the downside, several highlighted the continued strength of the dollar and some recent indications that inflation expectations had declined as contributing to their perception of those risks. Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Risks to core PCE inflation Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Note: For definitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. The economic projections provided by the members of the Board of Governors and the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks inform discussions of monetary policy among policymakers and can aid public understanding of the basis for policy actions. Considerable uncertainty attends these projections, however. The economic and statistical models and relationships used to help produce economic forecasts are necessarily imperfect descriptions of the real world, and the future path of the economy can be affected by myriad unforeseen developments and events. Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, participants consider not only what appears to be the most likely economic outcome as embodied in their projections, but also the range of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of their occurring, and the potential costs to the economy should they occur. Table 2 summarizes the average historical accuracy of a range of forecasts, including those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports and those prepared by the Federal Reserve Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee. The projection error ranges shown in the table illustrate the considerable uncertainty associated with economic forecasts. For example, suppose a participant projects that real gross domestic product (GDP) and total consumer prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty attending those projections is similar to that experienced in the past and the risks around the projections are broadly balanced, the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a probability of about 70 percent that actual GDP would expand within a range of 2.1 to 3.9 percent in the current year, 1.2 to 4.8 percent in the second year, and 0.9 to 5.1 percent in the third and fourth years. The corresponding 70 per- cent confidence intervals for overall inflation would be 1.8 to 2.2 percent in the current year, and 1.0 to 3.0 percent in the second, third, and fourth years. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over history, participants provide judgments as to whether the uncertainty attached to their projections of each variable is greater than, smaller than, or broadly similar to typical levels of forecast uncertainty in the past, as shown in table 2. Participants also provide judgments as to whether the risks to their projections are weighted to the upside, are weighted to the downside, or are broadly balanced. That is, participants judge whether each variable is more likely to be above or below their projections of the most likely outcome. These judgments about the uncertainty and the risks attending each participant’s projections are distinct from the diversity of participants’ views about the most likely outcomes. Forecast uncertainty is concerned with the risks associated with a particular projection rather than with divergences across a number of different projections. As with real activity and inflation, the outlook for the future path of the federal funds rate is subject to considerable uncertainty. This uncertainty arises primarily because each participant’s assessment of the appropriate stance of monetary policy depends importantly on the evolution of real activity and inflation over time. If economic conditions evolve in an unexpected manner, then assessments of the appropriate setting of the federal funds rate would change from that point forward. bank holding company emerging market economy The Board of Governors is pleased to submit its Monetary Policy Report pursuant to section 2B of the Federal Reserve Act. Monetary Policy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39 Box 4. Developments in the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet and Money Markets . . . . . . 42 Box 5. Periodic Review of Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communications . . . . . . . . 45 Box 6. Monetary Policy Rules in the Current Environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46 This report reflects information that was publicly available as of 9 a.m. EST on February 6, 2025. Unless otherwise stated, the time series in the figures extend through, for daily data, In bar charts, except as noted, the change for a given period is measured to its final quarter 1 For figures 27 and 38, note that the S&P/Case-Shiller U.S. National Home Price Index, the S&P 500 Index, and the Dow Jones Bank Index are products of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates and have been licensed for use by the Board. Copyright © 2025 S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC, a division of S&P Global, and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Redistribution, reproduction, and/or photocopying in whole or in part are prohibited without written permission of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC. For more information on any of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC’s indices, please visit www.spdji.com. S&P® is a registered trademark of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC, and Dow Jones® is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. Neither S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC, Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC, their affiliates, nor their third-party licensors make any representation or war- ranty, express or implied, as to the ability of any index to accurately represent the asset class or market sector that it purports to represent, and neither S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC, Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC, their affiliates, nor their third-party licensors shall have any liability for any errors, omissions, or interruptions of any index or the data included therein. Adopted effective January 24, 2012; as reaffirmed effective January 30, 2024 The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) is firmly committed to fulfilling its statutory man- date from the Congress of promoting maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long- term interest rates. The Committee seeks to explain its monetary policy decisions to the public as clearly as possible. Such clarity facilitates well-informed decisionmaking by households and businesses, reduces economic and financial uncertainty, increases the effectiveness of mone- tary policy, and enhances transparency and accountability, which are essential in a democratic Employment, inflation, and long-term interest rates fluctuate over time in response to economic and financial disturbances. Monetary policy plays an important role in stabilizing the economy in response to these disturbances. The Committee’s primary means of adjusting the stance of monetary policy is through changes in the target range for the federal funds rate. The Committee stability over the longer run has declined relative to its historical average. Therefore, the federal funds rate is likely to be constrained by its effective lower bound more frequently than in the past. Owing in part to the proximity of interest rates to the effective lower bound, the Committee judges that downward risks to employment and inflation have increased. The Committee is prepared to use its full range of tools to achieve its maximum employment and price stability goals. The maximum level of employment is a broad-based and inclusive goal that is not directly mea- surable and changes over time owing largely to nonmonetary factors that affect the structure and dynamics of the labor market. Consequently, it would not be appropriate to specify a fixed goal for employment; rather, the Committee’s policy decisions must be informed by assessments of the shortfalls of employment from its maximum level, recognizing that such assessments are neces- sarily uncertain and subject to revision. The Committee considers a wide range of indicators in making these assessments. The inflation rate over the longer run is primarily determined by monetary policy, and hence the Committee has the ability to specify a longer-run goal for inflation. The Committee reaffirms its judgment that inflation at the rate of 2 percent, as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, is most consistent over the longer run with the Federal Reserve’s statutory mandate. The Committee judges that longer-term inflation expecta- tions that are well anchored at 2 percent foster price stability and moderate long-term interest rates and enhance the Committee’s ability to promote maximum employment in the face of significant economic disturbances. In order to anchor longer-term inflation expectations at this level, the Committee seeks to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time, and there- fore judges that, following periods when inflation has been running persistently below 2 percent, appropriate monetary policy will likely aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for Monetary policy actions tend to influence economic activity, employment, and prices with a lag. In setting monetary policy, the Committee seeks over time to mitigate shortfalls of employment from the Committee’s assessment of its maximum level and deviations of inflation from its longer-run goal. Moreover, sustainably achieving maximum employment and price stability depends on a sta- ble financial system. Therefore, the Committee’s policy decisions reflect its longer-run goals, its medium-term outlook, and its assessments of the balance of risks, including risks to the financial system that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. The Committee’s employment and inflation objectives are generally complementary. However, under circumstances in which the Committee judges that the objectives are not complementary, it takes into account the employment shortfalls and inflation deviations and the potentially different time horizons over which employment and inflation are projected to return to levels judged consis- The Committee intends to review these principles and to make adjustments as appropriate at its annual organizational meeting each January, and to undertake roughly every 5 years a thorough emerging market economy implied volatility for the S&P 500 index Inflation moderated a little further last year after having slowed notably in 2023, but it remains market appears to have stabilized following a period of easing, with the unemployment rate flat- tening out at a relatively low level over the second half of last year. Real gross domestic product (GDP) increased solidly last year, supported by strength in consumer spending. As labor market tightness continued to ease and inflation moderated a bit further, the FOMC lowered the target range for the policy rate by a cumulative 100 basis points over its September, November, and December meetings, bringing it to the current range of 4¼ to 4½ percent. The Federal Reserve has also continued to reduce its holdings of Treasury and agency mortgage- backed securities. The FOMC is strongly committed to supporting maximum employment and returning inflation to its 2 percent objective, and it remains attentive to the risks to both sides of its dual mandate. In considering the extent and timing of additional adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will carefully assess incoming data, the evolving Inflation. After stepping down notably in 2023, consumer price inflation eased a bit more last year, although recent progress has been bumpy and inflation remains somewhat above 2 per- cent. The price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) rose 2.6 percent over the 12 months ending in December, down from a peak of 7.2 percent in 2022. The core PCE price index—which excludes often-volatile food and energy prices and is generally considered a better in 2023, as core services price inflation remained elevated. However, some other approaches to removing the influence of volatile components of inflation, such as the trimmed mean PCE measure produced by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, showed more marked deceleration in prices last year. Measures of longer-term inflation expectations are within the range of values seen in the decade before the pandemic and continue to be broadly consistent with the FOMC’s The labor market. The labor market remains solid and appears to have stabilized after a period of easing. The unemployment rate moved up over the first half of last year but was mostly flat there- after, ending the year at 4.1 percent—still low by historical standards—while job vacancies, which had been trending down, also flattened out over the second half at a solid level. As labor demand cooled somewhat further last year, monthly job gains slowed to a moderate pace on average. Labor supply likely increased less robustly than in previous years, with immigration appearing to have slowed over the second half of last year. Given the further rebalancing of labor demand and supply last year, the labor market no longer appears especially tight. Reflecting this further bal- ancing, nominal wage gains continued to slow in 2024 and are now closer to the pace consistent Economic activity. Real GDP is reported to have increased last year by 2.5 percent, a little slower than in 2023. Consumer spending continued to grow robustly, supported by a solid labor market and rising real wages, while real business fixed investment increased moderately. In the housing market, new home construction was solid but existing home sales remained depressed, with mortgage rates still elevated. In contrast to GDP, manufacturing output was little changed, in part reflecting weak production in interest-sensitive sectors. Financial conditions. Financial conditions continue to appear to be somewhat restrictive on balance. Short-term Treasury yields declined, in line with the easing of monetary policy since September; however, the market-implied path for the federal funds rate over the next year shifted up notably, and long-term Treasury yields increased markedly in the fourth quarter. Broad equity prices continued to increase despite the rise in longer-term Treasury yields, and yields on corpo- rate bonds were little changed, as spreads narrowed. Credit continued to be broadly available to large-to-midsize businesses, most households, and municipalities but remained relatively tight for small businesses and households with lower credit scores. Bank lending to households and busi- nesses continued to decelerate in the second half of 2024, likely reflecting still-elevated interest Financial stability. The financial system remains sound and resilient. Valuations remained high relative to fundamentals in a range of markets, including those for equity, corporate debt, and residential real estate. Total debt of households and nonfinancial businesses as a fraction of GDP continued to trend down to a level that is very low relative to that in the past two decades. Most banks continued to report capital levels well above regulatory requirements and have reduced their reliance on uninsured deposits, but fair value losses on fixed-rate assets were still sizable for some banks. In terms of funding risks, while the 2023–24 Securities and Exchange Commission reforms on money market funds (MMFs) have partially mitigated vulnerabilities of prime MMFs, other less regulated short-term investment vehicles remain vulnerable and some- what opaque, and their assets have been growing. Meanwhile, hedge fund leverage appears to be high and concentrated. (See the box “Developments Related to Financial Stability.”) International developments. Foreign growth remained modest in the second half of 2024. For- eign manufacturing in general was weak, as the cumulative effects of restrictive monetary policy weighed on the sector and, in Europe, energy-intensive industries continued to grapple with ele- vated energy costs. That said, high-tech manufacturing and exports remained strong in Asia on robust U.S. artificial intelligence (AI) and data center demand. In China, while exports were strong, domestic demand remained sluggish despite stimulus measures to shore up the ailing property sector. Meanwhile, foreign headline inflation continued to decline, but progress on inflation reduc- tion was uneven across economies. Many foreign central banks cut policy rates further since mid-2024, citing declining inflationary pressures, easing labor markets, and concerns about economic growth. Policymakers generally stressed the importance of maintaining vigilance amid persistent geopolitical risks and, in some economies, still-somewhat-elevated services inflation and wage pressures. Since mid-2024, the trade-weighted exchange value of the U.S. dollar has increased significantly, on net, reflecting widening gaps of U.S. interest rates over those of major advanced foreign economies, the relative Interest rate policy. After having held the target range for the policy rate at 5¼ to 5½ percent between late July 2023 and mid-September 2024, the FOMC lowered the target range for the meetings, bringing it to the current range of 4¼ to 4½ percent. The FOMC’s decision to begin reducing the degree of policy restraint reflected the FOMC’s greater confidence in inflation moving sustainably toward 2 percent and the judgment that it was appropriate to recalibrate the policy stance. The FOMC remains attentive to the risks to both sides of its dual mandate. In considering Committee will carefully assess incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks. balance sheet policy. The Federal Reserve has continued the process of significantly reducing its holdings of Treasury and agency securities in a predictable manner. Beginning in June 2022, prin- cipal payments from securities held in the System Open Market Account have been reinvested only to the extent that they exceeded monthly caps. Under this policy, the Federal Reserve has reduced its securities holdings by $297 billion since June 2024, bringing the total reduction in securities holdings since the start of balance sheet reduction to about $2 trillion. The FOMC has stated that it intends to maintain securities holdings at amounts consistent with implementing monetary policy efficiently and effectively in its ample-reserves regime. To ensure a smooth tran- sition, the FOMC slowed the pace of decline of its securities holdings in June 2024 and intends to stop reductions in its securities holdings when reserve balances are somewhat above the level that the FOMC judges to be consistent with ample reserves. Employment and earnings across groups. The tight labor market in recent years has been espe- cially beneficial for historically disadvantaged groups of workers, and many of the disparities in employment and wages by sex, race, ethnicity, education, and geography have narrowed. Over the past year, even as labor market conditions have eased, employment disparities continue to be near their recent lows, while wage growth has remained solid across many groups despite slow- ing a bit from post-pandemic highs. Even so, in absolute levels, significant disparities in groups remain. (See the box “Employment and Earnings across Demographic Groups.”) Strong productivity growth. Labor productivity in the business sector increased 1.8 percent annual pace over the previous expansion. Should this faster pace of productivity growth persist, it can support stronger GDP growth without adding inflationary pressure. Some factors that have boosted productivity growth recently may continue providing support, such as new business for- mation, which surged early into the pandemic and has remained strong. Other factors may have had more short-lived influences on productivity growth, including a temporary burst in worker reallocation across jobs earlier in the pandemic. Any measured productivity gains from integration of AI technologies into production processes have likely been small so far, but productivity gains may grow as AI use becomes more widespread. (See the box “Labor Productivity since the Start Federal Reserve’s balance sheet and money markets. The size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet has declined since June as the FOMC has continued to reduce its securities holdings. Usage of the overnight reverse repurchase agreement facility decreased further, while reserve balances were little changed. Conditions in money markets remained stable. (See the box Framework review. The Federal Reserve has begun its periodic public review of the monetary policy framework it uses to pursue its dual-mandate goals of maximum employment and price sta- bility. The review is focused on the FOMC’s Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, which articulates the Committee’s approach to monetary policy, and the Committee’s policy communications tools. Like the Federal Reserve’s 2019–20 review of its monetary policy framework, the current review will include outreach and public events attended by policymakers, Monetary policy rules. Simple monetary policy rules, which prescribe a setting for the policy inter- est rate in response to the behavior of a small number of economic variables, can provide useful guidance to policymakers. With inflation easing and the unemployment rate having increased somewhat, the policy rate prescriptions of most simple monetary policy rules have generally declined since 2023. Currently, most of the rules call for levels of the federal funds rate that are within the current target range. (See the box “Monetary Policy Rules in the Current Environment.”) Inflation eased a little further last year After stepping down notably in 2023, inflation moderated a little further last year, although it remains somewhat elevated. The price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) rose 2.6 percent over the 12 months ending in December, down slightly from its 2.7 percent pace the previous year and well below its peak of 7.2 percent in mid-2022. Thus, inflation has moved longer-run objective of 2 percent (figure 1). Progress on disinflation last year was bumpy, with both total PCE prices and core PCE prices—which exclude often-volatile food and energy prices and are generally considered a better guide to the future of inflation—showing firmer monthly 2024 as a whole, core PCE prices rose 2.8 percent—a little less than the 3.0 percent gain over the previous year. However, some alternative measures that attempt to reduce the influence of idiosyncratic price movements showed more marked disinflation. For example, the trimmed mean measure of PCE prices constructed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas increased 2.8 percent over the 12 months ending in December, a noticeable step-down from its 3.3 percent increase Figure 1. Personal consumption expenditures price indexes Trimmed mean Total Excluding food and energy Note: The horizontal line indicates the Federal Open Market Committee’s objective of 2 percent. Consumer energy prices declined last year, while food prices increased modestly PCE energy prices fell a modest 1.1 percent over the 12 months ending in December, as oil prices moved a little lower over 2024 (figure 2, left panel). The decline in oil prices was par- tially due to tepid oil demand from China and rising production in the U.S. and other non-OPEC Food and beverages (right scale) Energy (left scale) Housing services Services ex. energy and housing Goods ex. food, beverages, and energy Note: Percent change is from year earlier. from sustained geopolitical tension, including recently, however, oil prices increased amid tinuing geopolitical tensions remain an upside Note: The data are monthly averages of daily data and extend through January 31, 2025. PCE food prices increased a modest 1.6 per- following the much larger increases in 2021 prices surged in response to bird flu-related across other agricultural commodities have been more modest (figure 4). Prices of both energy and food products are Note: The data are monthly averages of daily data and extend through January 31, 2025. Reflecting the sharp increases seen in 2021 and 2022, these price indexes remain around Core goods prices have been declining slightly, close to pre-pandemic declines . . . In assessing the outlook for inflation, it remains helpful to consider three separate components Price changes for core goods appear to have nearly normalized, with core goods prices declin- ing slightly last year at a pace that was just a little slower than the average annual decline that prevailed in the years before the pandemic. The movement toward pre-pandemic conditions for this category of inflation in part reflects the resolution of supply chain issues and other supply constraints that had boosted goods prices earlier, and supply–demand conditions in goods mar- kets now appear to be relatively balanced. As one indication, the shares of respondents to the Quarterly Survey of Plant Capacity Utilization who cite insufficient labor or materials as reasons for operating below capacity have returned close to their pre-pandemic levels (figure 5). Core goods inflation received a small boost last year from price gains in nonfuel import prices, which rose 2.4 percent over the year (figure 6). Note: The series are the share of firms selecting each reason for operating below full capacity. The data extend through 2024:Q3. . . . while housing services price inflation moved lower last year but remains elevated . . . Housing services price inflation continued moderating last year, with prices rising 4.7 percent over the 12 months ending in December, down from 6.3 percent in 2023 and 7.7 percent in 2022. Despite this moderation, housing services inflation remains notably above its pre-pandemic level. Housing services inflation tends to respond with a lag to movements in rents for new leases to new tenants (“market rents”), and as these market rents have largely returned to pre-pandemic rates of increase, housing services inflation will likely continue to move lower as well (figure 7).2 PCE housing services prices Apartment List single-family and multifamily units Zillow single-family units RealPage multifamily units CoreLogic single-family detached units Note: Zillow data start in January 2016, and Apartment List data start in January 2018. CoreLogic data extend through November 2024. Apartment List, Zillow, RealPage, and CoreLogic measure market-rate rents—that is, rents for a new lease by a new tenant. PCE is personal consumption expenditures. . . . and core nonhousing services price inflation has flattened out at a somewhat elevated level Finally, prices for core nonhousing services—a broad group that includes services such as medical, travel and dining, and financial services—increased 3.5 percent last year, a bit above their increase in 2023 and their pre-pandemic pace. However, the lack of further progress in this category masks important heterogeneity within its components. For the “market-based” category of core services, which account for roughly three-fourths of core nonhousing services, prices increased 2.9 percent last year—similar to its pre-pandemic pace and slower than its 3.5 percent increase in 2023. Market-based core services include components such as food service and lodging that are more directly influenced by supply–demand conditions, so easing in the labor market has likely contributed to the ongoing deceleration in this category of prices. In contrast, price inflation for the “non-market-based” category, where prices are imputed and which includes some volatile categories such as portfolio management that tend to be heavily influenced by idio- syncratic factors, jumped last year.3 Measures of longer-term inflation expectations have been stable, while shorter- term expectations generally moved down a bit last year A generally held view among economists is that inflation expectations influence actual inflation by affecting wage- and price-setting decisions. Measures of inflation expectations over a longer 2 Because prices for housing services measure the rents paid by all tenants (and the equivalent rent implicitly paid by all homeowners)—including those whose leases have not recently come up for renewal—they tend to adjust slowly to changes in rental market conditions. 3 The market-based services prices are derived from specific consumer price indexes or producer price indexes associ- ated with observable market transactions, whereas the non-market-based services prices are imputed to account for the value of the service provided because no observable transactions are available. ers) and professional forecasters have remained broadly consistent with the FOMC’s longer-run 2 percent inflation objective (figure 8). Over the past year, these measures have been little changed and within the range seen in the decade before the pandemic. For example, the median forecaster in the Survey of Professional Forecasters, conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, continued to expect inflation to average 2 percent over the five years beginning five Similarly, market-based measures of longer-term inflation compensation, which are based on financial instruments linked to inflation such as Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities, are also broadly in line with readings seen in the years before the pandemic and consistent with PCE infla- tion returning to 2 percent (figure 9). Note: The data for the Michigan survey are monthly and extend through January 2025. The data for the Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF) are quarterly. Note: The data are at a business-day frequency and are estimated from smoothed nominal and inflation- indexed Treasury yield curves. Survey-based inflation expectations over a shorter horizon—which tend to follow observed inflation more closely—rose along with inflation in 2020 and 2021 but then moved back down through the end of 2024. More recently, the median value for expected inflation over the next year from the University of Michigan survey moved up some in December and January. Even so, Consumer Expectations are in line with pre-pandemic levels. The labor market remains solid . . . The labor market remains in solid shape. At the end of the year, the unemployment rate was low relative to historical experience, the labor force participation rate (LFPR) among workers aged 25 to 54 remained above its high from the years just before the pandemic, and job vacancies were at a strong level. For the year, employment rose moderately, layoffs remained low, and wage . . . with labor market conditions appearing to stabilize over the second half of last year after a period of easing After gradually increasing over much of 2023, the unemployment rate rose somewhat fur- June 2024. However, it was mostly unchanged thereafter, ending the year at 4.1 percent— ment rates moved up, on net, last year, but to graphic Groups” provides further details.) Note: All data displayed are 3-month moving averages. Unemployment rate measures total unemployed as a percentage of the labor force. Persons whose ethnicity is identified as Hispanic or Latino may be of any race. Small sample sizes preclude reliable estimates for Native Americans and other groups for which monthly data are not reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Similar to the unemployment rate, measures of job vacancies—which had been gradually moving lower since mid-2022—also appear to have stabilized over the second half of last year. For exam- ple, job openings as measured in the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey (JOLTS), as well as an alternative measure using job postings data from the large online job board Indeed, edged down, on net, over the first half of last year and flattened out more recently. In December, both measures were a bit above their 2019 average levels.4 4 While job openings might be above pre-pandemic levels because labor demand is stronger than in that period, it might instead, at least in part, reflect changes in firms’ job-posting behavior. For example, some firms might be more willing than they were pre-pandemic to post openings that they are unsure they might fill, because they experienced severe labor shortages and hiring difficulties earlier in the pandemic and want to avoid a similar situation. Economic expansions have tended to narrow long-standing disparities in employment and earnings across demographic groups, which can help make up for disproportionate losses experienced during downturns. These beneﬁ ts have been evident during the expansion in recent years as an exception- ally tight labor market has allowed gaps between groups to narrow signiﬁ cantly. Over the past year, even as labor market conditions have eased, employment disparities continue to be near their recent lows, while wage growth has remained solid across many groups despite slowing a bit from post- pandemic highs. However, despite the progress in recent years, signiﬁ cant disparities in absolute levels across groups remain. Among prime-age people (aged 25 to 54), employment for Black or African American workers remains relatively high. The employment-to-population (EPOP) ratio for this group increased from mid-2020 until 2023 and has been mostly ﬂ at, on net, near its historical peak since then (ﬁ gure A, left panel). This movement, combined with relatively smaller increases in the EPOP ratio for white workers over the same period, led the gap between the EPOP ratios for Blacks and whites to fall to its lowest point in 50 years. Over the past year, as the labor market has eased, this gap appears to have widened slightly but remains near its historical low.1 Employment for Hispanic or Latino workers has also remained quite strong, with an EPOP ratio close to its historical high. As a result, the gap between the EPOP ratios between this group and white workers is also near its narrowest point. The EPOP ratio for prime-age Asian workers remains high as well, sitting slightly below its historical peak.2 Similarly, the EPOP ratio for prime-age women of all levels of education grew strongly in the post- pandemic recovery, surpassing its pre-pandemic level, and peaked last year. The increase in the EPOP ratio among this group most likely reﬂ ects both the continuation of the pre-pandemic trend of rising female labor force participation—some of which is likely attributable to increased educational (continued) Figure a. Prime-age employment-to-population ratios compared with the 2019 average ratio, by group Note: The data are 3-month moving averages. Prime age is 25 to 54. All series are seasonally adjusted by Federal Reserve Board staff. In figures A and B, EPOP ratios are shown indexed to their 2019 average; therefore, gaps between groups are not readily evident. 2 As monthly series have greater sampling variability for smaller groups, we do not plot EPOP ratio estimates for American attainment—and the continuing availability of remote work.3 In contrast, the EPOP ratio for prime- age men has remained mostly ﬂ at near 2019 levels over the past several years, and, as a result, the male–female EPOP ratio gap narrowed signiﬁ cantly to a record low. That said, the EPOP ratios for women by education level diverged a bit in the latter half of 2024 (ﬁ gure A, right panel). While the EPOP ratio for college-educated women remained well above 2019 levels through the second half of last year, that for non-college-educated women moved closer to 2019 levels, reﬂ ecting both a small decline in labor force participation and a small increase in unemployment. Like the experiences of women and minority workers, employment for prime-age people living outside of large metropolitan areas also especially beneﬁ ted from the economic expansion of recent years. While the EPOP ratios for workers in all areas increased over this period, those for rural areas (“nonmetros”) and smaller cities have been particularly strong (ﬁ gure B, top panel).4 As a result, and given that EPOP ratios are relatively low in rural areas, the gap between EPOP ratios for workers in larger cities and those for workers in rural areas has declined over the past sev- eral years and now sits 1 percentage point below its 2019 average. The EPOP ratio gap between smaller and larger cities also dropped below its pre-pandemic level during this period; however, as the labor market has rebalanced over the past year, this gap appears to have widened back to its 2019 level. Interestingly, the employment gains for workers in rural areas and smaller cities dif- fered signiﬁ cantly by education level. In rural areas, employment for non-college-educated workers increased by more than for similarly educated workers in cities (ﬁ gure B, bottom-left panel). In con- trast, employment for college-educated workers increased relatively more in smaller cities than in either of the other areas (ﬁ gure B, bottom-right panel). While employment disparities across many demographic groups are within range of historical lows reached during the post-pandemic recovery period, substantial gender, racial, ethnic, and geographic gaps remain, underscoring long-standing structural factors. Currently, prime-age women are employed at a rate 11 percentage points less than men, while prime-age Black and Hispanic workers are employed at a rate 3 to 4 percentage points less than white workers. Further, workers in rural areas are employed at a rate 1 to 3 percentage points below workers in cities. Similar to employment, a solid but cooling labor market has supported nominal wage growth over the past year—albeit at a slower pace than that during the exceptionally tight labor market in the previous two years. Even so, with headline inﬂ ation declining, these wage gains imply continued solid increases in real wages across many groups. In recent years, real wage growth was particularly robust for lower-wage workers and for many historically disadvantaged groups; however, by the end of 2024, wage growth for these groups had moderated. As shown in the top-left panel of ﬁ gure C, real wage growth—as measured by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta’s Wage Growth Tracker and deﬂ ated by the personal consumption expenditures price index—was relatively strong for workers in the bottom half of the income distribution during the post-pandemic recovery through the ﬁ rst half of (continued) pandemic, see Didem Tüzemen and Thao Tran (2019), “The Uneven Recovery in Prime-Age Labor Force Participation,” Fed- eral Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Economic Review, vol. 104 (Third Quarter), pp. 21–41, https://www.kansascityfed.org/ Economic%20Review/documents/652/2019-The%20Uneven%20Recovery%20in%20Prime-Age%20Labor%20Force%20 Participation.pdf. For a discussion on access to remote work and participation rates, see Maria D. Tito (2024), “Does the Ability to Work Remotely Alter Labor Force Attachment? An Analysis of Female Labor Force Participation,” FEDS Notes (Wash- ington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January 19), https://doi.org/10.17016/2380-7172.3433. 4 Calculations of the series shown are as described in Alison Weingarden (2017), “Labor Market Outcomes in Metropolitan and Non-metropolitan Areas: Signs of Growing Disparities,” FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 25), https://doi.org/10.17016/2380-7172.2063. Larger metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs) are defined as metropolitan areas with a population greater than 500,000 or more, while smaller MSAs are those with a popula- tion between 100,000 and 500,000. Non-MSAs consist of counties without strong commuting ties to an urbanized center. Figure b. Prime-age employment-to-population ratios compared with the 2019 average ratio, by metropolitan status and education Note: The data are 3-month moving averages. Prime age is 25 to 54. Larger metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs) consist of 500,000 people or more, and smaller MSAs consist of 100,000 to 500,000 people. All series are seasonally adjusted by Federal Reserve Board staff. 2024; however, by the end of the year, wage growth had edged down for this group, and growth had become similar across all quartiles.5 This pattern in wage growth across the income distribution is reﬂ ected in the experiences of different demographic groups. Wage growth for nonwhite workers had been a bit stronger than that for white workers since 2022 but, by mid-2024, had fallen to a similar rate of growth (ﬁ gure C, top-right panel). Similarly, wage growth for workers with a high school diploma or less was strong relative to other groups in the post-pandemic tight labor market; however, as labor market conditions softened in 2024, wage growth for this group tapered and fell below that for college-educated workers (ﬁ gure C, bottom-left panel). In contrast, wages for men and women largely grew in tandem until the middle of last year, but real wage growth for women outpaced a bit that for men by the end of 2024 (ﬁ gure C, bottom-right panel). (continued) 5 To reduce noise due to sampling variation, which can be pronounced when considering disaggregated groups’ wage changes, the series shown in figure C are the 12-month moving averages of the groups’ median 12-month real wage change. Thus, by construction, these series lag the actual real wage changes. High school or less Associate’s degree Bachelor’s degree or more Note: Series show 12-month moving averages of the median percent change in the hourly wage of individuals observed 12 months apart, deflated by the 12-month moving average of the 12-month percent change in the personal consumption expenditures price index. In the top-left panel, workers are assigned to wage quartiles based on the average of their wage reports in both Current Population Survey outgoing rotation group interviews; workers in the lowest 25 percent of the average wage distribution are assigned to the 1st quartile, and those in the top 25 percent are assigned to the 4th quartile. Job gains eased some last year, slowing from (figure 12).5 Job growth remained relatively governments (where employment levels have been normalizing toward pre-pandemic trends ment declined in manufacturing. Note: The data shown are a 3-month moving average of the change in nonfarm payroll employment. demand last year manifested as a slowdown in hiring rather than an increase in layoffs. Indeed, many hiring indicators, such as the hiring rate from the JOLTS and the rate at which unemployed individuals became employed each month from the Current Population Survey, moved lower last year. In contrast, layoffs indicators, such as initial claims for unemployment insurance and the layoffs rate from JOLTS, were mostly little changed and have remained low (figure 13). Initial unemployment claims (right scale) JOLTS layoff rate (left scale) Note: The data for initial claims are reported as a 4-week moving average and extend through January 18, 2025. The data for the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey (JOLTS) layoff rate are monthly. Series are truncated at the top of the figure in 2020 and 2021. 5 Job growth last year has likely been somewhat less strong than currently reported in the Current Employment Sta- tistics (CES), as suggested by the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ (BLS) preliminary benchmark revision to the CES and administrative data from the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW). The CES payroll data will be revised with the release of the January employment report on February 7, when the BLS will benchmark payroll estimates to employment counts from the QCEW as part of its annual benchmarking process. Should payroll gains be downwardly revised as suggested by these indicators, payroll employment gains would then be more consistent with the edging up of the unemployment rate last year. Increases in labor supply appear to have slowed At the same time, the supply of labor—determined by both the LFPR (the share of the population either working or seeking work) and population growth—appears to have increased more slowly After having rebounded notably from its pan- demic lows, the LFPR has been little changed since mid-2023 and was 62.5 percent in aging has continued to put downward pres- sure on the LFPR, this influence has been offset by increasing participation among some age groups. In particular, the LFPR among those aged 25 to 54 has increased Note: Values before January 2024 are estimated by Federal Reserve Board staff to eliminate discontinuities in the published history. cially among women) and, despite declining a has remained at a high level. Regarding population growth, the Census Bureau now estimates that immigration increased strongly from 2022 through June 2024, contributing to strong annual population growth over this period.6 While official Census Bureau immigration estimates are unavailable after June, more recent indicators point to a sharp slowdown in immigration and population growth since the mid- The labor market no longer appears especially tight As labor demand has slowed further, labor demand and supply have continued to move into closer alignment. By many measures, the labor market appears somewhat less tight than just before the pandemic; for example, the gap between the number of total available jobs (measured by employed workers plus job openings) and the number of available workers (measured by the size of the labor force) averaged 0.8 million in the fourth quarter of last year—well below its 2022 7 Some of these more recent indicators include data from the Department of Homeland Security on encounters between migrants and Customs and Border Patrol agents on the southwest border; see U.S. Department of Homeland Security (2025), “Immigration Enforcement and Legal Processes Monthly Tables,” webpage, https://ohss.dhs.gov/ topics/immigration/immigration-enforcement/immigration-enforcement-and-legal-processes-monthly. Note: Available jobs are employment plus job openings as of the end of the previous month. Available workers are the labor force. Data for employment and labor force before January 2024 are estimated by Federal Reserve Board staff to eliminate discontinuities in the published history. share of respondents to the Conference Board Consumer Confidence Survey who say that jobs are plentiful, and the monthly percentage of the workforce that has quit their job as measured in JOLTS (an indicator of the availability of attractive job prospects), are also somewhat below 2019 levels (but above their ranges that prevailed over much of the previous expansion). Similarly, the unemployment rate in December was about ½ percentage point higher than its 2019 average Labor productivity increased solidly in 2024 increased 1.97 percent in 2024 (figure 16). Productivity growth has swung wildly since the onset of the pandemic, but looking through the fourth quarter of 2019 is estimated to have increased 1.8 percent, 0.3 percent- prevailed over the previous expansion.8 (For productivity growth, see the box “Labor Pro- Note: The data are output per hour in the business sector. 8 Productivity estimates can be subject to large revisions. For example, the anticipated downward revisions to payroll employment discussed in footnote 5 would likely imply a small upward revision to currently published productivity growth. Revisions to gross domestic product estimates, in either direction, could also have a substantial effect on measured productivity. While labor productivity in the business sector has been volatile since the start of the pandemic, smoothing through these swings, productivity has increased at an average annual rate of 1.8 percent from 2019:Q4 to 2024:Q4—stronger than its 1.5 percent annual average pace over the previous business cycle, 2007:Q4 to 2019:Q4 (ﬁ gure A). This relatively strong growth rate has put the level of productivity more than 1½ percent above where it would have been had it increased at its pre- pandemic pace. Should stronger productivity growth be maintained, it would have important economic consequences, because stronger productivity growth can support stronger growth in gross domestic product and real wages without additional inﬂ ationary pressure. Productivity Productivity, assuming pre-pandemic growth rate Note: The data are output per hour in the business sector. The blue line plots output per hour, assuming a constant growth rate equal to its average from 2007:Q4 to 2019:Q4. The shaded bars with top caps indicate periods of business recession as defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research: December 2007 to June 2009 and February 2020 to April 2020. Why has productivity growth been stronger than its pre-pandemic pace? One key contributing factor has likely been new business formation, which surged early in the pandemic and remains strong (ﬁ gure B). This strength has likely supported productivity growth because newer ﬁ rms are more likely to adopt new technologies or production processes, use existing processes more efﬁ ciently, or create new products themselves.1 Moreover, the surge in business formation has been disproportionately concentrated in high-tech industries, which historically have been important drivers of productivity gains.2 As some of the more productive businesses started over the past few years grow further, they (continued) 1 Although the latest data on new establishment formation is available only through 2024:Q2, new business applications— many of which lead to new businesses forming—remained high through 2024:Q4, suggesting that new businesses continued to be created at a strong pace throughout the second half of last year. For evidence that newer businesses have historically been an important driver of productivity gains, see Titan Alon, David Berger, Robert Dent, and Benjamin Pugsley (2018), “Older and Slower: The Startup Deficit’s Lasting Effects on Aggregate Productivity Growth,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 93 (January), pp. 68–85. For some evidence that the surge in business formation from the past few years has featured genuine new entrepreneurial activity (rather than only reflecting, for example, a surge in gig work or in new establishments among incumbent firms), see Ryan A. Decker and John Haltiwanger (2023), “Surging Business Formation in the Pandemic: Causes and Consequences?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, pp. 249–302, https://www.brookings.edu/ wp-content/uploads/2023/09/Decker-Haltiwanger_16820-BPEA-FA23_WEB.pdf; and Ryan A. Decker and John Haltiwanger (2024), “Surging Business Formation in the Pandemic: A Brief Update,” working paper, September. may continue to support strong productivity growth, even if the rate of business formation slows. That said, much is still unknown about the nature and growth prospects of these pandemic-era new busi- nesses, so there is considerable uncertainty around how much these businesses have contributed to recent productivity growth and how consequential they will be to productivity going forward. Other contributing factors may have provided a more short-lived boost to productivity growth. For example, some ﬁ rms facing severe labor shortages early in the pandemic likely expanded their use of labor-saving technologies and more efﬁ ciently restructured aspects of production, which enhanced their workers’ productivity and reduced some ﬁ rms’ need for pre-pandemic levels of labor. However, as labor supply has gradually returned, ﬁ rms’ need for further expansion of labor-saving technologies may have diminished. Another temporary factor has likely been worker reallocation across jobs (ﬁ gure C). Measures of worker reallocation, such as the rate of transitions between jobs (black line) and quits (blue line), jumped early in the pandemic and may have resulted in more productive matches between some workers and jobs.3 However, these measures have returned to pre-pandemic levels (or lower), so worker reallocation is unlikely to still be providing much support to productivity growth. (continued) Changing jobs since last month (right scale) JOLTS, total quits rate (left scale) Note: Quarterly new business applications are the sum of high-propensity applications over the month. The Business Employment Dynamics (BED) data extend through 2024:Q2. The shaded bar with a top cap indicates a period of business recession as defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research: February 2020 to April 2020. Note: The data are seasonally adjusted quarterly averages. The black line applies only to persons aged 16 or older. JOLTS is the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey. 3 For evidence that job-to-job movements have historically been an important contributor to productivity gains, see John Halti- wanger, Henry Hyatt, Erika McEntarfer, and Matthew Staiger (2025), “Cyclical Worker Flows: Cleansing vs. Sullying,” Review of Economic Dynamics, vol. 55 (January), 101252. For evidence suggesting that the recent period of elevated worker reallocation may have been productivity enhancing because it in part reflected transitions from lower-wage (lower-productivity) jobs to higher-wage (higher-productivity) jobs, see David Autor, Arindrajit Dube, and Annie McGrew (2023), “The Unexpected Compres- sion: Competition at Work in the Low Wage Labor Market,” NBER Working Paper Series 31010 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, March; revised May 2024), https://www.nber.org/papers/w31010. Finally, integration of artiﬁ cial intelligence (AI) into production processes may already be contributing to productivity gains. However, any effects on measured productivity so far have probably been small, since it will likely take many ﬁ rms some time to ﬁ gure out how to effectively integrate AI into the workplace.4 As AI becomes more widely adopted and more efﬁ ciently used, it may contribute more substantially to productivity, although there are conﬂ icting views about any potential economic impli- cations.5 It seems possible that all of the aforementioned factors have contributed, at least to some degree, to the strength in productivity since the start of the pandemic, although it is difﬁ cult to separate out their relative contributions. Going forward, whether productivity growth can remain above its pre- pandemic pace depends in part on how persistent the inﬂ uence of some of these factors proves to be and whether these or other factors become even more consequential (for example, how much fur- ther AI technologies develop and how widespread their usage becomes). 4 Evidence is mixed on how prevalent AI use is in the workplace currently. For example, the Census Bureau’s Business Trends and Outlook Survey reports that, as of January, only around 6 percent of firms reported using AI in production, and around 10 percent planned to do so in the next six months. That said, some other surveys indicate higher usage among firms. For example, 25 percent of service firms and 16 percent of manufacturing firms that responded to an August 2024 survey by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York reported using AI in production; see Jaison R. Abel, Richard Deitz, Natalia Emanuel, and Benjamin Hyman (2024), “AI and the Labor Market: Will Firms Hire, Fire, or Retrain?” Liberty Street Economics (blog), September 4, https://libertystreeteconomics.newyorkfed.org/2024/09/ai-and-the-labor-market-will-firms-hire-fire-or-retrain). Some worker-based surveys also point to a substantial share of workers using AI-enabled tools in their workflow—for exam- ple, one recent survey found that one-fourth of workers used generative AI in their work over the previous week; see Alexander Bick, Adam Blandin, and David J. Deming, “The Rapid Adoption of Generative AI,” NBER Working Paper Series 32966 (Cam- bridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, September), https://www.nber.org/papers/w32966; and Conference Board (2023), “Majority of U.S. Workers Are Already Using Generative AI Tools—But Company Policies Trail Behind,” press release, September 13, https://www.conference-board.org/press/us-workers-and-generative-ai. 5 For an estimate that AI could result in significant productivity gains, see Martin Neil Baily, Erik Brynjolfsson, and Anton Korinek (2023), “Machines of Mind: The Case for an AI-Powered Productivity Boom” (Washington: Brookings Institution, May 10), https://www.brookings.edu/articles/machines-of-mind-the-case-for-an-ai-powered-productivity-boom. For an esti- mate that the productivity effects of AI could be more modest, see Daron Acemoglu (2024), “The Simple Macroeconomics of AI,” Economic Policy, eiae042 (August). Wage growth has slowed but remains solid As labor market tightness eased somewhat further last year, nominal wage growth has also continued to slow, although to a still- solid pace (figure 17). Total hourly compen- sation, as measured by the employment cost index (ECI), increased 3.6 percent over the 12 months ending in December and has gradually slowed from its peak increase of also slowed some last year, with the Fed- Tracker (which reports the median 12-month wage growth of individuals responding to the Current Population Survey) slowing in line with Note: For the private-sector employment cost index, change is over the 12 months ending in the last month of each quarter; for private-sector average hourly earnings, the data are 12-month percent changes; for the Atlanta Fed’s Wage Growth Tracker, the data are shown as a 3-month moving average of the 12-month percent change. the first half but flattening out over the second half. Despite this slowing, wage growth remains somewhat above its 2019 pace. This contrasts with the normalization in other labor market tightness indicators cited earlier and might reflect per- sistence in the adjustment process of wages to earlier shocks as well as support from strong pro- ductivity growth. Nominal wage growth may still remain somewhat too high to be consistent with 2 percent inflation over time, although this depends in part on how persistent the recent strength in productivity proves to be. With PCE prices having risen 2.6 percent last year, these wage measures suggest that most workers saw increases in the purchasing power of their wages in 2024. That said, the extent of these increases depends in part on workers’ individual circumstances—because nominal wage changes vary significantly across industry and occupation and because households consume different baskets of goods than the one represented in the aggregate PCE price index. (For details on how real wage gains have differed across demographic groups, see the box “Employment and Gross domestic product rose solidly last year Real gross domestic product (GDP) is reported to have increased at a solid annual rate of (figure 18). GDP growth last year was impor- tantly supported by strength in consumer grew moderately, while activity in the hous- ing market was lackluster. For the year, GDP increased 2.5 percent—somewhat slower Note: The key identifies bars in order from left to right. The data for gross domestic income extend through 2024:H1. structures investment (which surged in 2023 from booming construction of manufactur- ing facilities), and more of a drag from net exports (as imports grew faster than exports). In contrast to GDP, manufacturing output was little changed last year. In part, weakness in man- ufacturing production reflects tight financing conditions, as manufacturing output was weaker, on average, in sectors that tend to be more responsive to interest rates. Moreover, recent growth in domestic goods spending has largely been accommodated by increased imports. Special factors also held down production in some key industries like aircraft, where a labor dispute held down output. In all, manufacturing output has been fairly flat in recent years and remains below its Consumer spending has been resilient despite some headwinds consumer spending adjusted for inflation grew a strong 3.2 percent last year, a little spending has been supported by a still-solid relative to income, and rising real wages— increased at an average pace of 3.6 percent ers continued to spend more of their income than was typical before the pandemic, and the saving rate—the difference between income—has remained somewhat below its years (figure 20). Consumers maintained this pace of spending in part by drawing down their stock of liquid assets (such as checking and savings accounts) that had accumulated demic and by relying more on credit. Even so, households’ stock of liquid assets appears to have stabilized at a solid level somewhat above its pre-pandemic trend, suggesting that households, in the aggregate, may have a larger-than-usual buffer to weather eco- Consumer spending has been more robust suggest (figure 21). Although sentiment in the Michigan survey (right scale) Conference Board (left scale) University of Michigan survey has improved notably since 2022, it remains well below its the Conference Board also remains somewhat Michigan survey measure, as it puts more Note: The data extend through January 2025. Consumer financing conditions remain somewhat restrictive sumer loans, consumer financing conditions have remained restrictive, reflecting still-high bor- rowing costs and tight bank lending standards. According to the October 2024 and January 2025 eral Reserve Board, over the second half of last year banks reported tightening lending standards further for credit cards but loosening them somewhat for auto loans, albeit from tight levels.9 For rates that have remained somewhat elevated relative to the pre-pandemic period. 9 These results reported from the SLOOS are based on banks’ responses weighted by each bank’s outstanding loans in the respective loan category, and they might therefore differ from the published SLOOS results (which are based on banks’ unweighted responses). Note: Credit card balances were little changed in 2011 and 2012. Note: The data are contract rates on 30-year, fixed- rate conventional home mortgage commitments and extend through January 30, 2025. Figure 24. New and existing home sales Existing home sales (right scale) New home sales (left scale) Note: New and existing home sales include only single-family sales. Even so, financing has generally remained available to support spending for most scores, and consumer credit expanded mod- Residential investment increased modestly last year investment turned around in the middle of 2023 and increased modestly, on net, last year, supported by solid income growth and mortgage rates—which moved down a bit rates have moved back up again. The markets for new and existing homes have evolved differently over the past few years (figure 24). Existing home sales remain purchased or refinanced homes when fixed mortgage rates were lower appear unwilling to move and take out a new mortgage with a much higher rate. Indeed, the majority of out- standing mortgages still have interest rates In contrast, sales of new homes bounced and remained around these levels throughout last year. The new home market has likely been supported by demand from buyers who are unable to find homes in the existing home homes encouraged builders to increase housing construction, and starts for single-family housing generally maintained solid levels last year (figure 26). Reflecting some additional rebalancing in the housing market, in part from supply improvements, house prices increased moderately last year, well below the pace seen in 2021 and 2022 (figure 27). Note: The sample only includes outstanding mortgages current on their payments. Note: S&P/Case-Shiller and CoreLogic data extend through November 2024. Meanwhile, starts of multifamily units—which are predominantly rental units—continued to trend lower last year because of weaker rent growth, increasing vacancies, and as a large backlog of new units have entered the market following a wave of multifamily construction from 2021 Capital spending grew moderately last year After increasing solidly in 2023, business investment spending rose moderately last year despite high interest rates, supported by strong sales growth and improving business sentiment Figure 28. Change in real business fixed investment ness investment have shifted over the past year. Investment in structures, which surged ing construction (especially for factories that batteries), has flattened out, albeit at a high Note: Business fixed investment is known as “private nonresidential fixed investment” in the national income and product accounts. The key identifies bars in order from left to right. (which includes software and research and development) has picked up a bit, in part as businesses have been outfitting new man- ued investment related to artificial intelligence business financing conditions remained somewhat restrictive, but credit remains generally available While businesses have still faced somewhat restrictive financing conditions as interest rates have stayed elevated, credit has remained generally available to most nonfinancial corporations. Over the second half of last year, banks reported leaving lending standards for business loans basi- cally unchanged, after tightening them since the middle of 2022. Issuance of corporate bonds remained solid across credit categories, although below the levels that prevailed at the start of For small businesses, which are more reliant on bank financing than large businesses are, credit conditions were little changed over the second half of last year. Surveys indicate that credit supply for small businesses remained relatively tight, while interest rates on loans to small businesses decreased some late in the year but remained near the top of the range observed since 2008. Loan default rates and delinquency rates, which had risen since mid-2022, moved down somewhat starting in the fall but still stand above their pre-pandemic rates. Finally, loan originations trended down slowly since the summer but are in the range observed before the pan- demic, suggesting that credit continues to be available for small businesses with sound financial Exports and imports grew moderately in the second half of 2024 After lackluster growth in the first half of last year, real exports of goods and services picked up in the second half, led by exports of capital goods (figure 29). Meanwhile, real imports were ported by imports of high-tech capital goods. Combined, net exports subtracted 0.2 per- second half and subtracted 0.5 percentage ened somewhat in the third quarter to roughly twice as wide as it was before the pandemic. Federal fiscal policy actions provided a modest boost to GDP growth last year Note: The key identifies bars in order from left to right. Last year, federal purchases grew moderately, and some policies enacted after the pandemic continued to boost private investment and consumption. This support to economic activity was offset somewhat by the fading effects of earlier pandemic-related fiscal policy support. All told, the contribution of discretionary changes in federal fiscal policy was a modest boost to real GDP The budget deficit and federal debt remain elevated After surging to about 15 percent of GDP in and receipts—declined through fiscal 2022 as the imprint of the pandemic faded, but it has been fairly flat since then (figure 30). In fiscal 2024, the budget deficit was 6.4 per- continued to outpace receipts and as the cost of debt service increased as a result of higher Note: The receipts and expenditures data are on a unified-budget basis and are for fiscal years (October through September); gross domestic product (GDP) data are on a 4-quarter basis ending in Q3. As a result of the fiscal support enacted early in the pandemic, federal debt held by the public jumped during the pandemic, reaching nearly 100 percent of GDP in early 2021—the highest debt-to-GDP ratio since 1946—and has only edged lower since then (figure 31). The debt-to-GDP ratio has been about flat since then, as the large primary deficits have occurred along with strong nominal GDP growth, but the Congressional Budget Office projects that debt-to-GDP will resume rising in the coming years as deficits remain elevated. Debt held by the public (right scale) Net interest outlays on federal debt (left scale) Note: The data for net interest outlays are annual, begin in 1948, and extend through 2024. Net interest outlays are the cost of servicing the debt held by the public, offset by certain types of interest income the government receives. Federal debt held by the public equals federal debt excluding most intragovernmental debt, evaluated at the end of the quarter. The data for federal debt are annual from 1900 to 1951 and a 4-quarter moving average thereafter and extend through 2024:Q3. GDP is gross domestic product. The fiscal position of most state and local governments remains in good shape, as tax revenue growth has normalized . . . Federal policymakers provided a historically falling somewhat in 2023, state tax reve- nues grew modestly in 2024, and taxes as a percentage of GDP remain somewhat above historical norms. According to the National Note: Receipts shown are year-over-year percent changes of 4-quarter moving averages, begin in 2012:Q4, and extend through 2024:Q3. Property taxes are primarily collected by local governments. total balances—that is, including rainy day funds—declined in 2024 from their all-time high in 2023 but remained well above pre- pandemic levels. At the local level, overall property tax receipts rose at a solid pace in 2024, and assessments suggest that—given past house price appreciation—property tax revenues will continue to rise going forward. . . . contributing to above-average growth in employment and construction spending last year in the pandemic faded, in part because wages have become more competitive with ment has approached its pre-pandemic trend, growth slowed somewhat last year, although to a still-strong pace. Similarly, real construc- tion outlays—which grew at a historically high pace in 2023 owing to support from federal grants and easing bottlenecks—increased tors faded. The expected level of the federal funds rate over the next year shifted up notably . . . Market-based measures of the expected path of the federal funds rate declined over Reserve eased monetary policy beginning at measures moved up in the fourth quarter as market participants scaled back their expec- funds rate in 2025 is little changed since last July, and the path for 2026 is notably higher (figure 34). Financial market prices now imply that the federal funds rate will decline a further 40 basis points from current Note: The federal funds rate path is implied by quotes on overnight index swaps—a derivative contract tied to the effective federal funds rate. The implied path as of July 9, 2024, is compared with that as of February 4, 2025. The path is estimated with a spline approach, assuming a term premium of 0 basis points. The July 9, 2024, path extends through 2028:Q3 and the February 4, 2025, path through 2029:Q1. 2026. Consistent with current market prices, cial Forecasts survey expected the federal funds rate to average 3.8 percent in the fourth quarter . . . and yields on long-term u.S. nominal Treasury securities are higher on net While short-term Treasury yields declined somewhat, on net, since last July, yields on long-term cent, the 10-year Treasury yield rose nota- bly, reaching a level of 4.6 percent by early February (figure 35). The rise in long-term reflected an increase in real yields, as mea- sured by yields on Treasury Inflation-Protected yields on other long-term debt were little changed on net improved market sentiment since September, spreads on corporate bonds over comparable-maturity Treasury securities narrowed, particularly for speculative-grade bonds, and are now very low relative to their respective historical distribu- tions. As the decline in spreads largely offset the increase in Treasury yields, corporate bond yields were little changed, on net, across credit categories and remained elevated (figure 36). Similarly, municipal bond spreads over comparable-maturity Treasury securities narrowed some- what, on net, and stand near the bottom of the historical distribution. Meanwhile, municipal bond yields increased slightly since July. Yields on agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS)—an important factor for home mortgage interest rates—were little changed, on net, and currently stand at similar levels to those observed in June (figure 37). The MBS spreads narrowed notably but remained elevated by historical standards, at least partly due to high interest rate volatility, which increases prepayment risk and reduces the value of holding MBS. Note: High-yield corporate reflects the effective yield of the ICE Bank of America Merrill Lynch (BofAML) High Yield Index (H0A0). Investment-grade corporate reflects the effective yield of the ICE BofAML triple-B U.S. Corporate Index (C0A4). Municipal reflects the yield to worst of the ICE BofAML U.S. Municipal Securities Index (U0A0). Note: Yield shown is for the uniform mortgage- backed securities 30-year current coupon, the coupon rate at which new mortgage-backed securities would be priced at par, or face, value for dates after May 31, 2019; for earlier dates, the yield shown is for the Fannie Mae 30-year current coupon. Spread shown is to the average of the 5-year and 10-year nominal Treasury yields. broad equity price indexes increased further Amid elevated expectations of long-term index increased further since June (figure 38). talization firms rose during this period. Bank equity prices increased during the second increased moderately since July amid higher path (figure 39). Currently, the level of the VIX is below the median of its historical distribu- tion since 1990. (For a discussion of financial stability issues, see the box “Developments Major asset markets functioned in an orderly manner, but liquidity remained low Treasury securities market functioning con- tinued to be orderly, but a number of indica- Note: The VIX is an option-implied volatility measure that represents the expected annualized variability of the S&P 500 index over the following 30 days. The expected volatility series shows a forecast of 1-month realized volatility, using a heterogeneous autoregressive model based on 5-minute S&P 500 returns. tors suggest that liquidity remained low by liquidity is broadly in line with the continued high level of interest rate volatility. Liquidity in equity markets continued to be low, at levels comparable with those observed last July. Meanwhile, corporate and municipal bond markets continued to function well amid stable liquidity and trading Short-term funding market conditions remained stable Conditions in overnight bank funding and repurchase agreement markets continued to be stable. December FOMC meetings fully passed through to overnight money market rates. Since June, the effective federal funds rate has remained 7 basis points below the interest rate on reserve balances. The Secured Overnight Financing Rate has been slightly above the offering rate on the pressure on quarter-ends. Take-up at the ON RRP facility continued to decline amid an increase in This discussion reviews vulnerabilities in the U.S. ﬁ nancial system. The framework used by the Federal Reserve Board for assessing the resilience of the U.S. ﬁ nancial system focuses on ﬁ nancial vulnerabilities in four broad areas: asset valuations, business and household debt, leverage in the ﬁ nancial sector, and funding risks. All told, the ﬁ nancial system remains sound and resilient. Valua- tions remained high relative to fundamentals in a range of markets, including those for equity, cor- porate debt, and residential real estate. Total debt of households and nonﬁ nancial businesses as a fraction of gross domestic product (GDP) continued to trend down to a level that is very low relative to that in the past two decades. Most banks continued to report capital levels well above regulatory requirements, but fair value losses on ﬁ xed-rate assets were still sizable for some banks. In addition, the trend of reduced reliance by banks on uninsured deposits continued, and recent Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) reforms mitigated some vulnerabilities associated with prime money market funds (MMFs). Meanwhile, hedge fund leverage appears to be high and concentrated. Valuation pressures increased somewhat from already high levels. The ratio of equity prices to 12-month forward earnings is close to the high end of its historical range, driven to a substantial extent by the largest companies. Spreads between yields on corporate bonds and those on comparable-maturity Treasury securities were very low compared with their history. In residential property markets, the ratio of house prices to rents rose to near the highest levels on record, though high house prices do not appear to have been supported by excessive borrower leverage. Meanwhile, conditions in commercial real estate (CRE) markets have recently showed signs of stabilization after a sustained period of deterioration. Nominal long-term Treasury yields increased moderately and Trea- sury market depth remained low, suggesting market liquidity remained low by historical standards. Vulnerabilities from nonﬁ nancial business and household debt remained moderate. The combined debt of both sectors as a share of GDP continued to trend down and is at its lowest level in the past 20 years (ﬁ gure A). Household debt as a share of GDP is especially subdued relative to recent history and is owed primarily by prime-rated borrowers (ﬁ gure B). However, delinquency rates on credit cards and auto loans among borrowers with nonprime credit ratings remained above pre-pandemic levels. Business debt as a share of GDP has declined signiﬁ cantly from the post-COVID-19 peak and stands (continued) Note: The shaded bars with top caps indicate periods of business recession as defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research: January 1980 to July 1980, July 1981 to November 1982, July 1990 to March 1991, March 2001 to November 2001, December 2007 to June 2009, and February 2020 to April 2020. GDP is gross domestic product. The data extend through 2024:Q3. Figure b. Nonfinancial business and household debt-to-GDP ratios Note: The shaded bars with top caps indicate periods of business recession as defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research: July 1981 to November 1982, July 1990 to March 1991, March 2001 to November 2001, December 2007 to June 2009, and February 2020 to April 2020. GDP is gross domestic product. The data extend through 2024:Q3. near the bottom of its range over the past decade (as shown in ﬁ gure B); however, business debt as a share of business assets was high by historical standards, and private credit arrangements have also been growing rapidly. That said, measures of the ability of businesses to service their debt have been stable within typical ranges, in part reﬂ ecting robust corporate earnings. Vulnerabilities associated with ﬁ nancial leverage remained notable. The banking sector remained sound and resilient overall, and most banks continued to report capital levels well above regulatory requirements. Although fair value losses on ﬁ xed-rate assets have moderated, they were still sizable for some banks and remained sensitive to changes in long-term interest rates. The overall credit qual- ity of banks’ assets was sound, with the aggregate bank loan delinquency rate remaining at histori- cally low levels. However, some banks, insurers, and securitization vehicles continued to have concen- trated exposures to CRE. Indicators suggest that hedge fund leverage was at or near the highest level in the past decade while broker-dealer leverage stayed near historical lows. Hedge funds’ Treasury cash–futures basis trade, which is highly leveraged and involves shorting a Treasury futures contract and purchasing a Treasury note deliverable into that contract, remained elevated through the second half of 2024. Separately, some highly leveraged hedge funds may also have contributed to the spike in volatility that hit equity markets in early August, as they had to quickly deleverage positions, largely to meet internal volatility targets. Liquidity at most domestic banks remained sound. Many banks have signiﬁ cantly reduced the fraction of assets funded with uninsured deposits. This funding was replaced, in part, by increased use of brokered and reciprocal deposits and, at large banks, short-term wholesale funding. Some open-end bond mutual funds remained vulnerable to signiﬁ cant withdrawals, as they are required to permit daily redemptions despite holding assets that can suffer losses and become illiquid under stress. While the 2023–24 SEC reforms on MMFs have mitigated some vulnerabilities associated with prime MMFs, structural vulnerabilities remained in certain other short-term investment vehicles. Moreover, assets in these alternative vehicles, including prime-like offshore MMFs, as well as stablecoins which are also vulnerable to runs, grew notably in the second half of 2024. Bond and loan funds remained susceptible to redemptions during periods of stress, with more severe pressures possible if assets become more illiquid or redemptions become unusually large. In addition, life insurers continued to rely on a higher-than-average share of nontraditional liabilities. the SEC passed in an orderly manner. In anticipation of the rules, there were multiple conversions from prime to government MMFs and closures of prime MMFs. Assets under management of MMFs reached historical highs in January as MMFs continued to offer favorable yields relative to bank deposits. Meanwhile, MMFs extended the maturity profile of their portfolios somewhat, on bank credit continued to decelerate Banks’ core loan holdings continued to decelerate in the second half of 2024, growing at a 1.3 percent annualized rate, down from 1.9 percent during the first half of last year (figure 40). The subdued loan growth likely reflects still-elevated interest rates and tight lending standards. Delinquency rates remained relatively stable in the second half of 2024 following several quar- ters of deterioration. Even so, delinquencies for commercial real estate loans and credit cards remained elevated relative to the pre-pandemic period. In contrast, delinquency rates for com- mercial and industrial loans remained in line with their pre-pandemic levels. Measures of bank profitability edged down during the second half of last year amid a decline in net interest margins and remain below the levels that prevailed before the pandemic (figure 41). Figure 41. Profitability of bank holding companies Return on assets (left scale) Return on equity (right scale) Note: The data extend through 2024:Q3. Foreign economic growth has remained modest in the second half of 2024 Foreign growth remained modest in the second half of last year, as the cumulative effects of restrictive monetary policy became more pronounced, curbing both private investment and con- sumer spending. Additionally, in Europe, energy-intensive sectors continued to grapple with ele- vated energy costs that resulted from Russia’s war on Ukraine. By contrast, growth in Asian econ- omies stepped up somewhat in the second half of the year, bolstered by strong export activity in the high-tech sector associated with robust U.S. artificial intelligence and data center demand. In China, growth was also supported by a slew of government stimulus measures, including mone- tary easing, support for the property sector and stock market, and a program to boost consumer purchases of automobiles and large appliances. These economic stimulus measures have been enacted both to stabilize the property market, which has experienced large declines in activity and prices in recent years, and to restore confidence in the broader economy. Inflation abroad slowed but remains uneven across economies After mostly moving sideways in the first half of last year, foreign headline inflation slowed in the second half, largely driven by declines in core inflation (figures 42 and 43). However, progress on inflation reduction remains uneven across economies and sectors, with services inflation and wage growth still running above levels consistent with central banks’ inflation objectives in several economies. China stood out with near-zero inflation, reflecting weak domestic demand and falling housing prices despite government stimulus measures. Global risks to inflation include upside risk from potential disruptions to energy supplies driven by geopolitical events and down- side risk from the possibility that deflationary forces in China could become entrenched. Foreign ex. China EMEs ex. China AFEs China Note: The advanced foreign economy (AFE) aggregate is the average of Canada, the euro area, Japan, and the U.K., weighted by shares of U.S. non-oil goods imports. The emerging market economy (EME) aggregate is the average of Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, the Philippines, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan, Thailand, and Vietnam, weighted by shares of U.S. non-oil goods imports. The foreign aggregate is the import-weighted average of all aforementioned economies. The inflation measure is the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices for the euro area and the consumer price index for the other economies. Many foreign central banks continued to ease monetary policy Many foreign central banks, including the European Central Bank and the Bank of Canada as well as several central banks in Latin America and Southeast Asia, continued to cut policy rates since mid-2024, citing declining inflationary pressures, easing labor markets, and concerns about economic growth. Policymakers generally emphasized that they are following a data-dependent Emerging market economies excluding China Note: The advanced foreign economy aggregate is the average of Canada, the euro area, Japan, and the U.K., weighted by shares of U.S. non-oil goods imports. The emerging market economy (EME) aggregate is the average of Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, the Philippines, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan, Thailand, and Vietnam, weighted by shares of U.S. non-oil goods imports, and begins in May 2017. The inflation measure is the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices for the euro area and the consumer price index for other economies. The stacked bars measure the percentage point contribution of each component to 12-month headline inflation in each referenced period. For each of these periods, the values shown are averages over all monthly 12-month changes ending in that period. The energy component of inflation for the EMEs was little changed in 2023. approach and underscored the importance of maintaining vigilance amid persistent geopolitical In contrast, the Bank of Japan raised its policy rates last summer and again this January and has continued to emphasize its commitment to achieving its inflation target after more than two decades of low-inflation outcomes. Brazil was also a notable exception, as a resurgence of inflation amid tight labor markets and large depreciation of the currency has prompted the Central Bank of Brazil to raise its policy rates forcefully since early September and to signal that further hiking is likely. Financial conditions abroad are little changed on balance . . . Since mid-2024, short-term sovereign yields declined notably in many advanced foreign econo- mies (AFEs) as many AFE central banks cut policy rates. By contrast, short-term yields rose in Japan, where market-based measures of policy expectations suggest further policy rate hikes by the Bank of Japan in 2025. Meanwhile, AFE longer-term sovereign yields rose moderately in some countries, with declines in expected policy rates being more than offset by increases in term deficits (figure 44). Relatedly, most AFE equity indexes were moderately higher, on net, since Chinese equity prices increased sharply in late September, and China-focused investment funds recorded large inflows in response to announcements by Chinese authorities of economic stimulus measures and policies to support equity markets. These movements were later partially reversed, however, as investors expressed disappointment at the size and scope of the stimulus when details of the measures became clearer. More broadly, while aggregate emerging market economy (EME) funds recorded strong inflows last September, these turned to large outflows in the fourth quarter as investors reacted to the deterioration in the economic outlook for China, rising U.S. longer-term interest rates, and the prospect of new U.S. tariffs on EME exports to the U.S. (figure 45). Nevertheless, EME sovereign spreads narrowed significantly amid a broad nar- rowing in dollar-denominated credit spreads. Figure 44. Nominal 10-year government bond yields in selected advanced foreign economies Note: The data are weekly averages of daily benchmark yields and extend through January 31, 2025. Figure 45. Emerging market mutual fund flows and spreads Equity fund ﬂows (right scale) Bond fund ﬂows (right scale) EMBI+ (left scale) Note: The bond and equity fund flows data are semiannual sums of weekly data from December 28, 2006, to December 25, 2024, and exclude domestically focused funds in emerging market economies. Weekly data span Thursday through Wednesday, and the semiannual values are sums over weekly data for weeks ending in that half year. The J.P. Morgan Emerging Markets Bond Index Plus (EMBI+) data are weekly averages of daily data, extend through January 31, 2025, and exclude Venezuela. . . . and the exchange value of the dollar has increased significantly trade-weighted basket of foreign currencies—increased significantly, on net, continuing its nota- ble rise seen in the first half of 2024 and reaching its highest level in decades (figure 46). The dollar index was, however, somewhat volatile since mid-2024; it decreased initially as U.S. yields declined in the third quarter of 2024, before increasing steadily afterward. Market participants attributed the recent increase in the dollar index to widening gaps of U.S. interest rates over ments in some foreign economies. Some market participants also pointed to potential increases in U.S. tariffs on imports as a factor pushing the dollar higher in recent months. Note: The data, which are in foreign currency units per dollar, are weekly averages of daily values of the broad dollar index and extend through January 31, 2025. As indicated by the arrow, increases in the data reflect U.S. dollar appreciation and decreases reflect U.S. dollar depreciation. The Federal Open Market Committee lowered the target range for the federal funds rate After having held the target range for the policy rate at 5¼ to 5½ percent between late July 2023 and mid-September 2024, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) lowered the target range for the policy rate by a cumulative 100 basis points over the last three meetings of 2024, bringing the range to 4¼ to 4½ percent (figure 47). The FOMC’s decision to begin reducing the degree of policy restraint reflected the FOMC’s greater confidence in inflation moving sustainably toward 2 percent and the judgment that it was appropriate to recalibrate the policy stance. In considering FOMC will carefully assess incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks. Figure 47. Selected interest rates Note: The 2-year and 10-year Treasury rates are the constant-maturity yields based on the most actively traded securities. The FOMC has continued the process of significantly reducing its holdings of Treasury and agency securities The FOMC began reducing its securities holdings in June 2022 and, since then, has continued to implement its plan for significantly reducing the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet in a predictable manner. Over the second half of last year, the FOMC reduced the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet with redemption caps of $25 billion per month on Treasury securities principal payments in excess of the agency debt and agency MBS caps are to be reinvested into Treasury securities, consistent with the FOMC’s intention to hold primarily Treasury securities in The System Open Market Account holdings of Treasury and agency securities have declined about down from a peak of 35 percent reached at the end of 2021 (figure 48). Reserve balances—the largest liability item on the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet—have edged down $68 billion since late June 2024 to a level of around $3.2 trillion. Since the beginning of balance sheet runoff, reserves have been little changed because the reserve-draining effect of balance sheet runoff has been largely offset by a $1.8 trillion decline in balances at the overnight reverse repurchase agreement facility. (See the box “Developments in the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet and Other assets Credit and liquidity facilities Agency debt and mortgage-backed securities holdings Treasury securities held outright Note: “Other assets” includes repurchase agreements, FIMA (Foreign and International Monetary Authorities) repurchase agreements, and unamortized premiums and discounts on securities held outright. “Credit and liquidity facilities” consists of primary, secondary, and seasonal credit; term auction credit; central bank liquidity swaps; support for Maiden Lane, Bear Stearns Companies, Inc., and AIG; and other credit and liquidity facilities, including the Primary Dealer Credit Facility, the Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility, the Commercial Paper Funding Facility, the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility, the Primary and Secondary Market Corporate Credit Facilities, the Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility, the Municipal Liquidity Facility, and the Main Street Lending Program. “Agency debt and mortgage-backed securities holdings” includes agency residential mortgage-backed securities and agency commercial mortgage-backed securities. “Capital and other liabilities” includes the U.S. Treasury General Account and the U.S. Treasury Supplementary Financing Account. The key identifies shaded areas in order from top to bottom. The data extend through January 29, 2025. The FOMC has stated that it intends to maintain securities holdings at amounts consistent with implementing monetary policy efficiently and effectively in its ample-reserves regime. To ensure a smooth transition to ample reserve balances, the FOMC slowed the pace of decline of its securi- ties holdings in June 2024 and intends to stop reductions in its securities holdings when reserve balances are somewhat above the level that the FOMC judges to be consistent with ample reserves. Once balance sheet runoff has ceased, reserve balances will likely continue to decline at a slower pace—reflecting growth in other Federal Reserve liabilities—until the FOMC judges that reserve balances are at an ample level. Thereafter, the FOMC will manage securities holdings as needed to maintain ample reserves over time. The FOMC will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook The FOMC is strongly committed to supporting maximum employment and returning inflation to its 2 percent objective. In considering the extent and timing of additional adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the FOMC will carefully assess incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks. Its assessments will take into account a wide range of informa- tion, including readings on labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, In addition to considering a wide range of economic and financial data, the FOMC gathers infor- mation from business contacts and other informed parties around the country, as summarized in the Beige Book. The Federal Reserve has regular arrangements under which it hears from a broad range of participants in the U.S. economy about how monetary policy affects people’s daily lives and livelihoods. In particular, the Federal Reserve has continued to gather insights into these matters through the Fed Listens initiative and the Federal Reserve System’s community development outreach. Additionally, this year the Federal Reserve has begun a public review of its monetary policy framework. (See the box “Periodic Review of Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Policymakers also routinely consult prescriptions for the policy interest rate provided by various monetary policy rules. These rule prescriptions can provide useful benchmarks for the consider- ation of monetary policy. However, simple rules cannot capture all of the complex considerations that go into the formation of appropriate monetary policy, and many practical considerations make it undesirable for the FOMC to adhere strictly to the prescriptions of any specific rule. Nevertheless, some principles of good monetary policy can be brought out by examining these simple rules. (See the box “Monetary Policy Rules in the Current Environment.”) box 4. Developments in the Federal Reserve’s balance Sheet and Money Markets The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) continued to reduce the size of the Federal Reserve’s System Open Market Account (SOMA) portfolio. Loans extended under the Bank Term Funding Program—which made longer-term funding and liquidity available to eligible depository institutions amid the banking-sector developments of spring 2023 to help ensure the stability of the banking sys- tem and the ongoing provision of money and credit to the economy—have also decreased $106 bil- lion to a level of $213 million since late June 2024.1 Since the previous report, total Federal Reserve assets have decreased $413 billion, leaving the total size of the balance sheet at $6.8 trillion, $2.1 trillion smaller since the reduction in the size of the SOMA portfolio began in June 2022 (table A and ﬁ gure A).2 Reserves, the largest liability item on the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet, have edged down $68 bil- lion since late June 2024 to a level of about $3.2 trillion.3 Since the beginning of balance sheet run- off, reserves have been little changed because the reserve-draining effect of balance sheet runoff was largely offset by a $1.8 trillion decline in balances at the overnight reverse repurchase agreement (ON RRP) facility. Since June 2024, usage of the ON RRP facility has continued to decline to levels below $200 billion (ﬁ gure B). Reduced usage of the ON RRP facility largely reﬂ ects money market mutual funds shifting their portfolios toward higher-yielding investments, including Treasury bills and private-market repurchase agreements. Conditions in overnight money markets remained stable. The ON RRP facility continued to serve its intended purpose of supporting the control of the effective federal funds rate (EFFR), and the Fed- eral Reserve’s administered rates—the interest rate on reserve balances and the ON RRP offering rate—remained highly effective at maintaining the EFFR within the target range. Following the Decem- ber 2024 FOMC meeting, the Federal Reserve made a technical adjustment to lower the ON RRP offering rate 5 basis points. The technical adjustment aligned the ON RRP offering rate with the bot- tom of the target range for the federal funds rate. The Federal Reserve’s deferred asset has increased $43 billion since late June to a level of around $221 billion.4 Negative net income and the associated deferred asset do not affect the Federal Reserve’s conduct of monetary policy or its ability to meet its ﬁ nancial obligations.5 (continued) 1 The remaining Bank Term Funding Program (BTFP) loans will mature by March 11, 2025. The BTFP was established under sec- tion 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act with the approval of the Secretary of the Treasury. The BTFP offered loans of up to one year to banks, savings associations, credit unions, and other eligible depository institutions (DIs) against collateral such as U.S. Treasury securities, U.S. agency securities, and U.S. agency mortgage-backed securities. For more details, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2024), “Bank Term Funding Program,” webpage, https://www.federalreserve.gov/ financial-stability/bank-term-funding-program.htm. 2 The last Federal Reserve Board statistical release H.4.1 (“Factors Affecting Reserve Balances”) before the publication of the previous Monetary Policy Report on July 5, 2024, was dated June 26, 2024. As a result, this discussion refers to changes in the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet since late June. 3 Reserve balances consist of deposits held at the Federal Reserve Banks by DIs, such as commercial banks, savings banks, 4 The deferred asset is equal to the cumulative shortfall of net income and represents the amount of future net income that will need to be realized before remittances to the Treasury resume. Although remittances are suspended at the time of this report, over the past decade and a half, the Federal Reserve has remitted over $1 trillion to the Treasury. 5 Net income is expected to turn positive again as interest expenses fall, and remittances will resume once the temporary deferred asset falls to zero. As a result of the ongoing reduction in the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet, interest expenses will fall over time in line with the decline in the Federal Reserve’s liabilities. Change (since Fed's balance sheet reduction began on June 1, 2022) Unamortized premiums Reserves held by depository Note: MBS is mortgage-backed securities. PPPLF is Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility. BTFP is Bank Term Funding Program. Components may not sum to totals because of rounding. (continued) Other assets Loans Central bank liquidity swaps Repurchase agreements Agency debt and MBS Treasury securities held outright Note: MBS is mortgage-backed securities. The key identifies shaded areas in order from top to bottom. The data are weekly and extend through January 29, 2025. Note: “Capital and other liabilities” includes the liability for earnings remittances due to the U.S. Treasury and contributions from the U.S. Treasury; the sum is negative from June 2023 onward because of the deferred asset that the Federal Reserve reports. The key identifies shaded areas in order from top to bottom. The data are weekly and extend through January 29, 2025. The Federal Reserve has begun its periodic public review of its monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices—the framework it uses to pursue its dual-mandate goals of maximum employment and price stability. Routine self-evaluation is healthy for any organization, and it is essen- tial that the Federal Open Market Committee’s (FOMC) monetary policy framework evolves as needed to best support the dual mandate amid an ever-changing economy. Accordingly, following the review that concluded in 2020, the FOMC indicated that it would carry out a thorough public review roughly every ﬁ ve years. The review is focused on two speciﬁ c areas: the FOMC’s Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Mone- tary Policy Strategy, which articulates the Committee’s approach to monetary policy, and the Commit- tee’s policy communication tools. The Committee’s 2 percent longer-run inﬂ ation goal is not a focus of the review.1 Like the Federal Reserve’s 2019–20 review of its monetary policy framework, the ongoing review will include outreach and public events attended by policymakers, community leaders, experts from outside the System, and other members of the public. As part of the public outreach associated with the review, the Federal Reserve Board will host a conference featuring economists and other analysts from outside the Federal Reserve System, who will discuss topics central to the review.2 The 2025 review will include a set of events hosted by the Federal Reserve as part of the Fed Listens initiative, which began with the FOMC’s 2019–20 framework review and has continued since then. At Fed Listens events, the Board and Reserve Banks have engaged with a wide range of organiza- tions—employee groups and union members, small business owners, residents of low- and moderate-income communities, workforce development organizations and community colleges, retir- ees, and others—to hear about how monetary policy affects peoples’ daily lives and livelihoods. FOMC participants discussed topics related to the review at the January 28–29, 2025, FOMC meet- ing, and these discussions will continue at subsequent meetings. At the end of the process, informa- tion and perspectives gathered during the review will inform policymakers’ judgments about appropri- ate changes to the FOMC’s monetary policy framework to best serve the American people. Simple interest rate rules relate a policy interest rate, such as the federal funds rate, to a small num- ber of other economic variables—typically including the current deviation of inﬂ ation from its target value and a measure of resource slack in the economy. As part of their monetary policy deliberations, policymakers regularly consult the prescriptions of a variety of simple interest rate rules without mechanically following the prescriptions of any particular rule. In 2024, the economy continued to make progress toward the FOMC’s dual-mandate goals. Inﬂ ation moved a little closer to 2 percent in 2024 and ran well below its peak in 2022. While the labor mar- ket remains solid, labor market conditions generally eased. Accordingly, the simple policy rules con- sidered here called for levels of the policy rate in 2024 that were on average lower than in the prior year. In support of its goals of maximum employment and inﬂ ation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run, the FOMC has reduced the target range for the federal funds rate from 5¼ to 5½ percent to 4¼ to 4½ percent, while continuing to reduce its holdings of Treasury securities and agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities. In many economic models, desirable economic outcomes can be achieved over time if monetary policy responds to changes in economic conditions in a manner that is predictable and adheres to some key design principles. In recognition of this idea, economists have analyzed many monetary policy rules, including the well-known Taylor (1993) rule, the “balanced approach” rule, the “adjusted Taylor (1993)” rule, and the “ﬁ rst difference” rule.1 Table A shows these rules, along with a “balanced approach (shortfalls)” rule, which responds to the unemployment rate only when it is higher than its estimated longer-run level. All of the simple rules shown embody key design principles of good mon- etary policy, including the requirement that the policy rate should be adjusted by enough over time to ensure a return of inﬂ ation to the central bank’s longer-run objective and to anchor longer-term inﬂ a- tion expectations at levels consistent with that objective. All ﬁ ve rules feature the difference between inﬂ ation and the FOMC’s longer-run objective of 2 per- cent.2 The ﬁ ve rules use the unemployment rate gap, measured as the difference between an esti- mate of the rate of unemployment in the longer run (ut ﬁ rst-difference rule includes the change in the unemployment rate gap rather than its level.3 All but the ﬁ rst-difference rule include an estimate of the neutral real interest rate in the longer run (rt (continued) Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 39 (December), pp. 195–214. The balanced-approach rule was analyzed in John B. Taylor (1999), “A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules,” in John B. Taylor, ed., Monetary Policy Rules (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), pp. 319–41. The adjusted Taylor (1993) rule was studied in David Reifschneider and John C. Williams (2000), “Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Era,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 32 (November), pp. 936–66. The first-difference rule is based on a rule suggested by Athanasios Orphanides (2003), “Historical Monetary Policy Analysis and the Taylor Rule,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 50 (July), pp. 983–1022. A review of policy rules is provided in John B. Taylor and John C. Williams (2011), “Simple and Robust Rules for Monetary Policy,” in Benjamin M. Friedman and Michael Woodford, eds., Handbook of Monetary Economics, vol. 3B (Amsterdam: North-Holland), pp. 829–59. The same volume of the Handbook of Monetary Economics also discusses approaches to deriving policy rate prescriptions other than through the use of simple rules. 2 The rules are implemented as responding to core PCE price inflation rather than to headline PCE price inflation because cur- rent and near-term core inflation rates tend to outperform headline inflation rates as predictors of the medium-term behavior of headline inflation. Implementations of simple rules often use the output gap as a measure of resource slack in the economy. In the rules described in table A, the output gap has been replaced with the unemployment rate gap (using a relationship known as Okun’s law) because that gap better captures the FOMC’s statutory goal to promote maximum employment. Movements in these alternative measures of resource utilization tend to be highly correlated. LR) is the level of the real federal funds rate that is expected to be consis- LR, rt LR is determined largely by nonmonetary tent, in the longer run, with maximum employment and stable inflation. Like ut factors. The first-difference rule shown in table A does not require an estimate of rt LR, a feature that is touted by proponents of such rules as providing an element of robustness. However, this rule has its own shortcomings. For example, research sug- gests that this sort of rule often results in greater volatility in employment and inflation than what would be obtained under the Taylor (1993) and balanced-approach rules. LR + πt + 0.5(πt − πLR) + (ut LR + πt + 0.5(πt − πLR) + 2(ut LR + πt + 0.5(πt − πLR) + 2min{(ut T93adj = max{Rt Note: Rt by the Taylor (1993), balanced-approach, balanced-approach (shortfalls), adjusted Taylor (1993), and first-difference rules, respectively. Rt−1 denotes the average midpoint of the target range for the federal funds rate in quarter t−1, ut age unemployment rate in quarter t, and πt price inflation for quarter t. In addition, ut LR is the level of the neutral real federal funds rate in the longer run that is expected to be consistent with sustain- ing maximum employment and keeping inflation at the Federal Open Market Committee’s 2 percent longer-run objective, represented by πLR. Zt is the cumulative sum of past deviations of the federal funds rate from the prescriptions of the Taylor (1993) rule when that rule prescribes setting the federal funds rate below an effec- tive lower bound (ELB) of 12.5 basis points. Box note 1 provides references for the policy rules. FD represent the values of the nominal federal funds rate prescribed is the aver- denotes the 4-quarter core personal consumption expenditures LR is the rate of unemployment expected in the longer run, and rt Unlike the other simple rules featured here, the adjusted Taylor (1993) rule recognizes that the fed- eral funds rate cannot be reduced materially below the effective lower bound (ELB). By contrast, the standard Taylor (1993) rule prescribed policy rates that, during the pandemic-induced recession, were far below zero. To make up for the cumulative shortfall in policy accommodation following a recession during which the federal funds rate is constrained by its ELB, the adjusted Taylor (1993) rule prescribes delaying the return of the policy rate to the (positive) levels prescribed by the standard Taylor (1993) rule. As benchmarks for monetary policy, simple policy rules have important limitations. One of these lim- itations is that the simple policy rules mechanically respond to only a small set of economic variables and thus necessarily abstract from many of the factors that the FOMC considers when it assesses the appropriate setting of the policy rate. In addition, the structure of the economy and current eco- nomic conditions differ in important respects from those prevailing when the simple policy rules were originally devised and proposed. Relatedly, the prescriptions of the rules incorporate values of the unemployment rate in the longer run and the neutral real interest rate in the longer run, which are economic concepts that are not only difﬁ cult to measure but can also change over time as the economy evolves. Finally, simple policy rules are not forward-looking and do not allow for important risk-management considerations, associated with uncertainty about economic relationships and the evolution of the economy, that factor into FOMC decisions. Figure A shows historical prescriptions for the federal funds rate under the ﬁ ve simple rules consid- ered. For each quarterly period, the ﬁ gure reports the policy rates prescribed by the rules, taking as given the prevailing economic conditions and survey-based estimates of ut LR at the time. All of the rules considered called for highly accommodative monetary policy in response to the pan- demic-driven recession, followed by tighter policy as inﬂ ation picked up and labor market conditions LR and rt (continued) strengthened. The policy rates prescribed by these rules have generally declined since 2023 because inﬂ ation moved closer to 2 percent and the unemployment rate increased somewhat. The current prescriptions from these rules are within the current target range for the federal funds rate of 4¼ to 4½ percent except for the ﬁ rst-difference rule, which prescribes a somewhat higher policy rate. All the prescriptions remain higher than survey-based estimates of the longer-run value of the federal funds rate. Federal funds rate Taylor (1993) rule Adjusted Taylor (1993) rule Balanced-approach rule Balanced-approach (shortfalls) rule First-difference rule Note: The rules use historical values of core personal consumption expenditures inflation, the unemployment rate, and, where applicable, historical values of the midpoint of the target range for the federal funds rate. Quarterly projections of longer-run values for the federal funds rate, the unemployment rate, and inflation used in the computation of the rules’ prescriptions are interpolations to quarterly values of projections from the Survey of Primary Dealers. The rules’ prescriptions are quarterly, and the federal funds rate data are the monthly average of the daily midpoint of the target range for the federal funds rate and extend through January 2025. The following material was released after the conclusion of the December 17–18, 2024, meeting of In conjunction with the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting held on December 17–18, 2024, meeting participants submitted their projections of the most likely each year from 2024 to 2027 and over the longer run. Each participant’s projections were based priate monetary policy—including a path for the federal funds rate and its longer-run value—and assumptions about other factors likely to affect economic outcomes. The longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the value to which each variable would be expected Table 1. Economic projections of Federal Reserve board members and Federal Reserve bank presidents, under their individual assumptions of projected appropriate monetary policy, December 2024 Longer run Longer run Memo: Projected appropriate policy path Federal funds rate Note: Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP) and projections for both measures of inflation are percent changes from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. PCE inflation and core PCE inflation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) and the price index for PCE excluding food and energy. Projections for the unemployment rate are for the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. Each participant’s projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate mone- tary policy. Longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. The projections for the fed- eral funds rate are the value of the midpoint of the projected appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the projected appropriate target level for the federal funds rate at the end of the specified calendar year or over the longer run. The September projections were made in conjunction with the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on September 17–18, 2024. 1 For each period, the median is the middle projection when the projections are arranged from lowest to highest. When the number of projections is even, the median is the average of the two middle projections. 2 The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each year. 3 The range for a variable in a given year includes all participants’ projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year. 4 Longer-run projections for core PCE inflation are not collected. Longer run to converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. “Appropriate monetary policy” is defined as the future path of policy that each par- ticipant deems most likely to foster outcomes for economic activity and inflation that best satisfy his or her individual interpretation of the statutory mandate to promote maximum employment Figure 1. Medians, central tendencies, and ranges of economic projections, 2024–27 and over the longer run Longer run Longer run Longer run Longer run Note: Definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. The data for the actual values of the variables are annual. Longer run Note: Each shaded circle indicates the value (rounded to the nearest 1/8 percentage point) of an individual participant’s judgment of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the appropriate target level for the federal funds rate at the end of the specified calendar year or over the longer run. Figure 3.a. Distribution of participants’ projections for the change in real GDP, 2024–27 and over the longer run Longer run Note: Definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Figure 3.b. Distribution of participants’ projections for the unemployment rate, 2024–27 and over the longer run Longer run Note: Definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Figure 3.C. Distribution of participants’ projections for PCE inflation, 2024–27 and over the longer run Longer run Note: Definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Note: Definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Figure 3.E. Distribution of participants’ judgments of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the appropriate target level for the federal funds rate, 2024–27 and over the longer run Longer run Note: Definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Median projection and conﬁdence interval based on historical forecast errors Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the percent change in real gross domestic product (GDP) from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The confidence interval around the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the confidence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reflect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections; these current assessments are summarized in the lower panels. Generally speaking, participants who judge the uncertainty about their projections as “broadly similar” to the average levels of the past 20 years would view the width of the confidence interval shown in the historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise, participants who judge the risks to their projections as “broadly balanced” would view the confidence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For definitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” Median projection and conﬁdence interval based on historical forecast errors Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The confidence interval around the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the confidence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reflect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections; these current assessments are summarized in the lower panels. Generally speaking, participants who judge the uncertainty about their projections as “broadly similar” to the average levels of the past 20 years would view the width of the confidence interval shown in the historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise, participants who judge the risks to their projections as “broadly balanced” would view the confidence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For definitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” Median projection and conﬁdence interval based on historical forecast errors Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Risks to core PCE inflation Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the percent change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The confidence interval around the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the confidence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reflect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections; these current assessments are summarized in the lower panels. Generally speaking, participants who judge the uncertainty about their projections as “broadly similar” to the average levels of the past 20 years would view the width of the confidence interval shown in the historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise, participants who judge the risks to their projections as “broadly balanced” would view the confidence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For definitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” Note: For each SEP, participants provided responses to the question “Please indicate your judgment of the uncertainty attached to your projections relative to the levels of uncertainty over the past 20 years.” Each point in the diffusion indexes represents the number of participants who responded “Higher” minus the number who responded “Lower,” divided by the total number of participants. Figure excludes March 2020 when no projections were submitted. Note: For each SEP, participants provided responses to the question “Please indicate your judgment of the risk weighting around your projections.” Each point in the diffusion indexes represents the number of participants who responded “Weighted to the Upside” minus the number who responded “Weighted to the Downside,” divided by the total number of participants. Figure excludes March 2020 when no projections were submitted. Note: The blue and red lines are based on actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the Committee’s target for the federal funds rate at the end of the year indicated. The actual values are the midpoint of the target range; the median projected values are based on either the midpoint of the target range or the target level. The confidence interval around the median projected values is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years. The confidence interval is not strictly consistent with the projections for the federal funds rate, primarily because these projections are not forecasts of the likeliest outcomes for the federal funds rate, but rather projections of participants’ individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy. Still, historical forecast errors provide a broad sense of the uncertainty around the future path of the federal funds rate generated by the uncertainty about the macroeconomic variables as well as additional adjustments to monetary policy that may be appropriate to offset the effects of shocks to the economy. The confidence interval is assumed to be symmetric except when it is truncated at zero - the bottom of the lowest target range for the federal funds rate that has been adopted in the past by the Committee. This truncation would not be intended to indicate the likelihood of the use of negative interest rates to provide additional monetary policy accommodation if doing so was judged appropriate. In such situations, the Committee could also employ other tools, including forward guidance and large-scale asset purchases, to provide additional accommodation. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the confidence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reflect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections. The confidence interval is derived from forecasts of the average level of short-term interest rates in the fourth quarter of the year indicated; more information about these data is available in table 2. The shaded area encompasses less than a 70 percent confidence interval if the confidence interval has been truncated at zero. Note: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root mean squared error of projections for 2004 through 2023 that were released in the winter by various private and government forecasters. As described in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain assumptions, there is about a 70 percent probability that actual outcomes for real GDP, unemployment, consumer prices, and the federal funds rate will be in ranges implied by the average size of projection errors made in the past. For more information, see David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip (2017), “Gauging the Uncer- tainty of the Economic Outlook Using Historical Forecasting Errors: The Federal Reserve’s Approach,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-020 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February), https://dx.doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2017.020. 1 Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 2 Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure that has been most widely used in government and private economic forecasts. Projections are percent changes on a fourth quarter to fourth quarter basis. 3 For Federal Reserve staff forecasts, measure is the federal funds rate. For other forecasts, measure is the rate on 3-month Treasury bills. Projection errors are calculated using average levels, in percent, in the fourth quarter. The economic projections provided by the members of the Board of Governors and the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks inform discussions of monetary policy among policymakers and can aid public understanding of the basis for policy actions. Considerable uncertainty attends these pro- jections, however. The economic and statistical models and relationships used to help produce eco- nomic forecasts are necessarily imperfect descriptions of the real world, and the future path of the economy can be affected by myriad unforeseen developments and events. Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, participants consider not only what appears to be the most likely economic out- come as embodied in their projections, but also the range of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of their occurring, and the potential costs to the economy should they occur. Table 2 summarizes the average historical accuracy of a range of forecasts, including those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports and those prepared by the Federal Reserve Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). The projection error ranges shown in the table illustrate the considerable uncertainty associated with economic forecasts. For example, sup- pose a participant projects that real gross domestic product (GDP) and total consumer prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty attending those projections is similar to that experienced in the past and the risks around the projections are broadly balanced, the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a probability of about 70 percent that actual GDP would expand within a range of 2.2 to 3.8 percent in the current year, 1.3 to 4.7 percent in the second year, 0.9 to 5.1 percent in the third year, and 0.7 to 5.3 percent in the fourth year. The corre- sponding 70 percent conﬁ dence intervals for overall inﬂ ation would be 1.7 to 2.3 percent in the cur- rent year, 0.4 to 3.6 percent in the second and third years, and 0.2 to 3.8 percent in the fourth year. Figures 4.A through 4.C illustrate these conﬁ dence bounds in “fan charts” that are symmetric and centered on the medians of FOMC participants’ projections for GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inﬂ ation. However, in some instances, the risks around the projections may not be symmetric. In particular, the unemployment rate cannot be negative; furthermore, the risks around a particular pro- jection might be tilted to either the upside or the downside, in which case the corresponding fan chart would be asymmetrically positioned around the median projection. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over history, partici- pants provide judgments as to whether the uncertainty attached to their projections of each eco- nomic variable is greater than, smaller than, or broadly similar to typical levels of forecast uncertainty seen in the past 20 years, as presented in table 2 and reﬂ ected in the widths of the conﬁ dence intervals shown in the top panels of ﬁ gures 4.A through 4.C. Participants’ current assessments of the (continued) uncertainty surrounding their projections are summarized in the bottom-left panels of those ﬁ gures. Participants also provide judgments as to whether the risks to their projections are weighted to the upside, are weighted to the downside, or are broadly balanced. That is, while the symmetric historical fan charts shown in the top panels of ﬁ gures 4.A through 4.C imply that the risks to participants’ pro- jections are balanced, participants may judge that there is a greater risk that a given variable will be above rather than below their projections. These judgments are summarized in the lower-right panels of ﬁ gures 4.A through 4.C. As with real activity and inﬂ ation, the outlook for the future path of the federal funds rate is subject to considerable uncertainty. This uncertainty arises primarily because each participant’s assessment of the appropriate stance of monetary policy depends importantly on the evolution of real activity and inﬂ ation over time. If economic conditions evolve in an unexpected manner, then assessments of the appropriate setting of the federal funds rate would change from that point forward. The ﬁ nal line in table 2 shows the error ranges for forecasts of short-term interest rates. They suggest that the histor- ical conﬁ dence intervals associated with projections of the federal funds rate are quite wide. It should be noted, however, that these conﬁ dence intervals are not strictly consistent with the projections for the federal funds rate, as these projections are not forecasts of the most likely quarterly outcomes but rather are projections of participants’ individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy and are on an end-of-year basis. However, the forecast errors should provide a sense of the uncertainty around the future path of the federal funds rate generated by the uncertainty about the macroeco- nomic variables as well as additional adjustments to monetary policy that would be appropriate to offset the effects of shocks to the economy. If at some point in the future the conﬁ dence interval around the federal funds rate were to extend below zero, it would be truncated at zero for purposes of the fan chart shown in ﬁ gure 5; zero is the bottom of the lowest target range for the federal funds rate that has been adopted by the Committee in the past. This approach to the construction of the federal funds rate fan chart would be merely a convention; it would not have any implications for possible future policy decisions regarding the use of negative interest rates to provide additional monetary policy accommodation if doing so were appropriate. In such situations, the Committee could also employ other tools, including forward guid- ance and asset purchases, to provide additional accommodation. While ﬁ gures 4.A through 4.C provide information on the uncertainty around the economic projec- tions, ﬁ gure 1 provides information on the range of views across FOMC participants. A comparison of ﬁ gure 1 with ﬁ gures 4.A through 4.C shows that the dispersion of the projections across participants is much smaller than the average forecast errors over the past 20 years. Figure 1. Personal consumption expenditures price indexes For trimmed mean, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas; for all else, Bureau of Economic Analysis; all Figure A. Prime-age employment-to-population ratios compared with the 2019 average ratio, Figure B. Prime-age employment-to-population ratios compared with the 2019 average ratio, by ing Administration. Figure 24. New and existing home sales For new home sales, U.S. Census Bureau; for existing home sales, National Association of Home Price Index. The S&P/Case-Shiller index is a product of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. (For Dow Jones Indices licensing information, see the Data Notes page.) Figure 28. Change in real business fixed investment Department of the Treasury; J.P. Morgan. Courtesy of J.P. Morgan Chase & Co., Copyright 2025. S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC via Bloomberg. (For Dow Jones Indices licensing information, see the Figure 41. Profitability of bank holding companies Figure 44. Nominal 10-year government bond yields in selected advanced foreign economies Figure 45. Emerging market mutual fund flows and spreads For bond and equity fund flows, Federal Reserve Board staff calculations and EPFR Global; for Figure 47. Selected interest rates box 4. Developments in the Federal Reserve’s balance Sheet and Money Markets Find other Federal Reserve Board publications at www.federalreserve.gov/publications/default.htm, or visit our website to learn more about the Board and how to connect with us on social media. The Board of Governors is pleased to submit its Monetary Policy Report pursuant to section 2B of the Federal Reserve Act. Statement on Longer-run goaLS and monetary PoLicy Strategy Adopted effective January 24, 2012; as amended effective January 26, 2016 The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) is firmly committed to fulfilling its statutory mandate from the Congress of promoting maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates. The Committee seeks to explain its monetary policy decisions to the public as clearly as possible. Such clarity facilitates well-informed decisionmaking by households and businesses, reduces economic and financial uncertainty, increases the effectiveness of monetary policy, and enhances transparency and accountability, which are essential in a democratic society. Inflation, employment, and long-term interest rates fluctuate over time in response to economic and financial disturbances. Moreover, monetary policy actions tend to influence economic activity and prices with a lag. Therefore, the Committee’s policy decisions reflect its longer-run goals, its medium- term outlook, and its assessments of the balance of risks, including risks to the financial system that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. The inflation rate over the longer run is primarily determined by monetary policy, and hence the Committee has the ability to specify a longer-run goal for inflation. The Committee reaffirms its judgment that inflation at the rate of 2 percent, as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, is most consistent over the longer run with the Federal Reserve’s statutory mandate. The Committee would be concerned if inflation were running persistently above or below this objective. Communicating this symmetric inflation goal clearly to the public helps keep longer-term inflation expectations firmly anchored, thereby fostering price stability and moderate long-term interest rates and enhancing the Committee’s ability to promote maximum employment in the face of significant economic disturbances. The maximum level of employment is largely determined by nonmonetary factors that affect the structure and dynamics of the labor market. These factors may change over time and may not be directly measurable. Consequently, it would not be appropriate to specify a fixed goal for employment; rather, the Committee’s policy decisions must be informed by assessments of the maximum level of employment, recognizing that such assessments are necessarily uncertain and subject to revision. The Committee considers a wide range of indicators in making these assessments. Information about Committee participants’ estimates of the longer-run normal rates of output growth and unemployment is published four times per year in the FOMC’s Summary of Economic Projections. For example, in the most recent projections, the median of FOMC participants’ estimates of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment was 4.9 percent. In setting monetary policy, the Committee seeks to mitigate deviations of inflation from its longer-run goal and deviations of employment from the Committee’s assessments of its maximum level. These objectives are generally complementary. However, under circumstances in which the Committee judges that the objectives are not complementary, it follows a balanced approach in promoting them, taking into account the magnitude of the deviations and the potentially different time horizons over which employment and inflation are projected to return to levels judged consistent with its mandate. The Committee intends to reaffirm these principles and to make adjustments as appropriate at its annual organizational meeting each January. Have the Gains of the Economic Expansion Been Widely Shared? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6 Developments Related to Financial Stability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 Note: Unless stated otherwise, the time series in the figures extend through, for daily data, June 16, 2016; for monthly data, May 2016; and, for quarterly data, 2016:Q1. In bar charts, except as noted, the change for a given period is measured to its final quarter from the final quarter of the preceding period. For figures 14, 32, and 35, note that the S&P/Case-Shiller Index is a product of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates and has been licensed for use by the Board. Copyright © 2016 S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC, a subsidiary of the McGraw Hill Financial Inc., and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Redistribution, reproduction and/or photocopying in whole or in part are prohibited without written permission of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC. For more information on any of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC’s indices please visit www.spdji.com. S&P® is a registered trademark of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones® is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. Neither S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC, Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC, their affiliates nor their third party licensors make any representation or warranty, express or implied, as to the ability of any index to accurately represent the asset class or market sector that it purports to represent and neither S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC, Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC, their affiliates nor their third party licensors shall have any liability for any errors, omissions, or interruptions of any index or the data included therein. summary Labor market conditions clearly continued to strengthen during the early months of this year: Payrolls expanded at a solid pace of almost 200,000 per month in the first quarter, and while the unemployment rate flattened out at close to 5 percent, the labor force participation rate moved up strongly. More recently, the signals regarding labor market improvement have become more mixed: Payroll gains are reported to have slowed to an average of 80,000 per month in April and May (or about 100,000 after adjustment for the effects of a strike). The unemployment rate dropped in May to 4.7 percent, its lowest level since late 2007; however, the labor force participation rate fell back again and was little changed from its year-ago level. All told, the latest readings suggest that labor markets are tighter than they were at the end of last year but that the pace of improvement has slowed. Whether those signs of slowing will be confirmed by subsequent data, and how persistent any such slowing will be, remains to be seen. Consumer price inflation has continued to be held down by lower prices for energy and imports, and the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) increased only about 1 percent over the 12 months ending in April. Changes in the PCE price index excluding food and energy items, which provide a better indication than the headline figure of where overall inflation will be in the future, also remained modest; this index, which rose 1½ percent over the 12 months ending in April, was partly restrained by lower prices for non-oil imported goods. However, both the headline and core inflation measures have picked up somewhat from a year earlier. Meanwhile, some survey- based measures of longer-run inflation expectations have remained relatively stable, while others have moved down; market-based measures of inflation compensation also are at low levels. Although real gross domestic product is reported to have increased at a sluggish rate in the first quarter of 2016, the available data for the second quarter point to a noticeable step-up in the pace of growth. On average, consumer spending so far this year appears to be expanding at a moderate pace, supported by solid income gains and the ongoing effects of the increases in wealth and the declines in oil prices of the past two years. The housing market continues its gradual recovery, and fiscal policy at all levels of government is now modestly boosting economic activity after exerting a considerable drag in recent years. One area of concern, however, is the softening in business fixed investment in recent quarters even beyond those sectors most directly affected by the plunge in energy prices. In addition, the weakness of exports—following the significant appreciation of the dollar over the past two years and the subdued pace of foreign economic growth—continues to hold back overall output growth. On balance, household and business credit conditions in the United States have remained accommodative so far this year. Following a period of heightened global financial market volatility earlier this year in which risk spreads for U.S. corporate bonds rose, financial conditions have eased somewhat in recent months, and corporate bond yields have returned to historically low levels. Mortgage rates once again have approached their all- time lows, and mortgage credit appears widely available to borrowers with solid credit profiles, though less so to would-be borrowers with imperfect credit histories. Student and auto loans are broadly available, including to borrowers with nonprime credit scores, and the availability of credit card loans for such borrowers appears to have expanded somewhat over the past several quarters. Broad measures of U.S. equity prices have increased slightly, on net, since the beginning of the year. Meanwhile, foreign financial markets appear to have stabilized following the period of volatility earlier this year, with foreign equity prices higher and risk spreads lower. That said, the potential remains for spillovers to the U.S. economy from shocks to foreign economic activity and financial markets, including possible reverberations from the U.K. referendum this week on membership in the European Union. Turning to the stability of the U.S. financial system, financial vulnerabilities have remained at a moderate level this year. Domestic financial institutions and markets functioned well during the period of heightened volatility early in the year. Large banking firms have kept their capital and liquidity ratios at high levels relative to historical standards, capital at other financial firms also appears to be elevated, and financial firms’ use of short-term wholesale funding remains subdued. Debt growth in the household sector has been modest. However, leverage of nonfinancial corporations is elevated by historical standards, and lower-rated firms are potentially vulnerable to adverse developments. In particular, the performance of firms in the energy sector has been especially weak due to the prolonged period of low oil prices. In equity markets, valuation pressures have increased somewhat as expectations for corporate earnings have been revised downward; valuation pressures have remained notable in the commercial real estate sector, to which some small banks have substantial exposures. After having raised the target range for the federal funds rate to between ¼ and ½ percent last December, the Committee maintained that target range over the first half of the year. The Committee’s decisions to leave the stance of policy unchanged were supported by its assessments earlier in the year that global economic and financial developments posed risks to the economic outlook and that growth in economic activity appeared to have slowed. In June, the Committee noted that recent information indicated that the pace of improvement in the labor market had slowed, while growth in economic activity appeared to have picked up. In addition, the Committee’s policy stance so far this year reflected its expectation that inflation would remain low in the near term, in part due to earlier declines in energy prices and in the prices of non- energy imports. The Committee stated that its accommodative stance of policy is intended to support further improvements in labor market conditions and a return to 2 percent inflation. The Committee continued to emphasize that, in determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, it will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. These judgments will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. The Committee expects that economic conditions will evolve in a manner that will warrant only gradual future increases in the federal funds rate, and that the federal funds rate will likely remain, for some time, below levels that are expected to prevail in the longer run. Consistent with this outlook, in the most recent Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), which was compiled at the time of the June meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), FOMC participants projected that the appropriate level of the federal funds rate would be below its longer-run level through 2018. (The June SEP is discussed in more detail in Part 3 of this report.) The Federal Reserve continued to use interest paid on reserve balances and employ an overnight reverse repurchase agreement facility to manage the federal funds rate, and these tools were effective in keeping the federal funds rate within its target range. The Federal Reserve also continued to test the operational readiness of other policy implementation tools. Labor market conditions have improved this year, though recent data suggest there has been a loss of momentum. Payroll gains averaged about 200,000 per month in the first quarter but then only 80,000 per month in April and May. The unemployment rate has edged down to 4¾ percent, a level that is near the midpoint of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants’ estimates of its longer-run rate. That said, a few indicators suggest that some slack in the labor market remains. Despite persistently weak productivity growth, measures of labor compensation show some tentative signs of acceleration. Overall consumer price inflation has continued to be held down by lower prices for energy and imports, but both overall inflation and inflation excluding food and energy items, a useful gauge of where overall inflation will be in the future, have picked up a bit over the past year. Some survey-based measures of longer-run inflation expectations have moved down; market-based measures of inflation compensation have declined noticeably since last summer. Real gross domestic product (GDP) is estimated to have increased at a sluggish rate in the first quarter, but more recent data point to a noticeable step-up in the pace of growth in the second quarter. Consumer spending appears to be expanding at a moderate pace so far this year, while the housing market continues its gradual recovery, and fiscal policy at all levels of government is now modestly boosting economic activity after exerting a considerable drag in recent years. An area of concern, however, is the softening in business fixed investment in recent quarters, even beyond those sectors most directly affected by the plunge in energy prices. In addition, weak exports are providing little boost to overall output growth. Heightened global financial market volatility early this year damped confidence both domestically and abroad, but financial conditions have generally eased somewhat in recent months; in the United States, credit conditions for both households and businesses have remained generally accommodative. 1. Net change in payroll employment Early this year, the labor market continued to improve . . . The labor market continued to improve in the first few months of this year. Payrolls expanded at an average rate of around 200,000 per month from January through March, modestly below the average of 230,000 jobs per month last year but still well above the number needed to absorb the trend number of new entrants into the workforce (figure 1). The unemployment rate held at about 5 percent, where it had been since the fall, but both labor force participation and the employment-to- 2. Labor force participation rate and employment-to-population ratio NOTE: Both series are a percent of the population aged 16 and over. SOURCE: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. population ratio rose noticeably (figure 2). The rise in the labor force participation rate was encouraging because it seemed to suggest that labor supply was responding significantly to the strengthening labor market. . . . but recently there may have been a loss of momentum . . . The data for April and May, however, suggest that the pace of labor market improvement has slowed. Payroll growth is reported to have averaged a pace of only 80,000 per month (about 100,000 after adjustment for the effects of a strike).1 And although the unemployment rate fell to 4.7 percent in May, that decline occurred as both labor force participation and the employment-to- population ratio fell back somewhat from their levels in March. On net, the participation rate in May was little changed from a year earlier (a position that should nonetheless be viewed as a strengthening relative to a trend that is probably declining because of demographic changes, especially the aging of the baby- boom generation). Despite these disappointing data, other labor market indicators are consistent with a job market that has continued to strengthen. In particular, initial claims for unemployment insurance, now available through early June, remain very low—and therefore at odds with the weaker tenor of the recent payroll figures. In addition, according to the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey, the rate of job openings as a share of private employment remains at a very high level; the quits rate has continued to trend up and is now fairly high, the latter measure indicating that workers feel increasingly confident about their employment opportunities. 1. According to the Labor Department, payroll employment in May was reduced by about 35,000 because of workers on strike at Verizon. These employees have returned to work and are expected to be included in payroll figures for June. 3. Measures of labor underutilization NOTE: U-4 measures total unemployed plus discouraged workers, as a percent of the labor force plus discouraged workers. Discouraged workers are a subset of marginally attached workers who are not currently looking for work because they believe no jobs are available for them. U-5 measures total unemployed plus all marginally attached to the labor force, as a percent of the labor force plus persons marginally attached to the labor force. Marginally attached workers are not in the labor force, want and are available for work, and have looked for a job in the past 12 months. U-6 measures total unemployed plus all marginally attached workers plus total employed part time for economic reasons, as a percent of the labor force plus all marginally attached workers. The shaded bar indicates a period of business recession as defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research. . . . and a few signs of labor underutilization remain Although the May level of the unemployment rate is near the midpoint of the FOMC participants’ estimates of its longer-run rate, a few indicators suggest that some slack in labor resource utilization remains. Most notably, the share of workers who are employed part time but would like to work full time is still elevated; accordingly, the more comprehensive U-6 measure of labor underutilization, which includes these underemployed individuals, has remained well above its pre-recession level (figure 3). Meanwhile, jobless rates for African Americans and Hispanics are high relative to the aggregate, though these rates have also improved during the economic recovery (figure 4). (For additional discussion, see the box “Have the Gains of the Economic Expansion Been Widely Shared?”) Have the Gains of the Economic Expansion Been Widely Shared? have experienced the largest rebound in employment. Thus far in 2016, blacks continue to have the lowest prime-age employment rates among these four groups, and the racial differences in employment-to-population ratios are very similar to pre-recession levels. The financial crisis resulted in massive job losses and falling income for American households. However, not all households suffered to the same extent during the downturn, nor have they benefited to the same extent during the subsequent recovery. This discussion reviews the labor market situation and household incomes for Americans of different races and ethnicities during the Great Recession and the ensuing economic expansion.1 Among the working population, blacks and Hispanics suffered the greatest losses in full-time employment share during the recession, and, even as overall employment has recovered, the full-time share remains significantly depressed for these workers (figure B). By early 2016, white and Asian prime-age workers had nearly returned to their pre-recession rates of full-time work, but the share of full-time employment among black and Hispanic workers remains several percentage points lower than their previous high levels. Prior to the Great Recession, black workers were the most likely to report usually working 35 hours per week or more, closely followed by Hispanics. By 2016, Hispanic workers had slightly lower rates of full-time employment than whites, and the full-time share of black workers was slightly lower than that of Asians. In the period of sustained high unemployment following the financial crisis, household incomes for all groups of Americans fell sharply and did not begin to recover until 2012. The decline in median household income was particularly large for black households—16 percent, compared with approximately A figure in the main text shows that unemployment rates for blacks and Hispanics rose more during the recession, and have declined more during the expansion, than for the nation as a whole (text figure 4).2 Rates for these groups remain higher than for whites; the differentials among these rates are now roughly the same as prior to the recession. A similar result is true for employment-to-population ratios of prime-age individuals (ages 25 to 54).3 Prime- age employment rates are lower for blacks and fell more sharply during the financial crisis, dropping nearly 8 percentage points between mid-2008 and the end of 2011, compared with declines of between 4 and 5 percentage points for whites, Asians, and Hispanics (figure A). Since 2011, however, blacks 1. The employment-to-population ratio and full-time share of employed individuals are calculated using data from the monthly Current Population Survey (CPS). Median household income and the income composition are calculated using data from the March CPS Annual Social and Economic Supplement (ASEC). Monthly data are available through April 2016, while the most recent ASEC data (March 2015 CPS) are for 2014. 2. The Hispanic ethnicity and race categories are not mutually exclusive. Some individuals are, for example, both Hispanic and white, and they are represented in both lines in the figures in the box. 3. The unemployment rate shows the number of of the total labor force. The employment-to-population ratio ignores the distinction between those actively seeking work or not and simply measures the number of employed individuals as a share of the total population. We use the prime-age population because we want to focus on the labor market recovery and do not want income to include Social Security and other sources of retirement income that are largely independent of economic conditions. unemployed individuals actively looking for work as a share NOTE: The data are 12-month moving averages. Prime age is defined as NOTE: The data are 12-month moving averages. Prime age is defined as those aged 25 to 54. those aged 25 to 54. By 2014 (latest data available), median household incomes of Asian, white, and Hispanic households had improved and were at least 94 percent of pre-recession levels, but median income for black households remained only 88 percent of the 2007 level. Racial and ethnic differences in income were sizable before the financial crisis and have only grown larger since then, with the median black household income at $40,000 in 2014, compared with $67,000 for white and $85,000 for Asian households (figure D). the decline in income for households during the downturn. Between 2007 and 2011, mean wage income for households in the middle quintile of the income distribution fell just over $5,000 for white households, $4,000 for Hispanic households, $8,000 for black households, and $7,000 for Asian households (figure E).5 Wages and salaries are the single largest source of income and have provided most of the increase in total income since 2011. Mean wage income for 2014 had returned to pre-recession levels for Asian households and had made up some of the lost ground among white and Hispanic households. Wage income for black households, however, remained 4. Percentages are based on an analysis of income data from the March CPS ASEC. Household race was determined by answers to the Hispanic ethnicity question and the first racial category selected by household heads between the ages of 25 and 54. Income of all household members is included. Any household head identifying as Hispanic is coded as Hispanic, regardless of race. Incomes for a very small group of households (less than 2 percent in 2014) that are identified as some other race group are not shown here, as the estimates are somewhat volatile and not very precise. 5. To show changes in the composition of income for “typical” households, we switch here to using mean income of households in the middle quintile of the distribution. NOTE: Prime-age households are defined as households led by those aged 25 to 54. Race refers to the race of the head of household. The data extend through 2014. substantially below levels experienced prior to the financial crisis. Transfer income rose substantially during the recession because of federal economic stimulus programs and automatic stabilizers, but the increases only offset a modest portion of the overall decline in income.6 Transfer income has receded very slowly since 2011, with mean transfers in 2014 remaining above pre-recession levels for all racial and ethnic groups. 6. Transfer income includes Social Security income, welfare, Supplemental Security Income, unemployment benefits, and educational assistance. other income includes business income; farm income; income from interest, dividends, rent, alimony, and contributions; retirement income; trusts; workers’ compensation; veterans’, survivors’, and disability benefits; educational assistance from nongovernment sources; assistance from friends and family; and other sources. NOTE: Prime-age households are defined as households led by those aged 25 to 54. Race refers to the race of the head of household. The data extend through 2014. NOTE: Prime-age households are defined as households led by those aged 25 to 54. Race refers to the race of the head of household. The data are grouped according to key years 2007, 2011, and 2014. 4. Unemployment by race and ethnicity NOTE: Persons whose ethnicity is identified as Hispanic or Latino may be of any race. The shaded bar indicates a period of business recession as defined by the 5. Measures of change in hourly compensation Compensation growth has shown tentative signs of a pickup . . . NOTE: The average hourly earnings data series begins in March 2007 and extends through May 2016. The compensation per hour and employment cost index data extend through 2016:Q1. For business-sector compensation, change is over four quarters; for the employment cost index, change is over the 12 months ending in the last month of each quarter; for average hourly earnings, change is from 12 months earlier. By most measures, the growth of labor compensation has remained modest, though recently there have been some signs of faster increases. The employment cost index (ECI) for private-industry workers, which includes the cost of employer-provided benefits as well as wages, registered a rise of only 1¾ percent over the 12 months ending in March (figure 5). However, two other prominent measures of labor compensation—average hourly earnings for all private-sector employees and business- sector compensation per hour—recorded larger increases than the ECI over the past year, and the increases in both series were above their corresponding averages over the preceding several years. In addition, according to the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta’s Wage Growth Tracker, the median of 12-month changes in individuals’ hourly wages (from the monthly survey of households) has been gradually trending higher, reaching 3½ percent in May. The relatively slow gains in labor compensation in recent years have occurred against a backdrop of persistently weak productivity growth. Since 2008, labor productivity gains have averaged around 1 percent per year, far below the pace that prevailed before the recession (figure 6). Indeed, in the past five years, productivity growth has averaged only ½ percent per year. The relatively slow pace of productivity growth is at least in part a consequence of the sustained weakness in capital investment over the recession and early recovery period. Productivity gains may improve in the future as investment in productivity-enhancing capital equipment and in research and development strengthens. Falling energy prices have held down consumer price inflation Overall consumer price inflation has moved up from the lows recorded last year, but it remains well below the FOMC’s longer-run objective of 2 percent. In April, the 12-month change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) was around 1 percent, higher than the ¼ percent rate recorded in April 2015 (figure 7). The pickup over this period was largely due to a slower rate of decline in both energy prices and non-energy import prices. Low oil prices have reduced global investment in the oil sector and have led to some cutbacks in production, particularly in the United States. These declines, firming global demand, and some temporary supply disruptions— including in Canada due to wildfires—have recently pushed crude oil prices higher after they reached a 12-year low in mid-January (figure 8). Nonetheless, at a bit below $50 per barrel, the spot price of Brent crude oil remains less than half its mid-2014 peak. Moreover, the continued low level of oil futures prices suggests that market participants expect only a modest increase in oil prices over 6. Change in business sector output per hour NOTE: Changes are measured from Q4 of the year immediately preceding the period through Q4 of the final year of the period. The final period is measured from 2007:Q4 through 2016:Q1. 7. Change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures Excluding food and energy NOTE: The data extend through April 2016; changes are from one year 8. Brent spot and futures prices NOTE: The data are weekly averages of daily data and extend through June 9. Non-oil import prices and U.S. dollar exchange rate the next couple of years, given the historically high global inventories of crude oil. The large cumulative drop in crude oil prices had mostly passed through to lower retail prices for gasoline and other energy products by early this year; despite some increases thereafter, prices at the pump remain at levels substantially below those of last summer. Similar to the price of crude oil, prices of metals and agricultural goods have moved higher since early this year. The rise in the prices of agricultural goods followed several quarters of declines that have held down retail food prices for consumers so far this year. The rise in many nonfuel commodities prices, together with a weaker dollar, helped push non-oil import prices higher in May—the first increase since 2014 (figure 9). Outside of the energy and food categories, inflation has picked up a little bit Inflation for items other than food and energy (so-called core inflation) has picked up a little. Core PCE prices rose about 1½ percent over the 12 months ending in April, up about ¼ percentage point from its year-earlier pace.2 The increase in the trimmed mean PCE price index, an alternative indicator of underlying inflation, has also picked up a bit over the past year; as is typically the case, this measure has run somewhat above core inflation over this period. Because the slack in labor and product markets appears to have been mostly taken up, and given the recent upward movements in oil prices and non-oil import prices—after months of declines—the downward pressure on inflation from these factors is likely waning. 2. Data from the consumer price index and the Some survey-based measures of expected inflation have drifted downward . . . The FOMC devotes careful attention to indicators of long-run inflation expectations, as these expectations are believed to be an important factor underlying many wage- and price-setting decisions. The latest readings from surveys of longer-term inflation expectations have sent mixed signals (figure 10). In the Survey of Professional Forecasters, conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, the median second- quarter reading on expected annual PCE price inflation over the next 10 years was again 2 percent. The distribution of inflation expectations 5 to 10 years ahead derived from surveys of primary dealers has remained similarly stable. But in the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers, the median reading on inflation expectations over the next 5 to 10 years has drifted down over the past two years and recorded a new low in early June. To the extent that this downward drift is a reaction to energy-driven declines in overall inflation, it could reverse over time as energy prices stop declining. . . . and market-based measures of inflation compensation have remained low Market-based measures of longer-term inflation compensation—derived either from differences between yields on nominal Treasury securities and Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities or from inflation swaps—have continued to decline and now stand at very low levels (figure 11). Deducing the sources of changes in inflation compensation is challenging because such movements reflect not only expected inflation, but also an inflation risk premium—the compensation that holders of nominal securities demand for bearing inflation risk—and other factors. Nevertheless, one cannot rule out a decline in inflation expectations among market participants since last summer. 10. Median inflation expectations NOTE: The Michigan survey data are monthly and extend through June 2016. The SPF data for inflation expectations for personal consumption expenditures are quarterly and extend from 2007:Q1 through 2016:Q2. Michigan survey data for June are preliminary. 11. 5-to-10-year-forward inflation compensation NOTE: The data are weekly averages of daily data and extend through June 12. Change in real gross domestic product and gross domestic income 13. Change in real personal consumption expenditures and disposable personal income Personal consumption expenditures Disposable personal income NOTE: The reading for 2016:H1 is the annualized April/Q4 change. SOURCE: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis. Economic activity has been expanding at a moderate pace Real GDP is currently reported to have increased at an annual rate of just ¾ percent in the first quarter, but with several signs of faster growth in the current quarter, real GDP appears on track to record a moderate overall gain in the first half of this year (figure 12).3 Consumer spending is advancing further, and housing activity continues to strengthen gradually. Meanwhile, government expenditures have maintained momentum. Although inventory investment exerted a sizable drag on GDP growth in the latter half of last year, it has been less of an influence in the first half of this year. Nevertheless, several of the headwinds that were apparent last year have continued to restrain growth in activity this year. In particular, a substantial appreciation of the dollar over the past couple of years, along with continued sluggish foreign growth, is weighing on the demand for U.S. exports. In addition, the sizable drop in oil prices since 2014—notwithstanding the substantial benefit to households—has led to marked cutbacks in production and investment in the energy sector of our economy. These negative factors have had particularly pronounced effects on activity in the industrial sector. Gains in income and wealth continue to support consumer spending Consumption growth was lackluster early in 2016, but data on retail sales and motor vehicle sales suggest that spending has picked up appreciably so far this quarter. Smoothing through the monthly fluctuations, consumer spending is reported to have increased at an annual rate of nearly 3 percent over the first four months of this year, only a little slower than the pace in 2015 (figure 13). 3. While it appears likely that residual seasonality—a predictable seasonal pattern remaining in data that have already been seasonally adjusted—in some components of GDP held down measured GDP growth in the first quarter, this factor would imply an offsetting boost in measured GDP growth over the remainder of the year. The improvement in the labor market has continued to support income growth, and low energy prices are boosting households’ purchasing power. As a result, real disposable personal income—that is, income after taxes and adjusted for inflation—was reported to have advanced at an annual rate of about 3¼ percent over the first four months of this year, just a touch below the pace in 2015. Ongoing gains in household net worth likely have also supported growth in consumer spending. House prices, which are of particular importance for the balance sheet positions of a broad set of households, have continued to move higher, with the CoreLogic national index showing a rise of about 6 percent over the 12 months ending in April (figure 14). Elsewhere, although equity prices have only increased slightly, on net, so far this year, the prior gains of the past few years have helped improve households’ financial positions. In the first quarter of this year, the ratio of aggregate household net worth to disposable income, which had previously returned to its pre-recession highs, ticked down slightly but remained far above its long-run historical average (figure 15). Consumers are upbeat about their economic prospects . . . The solid pace of income growth over the past year has helped households retain fairly upbeat perceptions about their economic prospects. The Michigan survey’s composite index of consumer sentiment—which incorporates households’ views about their own financial situations as well as economic conditions more broadly—has improved again recently following a moderate deterioration earlier in the year, and the latest readings were near the upper end of the range of values recorded during the previous economic expansion (figure 16). After having lagged behind improvements in headline sentiment earlier in the recovery, the survey measures of households’ expectations for real income changes over the next year or two have also improved noticeably and now stand close to their pre-recession levels. 14. Prices of existing single-family houses NOTE: The data for the S&P/Case-Shiller index extend through March 2016. The data for the Zillow and CoreLogic indexes extend through April 2016. For Dow Jones Indices licensing information, see the note on the Contents page. SOURCE: CoreLogic Home Price Index; Zillow; S&P/Case-Shiller U.S. National Home Price Index (“Index”). The S&P/Case-Shiller Index is a product of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. 15. Wealth-to-income ratio NOTE: The series is the ratio of household net worth to disposable personal NOTE: The data are three-month moving averages and extend through June 2016. June data are preliminary. Consumer sentiment is indexed to 100 in 1966. Real income expectations are calculated as the net percent of survey respondents expecting family income to go up more than prices during the next year or two, plus 100. 17. Changes in household debt 18. Household debt service NOTE: Debt service payments consist of estimated required payments on . . . and household credit availability is generally favorable Consumer credit has continued to expand this year amid stable credit performance (figure 17). Auto and student loans remain widely available, even to borrowers with lower credit scores, and outstanding balances of these types of loans expanded at a robust pace. Credit card borrowing has also accelerated a bit, on balance, and the outstanding balance in April was 5½ percent above its level a year earlier. Although there have been some tentative signs of easing overall, credit card standards have remained tight for nonprime borrowers. Low interest rates and rising incomes have enabled many households to lower their debt payment burdens. The household debt service ratio—that is, the ratio of required principal and interest payments on outstanding household debt to disposable personal income—has remained at a very low level by historical standards (figure 18). Interest rates on 30-year fixed-rate mortgages are down about ½ percentage point from the level at the December liftoff date, and rates on auto loans, on net, have been little changed since then. Going forward, the effect of any policy rate tightening on mortgage rates and, in turn, on households’ debt burdens will likely show through only gradually, as the current stock of household debt is disproportionately held in loan products with fixed interest rates. Residential construction activity has improved at a gradual pace The recovery in residential construction activity has maintained a moderate pace. Single-family starts continued to edge up slowly over the past year, while multifamily starts receded a little from their elevated levels in the middle of 2015 (figure 19). Looking further back, the rise in multifamily starts over the past five years has been substantial and has far exceeded the percent gain in single- family housing starts. The relative strength in multifamily construction partly reflects a shift in demand away from owner-occupied housing toward rental housing since the recession. Elsewhere, outlays for improvements to existing homes increased more than 10 percent over the past year, and commissions and fees paid on the sale of residential real estate rose moderately, in line with the uptrend in sales of existing homes and contracts for new homes (figure 20). In all, residential investment rose almost 10 percent in 2015 and appears on track to maintain a similar pace in the first half of this year. Low interest rates and an ongoing easing in mortgage credit standards have continued to support the expansions in housing demand and construction activity. In the April Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS), banks reported having eased lending standards and experienced stronger demand for most types of residential real estate loans in the first quarter.4 Even so, for individuals with relatively low credit scores, mortgages remain difficult to obtain. With mortgage interest rates having again moved down close to their all-time lows, housing affordability has remained favorable despite the moderate growth in house prices over the past year (figure 21). Business fixed investment has declined . . . A worrisome development in recent quarters has been the weakening in business fixed investment (private nonresidential fixed investment). Over the past year, real outlays in the nonresidential structures category— which constitutes roughly one-fourth of total business fixed investment—have fallen sharply, as investment in oil wells and other drilling and mining structures has followed the steep drop in oil prices (figure 22). The decline in the number of drilling rigs in operation has been so pronounced that investment in drilling and mining structures has shrunk to 4. The SLOOS is available on the Board’s website at 19. Private housing starts and permits 20. New and existing home sales Existing home sales NOTE: The data extend through April 2016. “Existing home sales” includes SOURCE: For new single-family home sales, Census Bureau; for existing 21. Mortgage rates and housing affordability NOTE: The housing affordability index data are monthly through April 2016, and the mortgage rate data are weekly through June 15, 2016. At an index value of 100, a median-income family has exactly enough income to qualify for a median-priced home mortgage. Housing affordability is seasonally adjusted by Board staff. 22. Change in real private nonresidential fixed investment 23. Corporate bond yields, by securities rating NOTE: The yields shown are yields on 10-year bonds. SOURCE: BofA Merrill Lynch Global Research, used with permission. less than one-third its peak in 2014, and the ongoing contraction has subtracted nearly ½ percentage point from real GDP growth over the past four quarters. Outside of the energy sector, business outlays for structures recorded relatively modest increases following the sizable gains observed in the first half of 2015. Meanwhile, business spending on equipment and intellectual property products moved down in the fourth quarter of last year and the first quarter of 2016, and the available indicators, such as orders and shipments of capital goods and surveys of business conditions, point to continued softness in the current quarter. Although investment spending continues to be supported by low interest rates and generally accommodative financial conditions, spending is likely being restrained by a slowing in actual and expected business output growth. Weak foreign demand and the stronger dollar are already having an adverse effect on domestic businesses, and analysts’ forecasts for year- ahead corporate earnings have been revised down considerably, even outside of the energy sector. Meanwhile, as reported by the Bureau of Economic Analysis, corporate profits recorded only a slight increase in the first quarter after falling sharply at the end of last year, although here, too, the weakness was heavily concentrated in the energy sector. . . . while corporate financing conditions have remained generally accommodative Corporate financing conditions remained generally accommodative in the first half of this year, although ongoing oil market developments and episodes of global financial stress led to sporadic periods of heightened perceptions of risk. In particular, corporate bond markets showed strains early in the year, especially for those firms most affected by the low energy prices. In recent months, however, pressures in bond markets have eased somewhat, and corporate bond yields overall have returned to historically low levels (figure 23). In the April SLOOS, banks indicated that they had tightened their standards on commercial and industrial (C&I) loans to large and middle-market firms in the first quarter, but even so, such financing remained broadly available. For the first quarter as a whole, corporate bond issuance and the growth of C&I loans on banks’ balance sheets were quite strong (figure 24). Firms’ equity issuance was also generally solid, though initial public offerings have been weak. Meanwhile, the growth of small business loans was subdued. Financing conditions in the commercial real estate (CRE) sector have remained accommodative overall, but here, too, there have been some signs of tightening. Growth of CRE loans at banks remained strong during the first half of the year. However, banks indicated that they had further tightened their lending standards on CRE loans in the first quarter of 2016, according to the April SLOOS. In addition, spreads on interest rates for CRE loans relative to 10-year swap rates and to yields on commercial mortgage-backed securities rose sharply further early this year, and although they have retreated significantly since then, these measures remain well above their historical average levels. Exports and imports have both been weak this year Based on recently released trade prices and the nominal census trade data, it appears that real exports were roughly flat in the first quarter of 2016, held back by slow foreign growth and the considerable appreciation of the dollar over the past two years. Despite the appreciation of the dollar, real imports looked to have declined in the first quarter, with weakness in both capital- and consumer-goods categories. Overall, the net export contribution to GDP growth was about neutral. While the nominal trade deficit narrowed a little in the first quarter, the current account deficit widened a touch to 2.7 percent of nominal GDP (figure 25). The April trade data suggest that net exports will be a small drag on GDP growth in the current quarter, as the trade deficit increased, with imports rebounding from a very weak March level. 24. Selected components of net debt financing for nonfinancial businesses 25. U.S. trade and current account balances NOTE: GDP is gross domestic product. SOURCE: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis. 26. Change in real government expenditures on consumption and investment 27. Federal receipts and expenditures NOTE: Through 2015, receipts and expenditures are for fiscal years (October to September); gross domestic product (GDP) is for the four quarters ending in Q3. For 2016, receipts and expenditures are for the 12 months ending in May, and GDP is the average of 2015:Q4 and 2016:Q1. Receipts and expenditures are on a unified-budget basis. The drag from federal fiscal policy has ended . . . Fiscal policy at the federal level had a roughly neutral influence on GDP growth in 2015, as the substantial contractionary effects of earlier fiscal consolidation have abated. Policy actions had little effect on taxes, while transfers and federal purchases of goods and services merely edged up (figure 26). Going forward, if the increased spending authority enacted in last year’s budget agreement is fully utilized, federal fiscal policy would likely be mildly supportive of GDP growth over 2016 and 2017. After narrowing significantly over the past several years, the federal unified budget deficit has recently widened slightly. At 18 percent of GDP, receipts have remained high relative to the recession and early recovery period (figure 27). At 21 percent, expenditures as a share of GDP are above the levels that prevailed before the start of the most recent recession. Although the ratio of federal debt held by the public to nominal GDP is already quite elevated, the deficit currently remains small enough to roughly stabilize this ratio at around 75 percent (figure 28). . . . and state and local government expenditures are rising The expansion of economic activity and further gains in house prices continue to support a gradual improvement in the fiscal position of most state and local governments. Consistent with their improving finances, states and localities significantly expanded real construction spending in 2015 and in the early part of this year. By contrast, employment growth in the state and local sector was muted last year, but the pace has stepped up somewhat so far in 2016 (figure 29). Financial conditions tightened early in the year but then eased Early in 2016, domestic financial conditions tightened, as uncertainty about the outlook for the Chinese economy, lower oil prices, and weak data on economic activity in several economies contributed to concerns about the prospects for global economic growth and to a pullback from risky assets. At that time, Treasury yields declined across maturities, equity prices fell steeply, equity price volatility rose, and risk spreads on corporate bonds widened notably. In addition, investors came to expect a more gradual increase in the target range for the federal funds rate than they had previously anticipated. However, investors’ concerns appeared to diminish beginning in mid-February, and since then, amid mixed U.S. economic data, domestic financial conditions have generally eased on balance: Stock prices rose notably, equity price volatility declined, and credit spreads on corporate bonds narrowed. (For a discussion of financial stability developments over this same period, see the box “Developments Related to Financial Stability.”) On balance to date this year, the expected path for the federal funds rate over the next several years declined . . . The path of the federal funds rate implied by market quotes on interest rate derivatives flattened, on net, since December. The turbulence in global financial markets early in the year, the FOMC’s communications, and some indications of a slowing in the pace of improvement in the labor market of late contributed to market participants’ expectation that U.S. monetary policy would be more accommodative than they had anticipated late last year. Survey-based measures of the expected path of policy also moved down this year. Respondents to the Survey of Primary Dealers and to the Survey of Market Participants in June expected fewer 25 basis point increases in the FOMC’s target range for the federal funds rate this year than they projected in December. Market-based measures of uncertainty about the policy rate approximately one to two years ahead declined, on balance, from their year- end levels. 28. Federal government debt held by the public NOTE: The data for gross domestic product (GDP) are at an annual rate. Federal debt held by the public equals federal debt less Treasury securities held in federal employee defined benefit retirement accounts, evaluated at the end of the quarter. 29. State and local government employment change NOTE: The value for 2016:H1 is calculated with data extending through May. The value for 2013 is -0.08. Capital positions also have remained relatively overall remain at a moderate level. This assessment is supported by the resilience demonstrated by domestic financial firms and markets during the period of heightened financial volatility near the start of the year. Capital and liquidity ratios at large banks have stayed at high levels relative to historical standards, and debt growth in the household sector has been modest. However, leverage of nonfinancial corporations continues to be elevated by historical standards, leaving lower-rated firms potentially vulnerable to adverse developments. Stresses on energy firms remain high given the low level of oil prices. valuation pressures have increased somewhat in equity markets as expected profits have been marked down. Commercial real estate (CRE) prices are near or above their previous peaks. Even given moderate financial vulnerabilities, a number of possible external shocks, including if the United Kingdom chooses to leave the European Union in a pending referendum, could pose risks to financial stability. Stronger capital positions at domestic banking organizations have substantially contributed to the improved resilience of the U.S. financial system (figure A). The results of the stress tests mandated by the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 and the accompanying Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review are scheduled to be released June 23 and June 29, 2016, respectively.1 In addition, large domestic banks have continued to hold high levels of liquid assets and have shifted the composition of their liabilities toward more-stable funding sources. However, measures of profitability, such as return on assets and return on equity, declined noticeably in the first quarter as many banking firms increased provisions for loan losses. The pickup in provisions to date primarily reflects rising delinquencies for loans to energy-related firms. Energy exposures for most banks appear manageable, but some small domestic banks still have significant exposure to the oil sector, and others could be affected by spillovers from the energy sector to other business lines. A few large domestic banks have material ties to global banks that appear to be more susceptible to low oil prices due to their significant exposures to oil- producing emerging market economies. elevated at insurance companies and broker-dealers. In addition, net secured borrowing by dealers—primarily used to finance their own portfolios of securities—has stayed near its lowest levels since 2001. Margin credit extended by dealers—which funds clients’ positions in traded stocks—has fluctuated within the upper part of its historical range, but margin calls reportedly were met without disruption or a marked increase in disputes during the heightened market volatility at the start of the year. instruments, which form funding intermediation chains that are vulnerable to runs, has continued to trend down relative to gross domestic product (GDP) and total nonfinancial debt, suggesting vulnerabilities from maturity transformation have continued to fall. Assets in money market mutual funds (MMFs) have been relatively stable this year, though assets in institutional prime MMFs have been declining, primarily because Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) reforms aimed at mitigating the funds’ susceptibility to investor runs have induced conversions of prime funds into government-only funds. Nevertheless, some structural vulnerabilities are expected to persist in MMFs even after SEC reforms go fully into effect in october 2016. For open-end mutual funds, the Financial Stability oversight Council highlighted potential risks to financial stability from liquidity transformation A. Regulatory capital ratios at the top 25 bank holding 1. The exercise tests the ability of the 34 participating bank holding companies to maintain adequate capital ratios and continue to provide intermediary services in the face of a hypothetical severe recession. For descriptions of the scenarios, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016), 2016 Supervisory Scenarios for Annual Stress Tests Required under the Dodd-Frank Act Stress Testing Rules and the Capital Plan Rule (Washington: Board of Governors, January), https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/ bcreg/bcreg20160128a2.pdf. NOTE: The common equity tier 1 ratio equals core equity capital divided by risk-weighted assets, while the leverage ratio equals tier 1 capital divided by average total consolidated assets. Exact calculations for the two regulatory capital ratios can be found in schedule HC-R of the Federal Reserve Board's reporting form FR Y-9C. Before 2014:Q1, the numerator of the common equity tier 1 ratio is tier 1 common capital. Beginning in 2014:Q1 for advanced approaches bank holding companies and in 2015:Q1 for all other bank holding companies, the numerator is common equity tier 1 capital. The shaded bars indicate periods of business recession as defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research. through funds that hold less liquid assets and could face elevated redemptions, and the council suggested possible actions to mitigate those risks. valuation pressures have generally stayed at a moderate level since January, though they rose for a few asset classes. Forward price-to-earnings ratios for equities have increased to a level well above their median of the past three decades. Although equity valuations do not appear to be rich relative to Treasury yields, equity prices are vulnerable to rises in term premiums to more normal levels, especially if a reversion was not motivated by positive news about economic growth. In contrast, valuation pressures in corporate bond markets—which manifest in low yields and credit spreads—were about unchanged. Credit spreads for 10-year investment- and speculative-grade bonds changed little, on balance, and far-term forward spreads on speculative-grade corporate bonds have risen slightly, suggesting only a small decrease in investors’ risk appetite. Although respondents to the Board’s Senior Credit officer opinion Survey on Dealer Financing Terms reported some deterioration in market liquidity during the heightened financial volatility near the start of the year, standard measures of liquidity in corporate bond markets decreased only about in line with what might be expected given historical relationships between liquidity and volatility. valuations in the CRE sector appear increasingly vulnerable to negative shocks, as CRE prices have continued to outpace rental income and exceed, by some measures, their pre-crisis peaks. However, leverage in the sector does not appear excessive, and some evidence points to a recent reduction in risk appetite among CRE investors. overall growth of CRE debt is moderate, and the ratio of debt backed by nonfarm nonresidential property to GDP is below an estimate of its long-run historical trend. In addition, according to the January and April results of the Board’s Senior Loan officer opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices, banks tightened lending standards in the fourth quarter of 2015 and first quarter of 2016. has stayed near the levels that prevailed in the mid- 2000s, though it is below conventional estimates of its long-term upward trend. In addition, debt growth in the household sector remained modest and mostly attributable to prime borrowers. In contrast, leverage for the nonfinancial corporate sector has stayed elevated and indicators of corporate credit quality, though still solid overall, continued to show signs of deterioration for lower-rated firms, especially in the energy sector. Even so, the risks posed by the elevated indebtedness of nonfinancial corporations may be attenuated by substantial cash holdings of investment-grade firms, relatively low interest expenses, and limited short- term debt. The Federal Reserve Board has taken several further steps to improve the resilience of financial institutions and overall financial stability, including three proposals that apply only to large banking organizations and increase in stringency with the systemic footprint of the organization. First, the Board issued for public comment a proposed rule that would impose single-counterparty credit limits to help constrain interconnectedness within the financial system.2 Second, the Board and the other federal banking agencies issued for public comment a proposed rule that would require large U.S. banking organizations to maintain a minimum net stable funding ratio (NSFR).3 The proposal would require those institutions to maintain sufficient levels of stable funding relative to the liquidity of their assets, derivatives, and commitments over a one-year period, reducing liquidity risk in the banking system. The NSFR proposal would also serve as a complement to the liquidity coverage ratio rule. Third, the Board issued for public comment a proposed rule that would reduce the threat of disorderly liquidation of financial firms by requiring U.S. global systemically important banks (G-SIBs) and the U.S. operations of foreign G-SIBs to restrict the ability of counterparties to terminate qualified financial contracts early if the firm enters bankruptcy or a resolution process.4 Insurance Corporation announced their determinations and provided firm-specific feedback on the 2015 resolution plans of eight U.S. G-SIBs.5 The two agencies ordered five of the firms to address identified deficiencies in their plans by october 1, 2016, or possibly be subjected to more stringent prudential requirements. 2. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016), “Federal Reserve Board Proposes Rule to Address Risk Associated with Excessive Credit Exposures of Large Banking organizations to a Single Counterparty,” press release, March 4, https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/ bcreg/20160304b.htm. 3. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 4. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016), “Federal Reserve Board Proposes Rule to Support U.S. Financial Stability by Enhancing the Resolvability of very Large and Complex Financial Firms,” press release, May 3, https:// www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/bcreg/20160503b. htm. 5. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (2016), “Agencies Announce Determinations and Provide Feedback on Resolution Plans of Eight Systemically Important, Domestic Banking Institutions,” joint press release, April 13, https:// www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/bcreg/20160413a. htm. 30. Yields on nominal Treasury securities NOTE: The Treasury ceased publication of the 30-year constant maturity series on February 18, 2002, and resumed that series on February 9, 2006. 31. Yield and spread on agency mortgage-backed securities NOTE: The data are daily. Yield shown is for the Fannie Mae 30-year current coupon, the coupon rate at which new mortgage-backed securities would be priced at par, or face, value. Spread shown is to the average of the 5- and 10-year nominal Treasury yields. 32. Equity prices NOTE: For Dow Jones Indices licensing information, see the note on the . . . longer-term nominal Treasury yields decreased . . . Yields on 5-, 10-, and 30-year nominal Treasury securities declined in the first half of the year on balance (figure 30). Treasury yields decreased most notably in the early part of the year amid an increase in safe- haven demands and a pullback from risky assets. Yields changed little since then, on net, as risk sentiment generally improved but concerns about longer-term economic growth remained. Consistent with the change in yields on Treasury securities, yields on 30-year agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS)—an important determinant of mortgage interest rates—decreased, on balance, in the first half of 2016 (figure 31). . . . broad equity price indexes increased slightly, and those of companies linked to energy sectors rose substantially . . . After incurring sharp declines early in the year, broad equity price indexes rebounded as risk sentiment improved, resulting in levels that were slightly higher, on net, than at year-end (figure 32). In addition, reflecting the rebound in oil prices since the turn of the year, stock prices of companies in the energy sector outperformed broad equity market indexes over the first half of 2016. Meanwhile, implied volatility of the S&P 500 index increased through mid-February and then declined, ending the period above its year-end level. . . . while risk spreads on corporate bonds narrowed Similar to the movements in equity markets, spreads on corporate bonds over comparable- maturity Treasury securities widened early in the year but later retraced those moves, leaving spreads generally little changed, on net, over the first half of the year. Spreads on the lowest-rated speculative-grade issues declined appreciably. Nonetheless, corporate bond spreads stayed notably above their historical median levels, consistent with some deterioration in credit quality in the corporate sector. Bank credit continued to expand, but profitability declined Aggregate credit provided by commercial banks increased at a solid pace through May (figure 33). The expansion in bank credit reflected strong loan growth coupled with a modest increase in banks’ holdings of securities. The growth of loans on banks’ books was generally consistent with banks’ reports in the April SLOOS of stronger demand for most loan categories and easier lending standards for loans to households. Measures of bank profitability remained below their historical averages and declined in the first quarter of 2016, pressured by higher provisioning for losses on loans to borrowers in the oil and gas sectors, reduced trading and investment banking revenues, and continued low net interest margins (figure 34). However, with the exception of C&I loans, loan delinquency and charge-off rates continued to decline across most major loan types and remained near or at their lowest levels since the financial crisis. Stock prices of large bank holding companies decreased over the first half of the year, while banks’ credit default swap spreads increased and stayed above their average level over the past two years. Measures of liquidity conditions and functioning in financing markets were generally stable Available indicators of Treasury market functioning have remained broadly stable over the first half of 2016. A variety of liquidity metrics—including bid-asked spreads and bid sizes in secondary markets for Treasury securities—have displayed no notable signs of liquidity pressures over the same period. In addition, Treasury auctions generally continued to be well received by investors. Liquidity conditions in the agency MBS market also appeared to be generally stable. Dollar-roll-implied financing rates for production coupon MBS—an indicator of the scarcity of agency MBS for settlement— 33. Ratio of total commercial bank credit to nominal gross domestic product 34. Profitability of bank holding companies NOTE: The data are quarterly and are seasonally adjusted. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Board, Form FR Y-9C, Consolidated Financial 35. Equity indexes for selected foreign economies Emerging markets NOTE: The data are weekly averages of daily data and extend through June 16, 2016. For Dow Jones Indices licensing information, see the note on the Contents page. suggested limited settlement pressures over the first half of 2016. In addition, measures of corporate bond market liquidity, such as gauges of the effect of trades on market prices, stayed at levels comparable with those seen prior to the financial crisis. However, accurately measuring liquidity in fixed-income markets can be challenging, and liquidity conditions may vary in certain segments of the market or during times of stress. Short-term dollar funding markets also continued to function smoothly during the first half of 2016. There were generally no signs of stress in either secured or unsecured money markets, including at March quarter-end. Municipal bond markets functioned smoothly despite recent developments on Puerto Rico’s debt Credit conditions in municipal bond markets continued to be stable even as the situation facing Puerto Rico and its creditors deteriorated further. Gross issuance of municipal bonds remained solid in the first quarter, and yield spreads on general obligation (GO) municipal bonds over comparable-maturity Treasury securities increased a bit on net. Puerto Rico’s Government Development Bank missed a substantial debt payment due in early May, and investors remained focused on the next sizable payment of GO bonds due in July. Foreign financial market conditions improved after tightening early in the year Foreign financial market conditions tightened early in the year, with bond spreads rising and equity markets falling in most countries as investor concerns about global economic growth increased, particularly with regard to China (figure 35). Since mid-February, in response to the release of some positive foreign data, reassuring moves by Chinese policymakers, and a market perception that U.S. monetary policy would be somewhat more accommodative than previously expected, financial conditions generally improved. A rebound in oil prices also seemed to reassure investors, possibly by diminishing financial stability concerns around oil- producing firms and oil-exporting economies. Bond yields, however, have generally moved lower since February, both because of low readings on inflation and in response to the U.S. employment report in June (figure 36). The dollar depreciated early in the year but has risen, on balance, more recently After increasing more than 20 percent from mid-2014 through its recent peak in January of this year, the broad dollar index—a measure of the trade-weighted value of the dollar against foreign currencies—has declined about 4 percent on balance (figure 37). The exchange value of the dollar fluctuated importantly over the first half of this year in response to shifting views about the path of U.S. monetary policy—falling early on, rising starting in May, and declining again more recently. On net, the dollar declined significantly against currencies of some commodity exporters, including Canada, as higher oil prices provided support for those currencies. In contrast, the British pound appreciated less against the dollar than other currencies, likely reflecting investor concerns about the upcoming referendum on whether the United Kingdom should leave the European Union. The Chinese renminbi was under considerable depreciation pressure late last year and very early in 2016 but stabilized as fears that Chinese policymakers would allow the renminbi to fall considerably further were allayed by reassuring statements of Chinese authorities, positive macroeconomic data, and decreased capital outflows (figure 38). Economic growth remained modest in most advanced foreign economies In the euro area, Canada, and Japan, economic growth picked up in the first quarter of 2016 (figure 39). The euro-area economy was supported by the European Central Bank’s 36. 10-year nominal benchmark yields in selected advanced economies NOTE: The data are weekly averages of daily data and extend through June 37. U.S. dollar exchange rate indexes Emerging market economies NOTE: The data, which are in foreign currency units per dollar, are weekly averages of daily data and extend through June 16, 2016. 38. Chinese renminbi exchange rate RMB/USD (inverted scale) NOTE: The data are weekly averages of daily data and extend through June 16, 2016. The line plots the number of Chinese renminbi per U.S. dollar (RMB/USD). Given the inverted scale, the line moving up indicates an appreciation of the renminbi against the dollar. 39. Real gross domestic product growth in selected advanced foreign economies Inflation in selected advanced foreign economies NOTE: The data for Canada and Japan extend through April 2016. SOURCE: For the United Kingdom, Office of National Statistics; for Japan, Ministry of International Affairs and Communications; for euro area, Statistical Office of the European Communities; for Canada, Statistics Canada; all via Haver Analytics. highly accommodative monetary policies, and the Canadian economy continued to recover from a brief recession in early 2015, with past depreciation of the Canadian dollar providing some support. However, GDP growth in the second quarter is likely to be hampered in Japan (as a result of an earthquake in April) and in Canada (on account of massive wildfires that have disrupted oil production). In addition, uncertainty related to the forthcoming U.K. referendum appears to have contributed to a step-down in U.K. growth this year. Inflation also remained low . . . In most advanced foreign economies (AFEs), core inflation remained subdued, reflecting continued economic slack in some countries and generally subdued wage growth. As a result, despite the recent rebound in oil prices and the inflationary effects of past sizable depreciations of some currencies, headline inflation remained well below central bank targets in Canada, the euro area, Japan, and the United Kingdom (figure 40). . . . leading AFE central banks to maintain highly accommodative monetary policies In late January of this year, the Bank of Japan adopted a negative policy rate, and in March, the European Central Bank reduced its deposit rate further into negative territory, increased the pace and scope of its asset purchases, and announced a new program of four-year loans—potentially at slightly negative rates— to euro-area banks. Meanwhile, the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, and many other AFE central banks maintained their policy rates at historically low levels. In emerging markets, economic growth picked up from late last year but remains subpar The Chinese economy slowed in the first quarter (figure 41). However, recent indicators suggest that more accommodative fiscal and monetary policies are providing a lift to economic activity, particularly in the property market, where easier credit conditions have fueled a sharp turnaround. Elsewhere in emerging Asia, weak external demand from both the advanced economies and China weighed on growth in the first quarter, but exports and manufacturing have improved more recently. Mexico’s economy was a bright spot in Latin America in the first quarter, as GDP growth picked up despite lackluster exports to the United States; however, it appears economic activity decelerated in the second quarter. In Brazil, the recession continued in the first quarter, reflecting long-standing structural problems, low commodity prices, and a political crisis, subsequently resulting in a change in government. However, the contraction was smaller than in previous quarters, as commodity prices recovered somewhat and the sharp depreciation of the currency last year helped boost exports. Growth was mixed in the rest of South America, with Chilean GDP rebounding sharply while Venezuela’s economy continued to experience a deep recession. 41. Real gross domestic product growth in selected emerging market economies NOTE: The data for China are seasonally adjusted by staff. The data for Mexico, Brazil, and Korea are seasonally adjusted by their respective government agencies. Over the first half of the year, monetary policy remained accommodative to support further improvement in labor market conditions and a return to 2 percent inflation. In particular, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) maintained the target range for the federal funds rate at ¼ to ½ percent. This unchanged policy stance was supported, among other factors, by the FOMC’s assessments in the first months of the year that global economic and financial developments posed risks to the economic outlook, and in June that recent information indicated that the pace of improvement in the labor market had slowed. In addition, the Committee’s policy stance reflected its expectation that inflation would remain low in the near term. Looking ahead, the FOMC expects that economic conditions will warrant only gradual increases in the federal funds rate. In determining future adjustments to the federal funds rate, the Committee will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. The FOMC maintained the federal funds rate target range at ¼ to ½ percent in the first half of the year . . . After raising the target range for the federal funds rate last December to between ¼ and ½ percent, the Committee has maintained that range over the first half of the year (figure 42). This unchanged policy stance was supported initially by the Committee’s assessment that global economic and financial developments posed risks to the economic outlook, as expressed in its March 2016 statement, and by its judgment in April that growth in domestic economic activity appeared to have slowed.5 In June, the Committee noted that recent information indicated that the pace of improvement in the labor market had slowed, while growth in domestic economic activity 5. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016), “Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement,” press release, March 16, https://www. federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20160316a. htm; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016), “Federal Reserve Issues FOMC State- ment,” press release, April 27, https://www.federalreserve. gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20160427a.htm. 42. Selected interest rates NOTE: The 2-year and 10-year Treasury rates are the constant-maturity yields based on the most actively traded securities. SOURCE: Department of the Treasury; Federal Reserve Board. appeared to have picked up in the spring.6 The decision to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate also reflected the Committee’s expectation that inflation would stay low in the near term, partly because of earlier declines in energy prices and in the prices of non-energy imports, as well as recently elevated uncertainty about the possible consequences of the U.K. referendum on European Union membership for the U.S. economic outlook. Over the first half of 2016, the Committee remained particularly attentive to risks to the U.S. economic outlook posed by global economic and financial developments. The Committee noted earlier in the year that it was closely monitoring such developments and assessing their implications for the labor market and inflation and for the balance of risks to the outlook. The Committee subsequently indicated that these concerns had attenuated, but that it would continue to closely monitor inflation indicators and global economic and financial developments. . . . indicated that the stance of monetary policy was likely to remain accommodative . . . The Committee continued to expect that the federal funds rate was likely to remain, for some time, below levels that were expected to prevail in the longer run, and that with gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary policy, economic activity would expand at a moderate pace and labor market indicators would continue to strengthen. The Committee also continued to expect inflation to remain low in the near term but to rise to 2 percent over the medium term as the transitory effects of past declines in energy and import prices dissipate and the labor market strengthens further. Consistent with this outlook, in the most recent Summary of Economic Projections, which was compiled at the time of the June 6. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve FOMC meeting, FOMC participants projected that the appropriate level of the federal funds rate would be below its longer-run level through 2018. . . . and stressed that future changes in the target range for the federal funds rate will depend on the economic outlook as informed by incoming data The FOMC continued to emphasize that, in determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee would assess realized and expected economic conditions, as informed by incoming data, relative to its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. This assessment would take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. In light of the current shortfall of inflation from 2 percent, the Committee indicated that it would carefully monitor actual and expected progress toward its inflation goal. Stronger growth or a more rapid increase in inflation than the Committee currently anticipates would likely call for faster increases in the federal funds rate; conversely, if conditions prove weaker, a lower path of the federal funds rate would likely be appropriate. The size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet has remained stable To help maintain accommodative financial conditions, the Federal Reserve kept its holdings of longer-term securities at sizable levels over the first half of the year. In particular, the Committee maintained its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction, and it anticipates doing so until normalization of the level of the federal funds rate is well under way. assets have held steady at around $4.5 trillion (figure 43). Holdings of U.S. Treasury securities in the System Open Market Account (SOMA) have remained at $2.5 trillion, and holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities at approximately $1.8 trillion. Consequently, total liabilities on the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet were mostly unchanged. Interest income on the SOMA portfolio has continued to support substantial remittances to the U.S. Treasury Department. The Federal Reserve provided $117.1 billion of such distributions to the Treasury in 2015, which included a one-time transfer of $19.3 billion made in December 2015 to reduce aggregate Reserve Bank capital surplus to $10 billion, as required by the Fixing America’s Surface Transportation Act, and a transfer of $24.8 billion during the first quarter of 2016.7 The Federal Reserve’s remittances to the Treasury have totaled over $600 billion on a cumulative basis since 2008. The Federal Reserve’s implementation of monetary policy has continued smoothly Consistent with the FOMC’s Policy Normalization Principles and Plans published on September 17, 2014, and augmented with additional operational information at the March 2015 FOMC meeting, the Federal Reserve continued to use interest paid on reserve balances and employ an overnight reverse repurchase agreement (ON RRP) facility to manage the federal funds rate, and the effective federal funds rate has remained in its target range.8 Specifically, the Board of Governors left the interest rate paid on required and excess reserve balances unchanged at ½ percent, while the FOMC continued to authorize daily ON RRP 7. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 8. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2014), “Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement on Policy Normalization Principles and Plans,” press release, September 17, www.federalreserve.gov/ newsevents/press/monetary/20140917c.htm; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2015), “Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, March 17–18, 2015,” press release, April 8, www. federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20150408a. htm. 43. Federal Reserve assets and liabilities Treasury securities held outright NOTE: “Credit and liquidity facilities” consists of primary, secondary, and seasonal credit; term auction credit; central bank liquidity swaps; support for Maiden Lane, Bear Stearns, and AIG; and other credit facilities, including the Primary Dealer Credit Facility, the Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility, the Commercial Paper Funding Facility, and the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility. “Other assets” includes unamortized premiums and discounts on securities held outright. “Capital and other liabilities” includes reverse repurchase agreements, the U.S. Treasury General Account, and the U.S. Treasury Supplementary Financing Account. The data extend through June 15, 2016. operations at an offering rate of ¼ percent. In addition, the Board of Governors took no action to change the discount rate (the primary credit rate), which remained at 1 percent. The FOMC also continued to indicate that the Federal Reserve’s daily ON RRP operations would be undertaken in amounts limited only by the value of Treasury securities held outright in the SOMA that are available for such operations and by a per-counterparty limit of $30 billion per day. The total take-up at ON RRP operations with the Federal Reserve generally decreased in the first half of the year and remained at levels below those observed prior to the increase in the target range for the federal funds rate in December. The Committee has stated that it intends to phase out the ON RRP facility when it is no longer needed to help control the federal funds rate. The Federal Reserve also continued to test the operational readiness of other policy tools. In particular, two Term Deposit Facility operations were conducted in the first half of 2016; seven-day deposits were offered at both operations at a floating rate of 1 basis point over the interest rate on excess reserves. In these operations, term deposit volumes were broadly in line with those in previous tests with similar parameters. In addition, the Open Market Desk conducted several small– dollar value exercises solely for the purpose of maintaining operational readiness. In conjunction with the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting held on June 14–15, 2016, meeting participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real output growth, the unemployment rate, inflation, and the federal funds rate for each year from 2016 to 2018 and over the longer run.9 Each participant’s projection was based on information available at the time of the meeting, together with his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy and assumptions about the factors likely to affect economic outcomes. The longer- run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the value to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, 9. One participant did not submit longer-run under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. “Appropriate monetary policy” is defined as the future path of policy that each participant deems most likely to foster outcomes for economic activity and inflation that best satisfy his or her individual interpretation of the Federal Reserve’s objectives of maximum employment and stable prices. The median of participants’ projections for the growth of real gross domestic product (GDP) was 2 percent for each year from 2016 through 2018, in line with the median estimate of the longer-run growth rate of real GDP (table 1 and figure 1). The median of growth projections in 2016 and 2017 was slightly lower than the median of near-term projections made at the time of the March FOMC meeting. The range of participants’ projections Table 1. Economic projections of Federal Reserve Board members and Federal Reserve Bank presidents, under their individual assessments of projected appropriate monetary policy, June 2016 Percent Longer run Longer run Longer run Memo: Projected appropriate policy path 2.8–3.8 1.4–1.9 Federal funds rate ............. 3.0–4.0 1.6–2.4 March projection ........... Note: Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP) and projections for both measures of inflation are percent changes from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. PCE inflation and core PCE inflation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index for personal consumption expendi- tures (PCE) and the price index for PCE excluding food and energy. Projections for the unemployment rate are for the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. Each participant’s projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy. Longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. The projections for the federal funds rate are the value of the midpoint of the projected appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the projected appropriate target level for the federal funds rate at the end of the specified calendar year or over the longer run. The March projections were made in conjunction with the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on March 15–16, 2016. One participant did not submit longer-run projections in conjunction with the June 14–15, 2016, meeting. 1. For each period, the median is the middle projection when the projections are arranged from lowest to highest. When the number of projections is even, the median is the average of the two middle projections. 2. The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each year. 3. The range for a variable in a given year includes all participants’ projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year. 4. Longer-run projections for core PCE inflation are not collected. Figure 1. Medians, central tendencies, and ranges of economic projections, 2016–18 and over the longer run Longer run Longer run Longer run Note: Definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to the projections table. The data for the actual values of the variables are annual. for real GDP growth in 2017, 2018, and over the longer run widened somewhat relative to March. The median of projections for the unemployment rate edges down from 4.7 percent at the end of 2016 to 4.6 percent in 2017 and 2018, modestly below the median assessment of the longer-run normal unemployment rate of 4.8 percent. The medians and ranges of the unemployment rate projections for 2016 to 2018 were nearly unchanged from March. The median of projections for inflation as measured by changes in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) in 2016 stands at 1.4 percent, a bit higher than in March; the median rises to 1.9 percent for 2017 and to the Committee’s objective of 2 percent for 2018 and over the longer run. The medians of projections for core PCE inflation also rise gradually over the next two years. With regard to participants’ projections of appropriate monetary policy, the median projection for the federal funds rate rises only gradually from ⅞ percent in 2016 to 1⅝ percent at the end of 2017 and 2⅜ percent by the end of 2018, somewhat below the 3 percent median of participants’ estimates of its longer-run normal level (figure 2). Longer run Note: Each shaded circle indicates the value (rounded to the nearest ⅛ percentage point) of an individual participant’s judgment of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the appropriate target level for the federal funds rate at the end of the specified calendar year or over the longer run. One participant did not submit longer-run projections. Although the median federal funds rate at the end of 2016 is unchanged from the March projection, a number of participants revised down their projections. For 2017 and 2018, the median projections are ¼ percentage point and ⅝ percentage point lower, respectively, than in March. The median estimate of the longer- run level of the federal funds rate was revised down ¼ percentage point. These projections represent participants’ individual assessments of appropriate policy consistent with their projections of economic growth, employment, inflation, and other factors. However, the economic outlook is inherently uncertain; thus, each participant’s assessment of appropriate policy is also necessarily uncertain, especially at longer time horizons, and will change in response to changes to the economic outlook and associated risks. A more complete description of the Summary of Economic Projections will be released with the minutes of the June 14–15, 2016, FOMC meeting on July 6. The Board of Governors is pleased to submit its Monetary Policy Report to the Congress pursuant to section 2B of the Federal Reserve Act. Economic activity in the United States expanded at a moderate pace, on average, in the second half of 2010 and early 2011. In the spring and early summer, a num- ber of key indicators of economic activity softened relative to the readings posted in late 2009 and the first part of 2010, raising concerns about the durability of the recovery. In light of these developments—and in order to put the economic recovery on a firmer foot- ing—the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) provided additional monetary policy stimulus during the second half of 2010 by reinvesting principal repay- ments from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in longer-term Treasury securities and by announcing its intention to purchase an additional $600 billion of Treasury securities by the end of the second quarter of 2011. Financial market conditions improved notably in the fall of 2010, partly in response to actual and expected increases in monetary policy accommodation. In addi- tion, later in the year, the tenor of incoming economic news strengthened somewhat, and the downside risks to economic growth appeared to recede. Nonetheless, the job market has improved only slowly. Employment gains have been modest, and although the unemploy- ment rate fell noticeably in December and January, the margin of slack in the labor market remains wide. Meanwhile, despite rapid increases in commodity prices, longer-term inflation expectations remained stable, and measures of underlying consumer price inflation continued to trend downward on net. Real gross domestic product (GDP) rose at a moder- ate rate in the third quarter. Inventories provided the principal impetus to growth while final sales showed little vigor—the same pattern that prevailed in the first half of the year. Less favorable readings that began to emerge during the second quarter for a range of indi- cators—new claims for unemployment insurance, industrial production, and numerous surveys of busi- ness activity, among others—pointed to a slowing in the pace of the recovery and suggested that the transi- tion from a recovery boosted importantly by the inven- tory cycle to one propelled mainly by private final demand was proceeding only very gradually. Later in the year, however, this process appeared to gain trac- tion. Indeed, real GDP is estimated to have risen a little faster in the fourth quarter than in the third quar- ter despite a substantial slowdown in the pace of inventory investment in the fourth quarter; final sales increased much more rapidly in the fourth quarter than earlier. posted a solid gain, boosted in part by continued, albeit modest, increases in real wage and salary income; some waning of the drag on outlays from ear- lier declines in household net worth; and a modest improvement in the availability of consumer credit. Businesses continued to step up their spending on equipment and software in response to a brighter out- look for sales as well as more favorable conditions in credit markets. In the external sector, the continued rebound in exports was supported by firming foreign demand. Meanwhile, the construction sector remained exceptionally weak. The continued recovery in economic activity has been accompanied by only a slow improvement in labor market conditions. Private payroll employment has moved up at a relatively tepid rate—about 115,000 per month, on average, since the February 2010 trough in employment—recouping only a small portion of the 8¾ million jobs lost during 2008 and 2009. Over most of this period, the pace of hiring was insufficient to substantially reduce the unemployment rate. In December and January, however, the jobless rate was reported to have declined noticeably. In addition to the recent drop in the unemployment rate, some other indicators of labor market conditions—for example, measures of firms’ hiring plans—have brightened a bit, raising the prospect that a pickup in the pace of hiring may be in the offing. That said, the level of the unem- ployment rate remains very elevated, and the long-term unemployed continue to account for a historically large fraction of overall joblessness. Consumer price inflation trended down during 2010 as slack in resource utilization restrained cost pressures while longer-term inflation expectations remained stable. Although the prices of crude oil and many industrial and agricultural commodities rose rapidly in the latter half of 2010 and the early part of 2011, over- all personal consumption expenditures (PCE) prices increased at an annual rate of just 1¼ percent over the 12 months ending in January, which compares with a 2½ percent rise during the preceding 12 months. Core PCE prices—which exclude prices for food and energy—rose ¾ percent in the 12 months ending in January. Financial market conditions continued to be sup- portive of economic growth in the second half of 2010 and into 2011. Equity prices rose solidly, reflecting the more accommodative stance of monetary and fiscal policy, an improved economic outlook, and better- than-expected corporate earnings reports. Yields on longer-term Treasury securities declined in the summer and early autumn, reflecting in part anticipation of additional monetary policy stimulus, but subsequently rose as economic prospects improved and as market expectations of the ultimate size of FOMC Treasury purchases were revised down. Despite some volatility, yields on Treasury securities remained relatively low on balance. Medium- and longer-term inflation compen- sation derived from inflation-indexed Treasury securi- ties increased since the summer as concerns about deflation eased, though these measures remained within historical ranges. Interest rates on fixed-rate residential mortgages moved broadly in line with yields on Treasury securities while the spreads between yields on corporate bonds and those on Treasury securities declined; overall, both mortgage rates and corporate yields continued to be at low levels. Although bank lending policies generally stayed tight, banks reported some easing in those conditions on net. After posting substantial declines since the third quarter of 2008, total loans held on the books of banks showed signs of stabilizing in recent months. Larger nonfinancial corporations with access to capital markets took advantage of favorable financial conditions to issue debt at a robust pace. Bond and syndicated loan issuance was strong, particularly among lower-rated corporate borrowers. Commercial and industrial loans on banks’ books started to expand around the end of 2010. Nevertheless, small, bank- dependent businesses remained constrained in their access to credit, although some indicators suggested that credit availability for these firms was beginning to improve. Household debt appears to have contracted in the second half of 2010, but at a somewhat slower pace than earlier in the year. Household mortgage debt likely continued to decline, as housing demand remained weak and lending standards were reportedly still stringent. Revolving consumer credit also con- tracted. By contrast, nonrevolving consumer credit— primarily auto and student loans—increased solidly in the final quarter of 2010. After first emerging during the spring, concerns about fiscal and banking developments in Europe resurfaced later in the year. Although some European sovereigns and financial institutions faced renewed funding pressures in the fourth quarter, the repercus- sions in broader global financial markets were muted. To help minimize the risk that strains abroad could spread to the United States, as well as to continue to support liquidity conditions in global money markets, the FOMC in December approved an extension of the temporary U.S. dollar liquidity swap arrangements with a number of foreign central banks. Apparently seeking to boost returns in an environ- ment of low interest rates, investors displayed an increased appetite for higher-yielding fixed-income instruments in the second half of 2010 and into 2011, which likely supported strong issuance of these prod- ucts and contributed to a narrowing of risk spreads, such as those on corporate debt instruments. Informa- tion from a variety of sources, including the Federal Reserve Board’s Senior Credit Officer Opinion Survey on Dealer Financing Terms, suggests that use of dealer-intermediated leverage by financial market par- ticipants rose a bit in recent quarters but remained well below its pre-crisis levels.1 The condition of financial institutions generally appeared to improve further, and the regulatory capital ratios of commercial banks, par- ticularly the largest banks, moved higher. With the pace of recovery in output and employ- ment seen as disappointingly slow and measures of inflation viewed as somewhat low relative to levels judged consistent with the Committee’s mandate, the FOMC took several actions to provide additional sup- port to the economic recovery during the second half of last year. In August, the FOMC decided to reinvest principal payments from agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities held in the System Open Market Account (SOMA) in longer-term Treasury securities to keep constant the size of the SOMA port- folio and so avoid an implicit tightening of monetary policy. In November, to provide further policy accom- modation to help support the economic recovery, the FOMC announced its intention to purchase an addi- tional $600 billion in longer-term Treasury securities by the end of the second quarter of 2011. Throughout the second half of 2010 and early 2011, the FOMC maintained a target range for the federal funds rate of between 0 and ¼ percent and reiterated its expectation 1. The survey is conducted quarterly and is available at that economic conditions, including low rates of resource utilization, subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations, were likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate for an extended period. The Federal Reserve continued to develop and test tools to drain or immobilize large volumes of banking system reserves in order to ensure that it will be able to smoothly and effectively exit from the current extraor- dinarily accommodative policy stance at the appropri- ate time. The Committee continues to monitor the eco- nomic outlook and financial developments, and it will employ its policy tools as necessary to support the eco- nomic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, returns to levels consistent with its mandate. The economic projections prepared in conjunction with the January FOMC meeting are presented in Part 4 of this report. In broad terms, FOMC participants anticipated a sustained but modest recovery in real economic activity this year that would pick up some- what in 2012 and 2013. The expansion was expected to be led by gains in consumer and business spending that are supported by improvements in household and busi- ness confidence. Nevertheless, economic growth was expected to be damped by a number of headwinds, including the gradual pace of improvements in the labor market, still-stringent borrowing conditions for households and bank-dependent small businesses, lin- gering household and business uncertainty, and ongo- ing weakness in real estate markets. On balance, FOMC participants anticipated that real GDP would increase at above-trend rates over the next three years, but not as rapidly as in previous recoveries. Meanwhile, the unemployment rate was projected to fall gradually. Inflation was expected to drift up slowly toward the levels that Committee participants believe to be most consistent with the Committee’s mandate. Reflecting their assessment that the recovery appeared to be on a firmer footing, the participants upgraded slightly their projections for near-term economic growth relative to the ones they prepared in conjunction with the Novem- ber FOMC meeting; otherwise, their projections for economic growth and inflation were little changed. Participants generally judged that the uncertainty attached to their projections for both economic activity and inflation was greater than historical norms. A sub- stantial majority of participants viewed the risks to both economic growth and inflation as balanced; only a few saw them as tilted either to the upside or to the downside. In November, a noticeable share of partici- pants had seen the risks—particularly those to eco- nomic growth—as tilted to the downside. Participants also reported their assessments of the rates to which key macroeconomic variables would be expected to converge over the longer term under appropriate mon- etary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. The central tendencies of these longer-run projections were 2.5 to 2.8 percent for real GDP growth, 5.0 to 6.0 percent for the unemployment rate, and 1.6 to 2.0 percent for the inflation rate. Economic activity expanded at a moderate pace, on balance, in the second half of 2010. According to the currently available estimates from the Bureau of Eco- nomic Analysis, real gross domestic product (GDP) increased at an annual rate of about 2¾ percent, on average, over that period (figure 1). In the third quar- ter, as had been the case in the first half of the year, much of the increase was the result of inventory accu- mulation; in contrast, final sales continued to rise at a subdued rate. Meanwhile, several indicators of eco- nomic activity had softened from the readings observed earlier in the year, raising concerns about the durability of the recovery. Later in the year, however, the tone of the incoming data on economic activity brightened somewhat, final sales strengthened, and the recovery appeared to be on a firmer footing. Since the middle of 2010, consumer spending has risen solidly on average, businesses have continued to increase their outlays for equipment and software, and exports have moved up further. In contrast, construc- tion of new homes and nonresidential buildings remains exceptionally weak. Conditions in the labor market have improved only slowly, with payrolls increasing at a modest pace. Throughout nearly all of 2010, that pace of employment expansion was insuffi- cient to bring the unemployment rate down meaning- fully from its recent peak. In December 2010 and Janu- ary of this year, however, the unemployment rate is estimated to have dropped more noticeably, even though payroll employment gains remained lackluster. Meanwhile, long-duration joblessness persisted at near-record levels. With regard to inflation develop- ments, despite rapid increases in commodity prices, longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable and consumer price inflation has continued to trend downward on net (figure 2). Conditions in financial markets generally improved over the course of the second half of 2010 and early 2011 and continued to be supportive of economic activity. This improvement reflected, in part, additional monetary policy stimulus provided by the Federal Reserve, as well as growing investor confidence in the sustainability of the economic recovery. Although yields on Treasury securities rose somewhat, on net, since mid-2010, yields on investment-grade corporate bonds were little changed at low levels, and yields on speculative-grade bonds declined. In equity markets, price indexes generally rose, buoyed by solid corporate earnings and a more positive economic outlook. Com- mercial banks reported that they had eased some of their lending standards and terms, though lending standards remained generally tight and some busi- 1. Change in real gross domestic product, 2004–10 2. Change in the chain-type price index for personal consumption expenditures, 2004–11 Excluding food and energy NOTE: Here and in subsequent figures, except as noted, change for a given period is measured to its final quarter from the final quarter of the preceding period. NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through January 2011; changes are nesses and households continued to face difficulties obtaining credit. Changes in interest rates faced by households were mixed. The improvement in financial conditions was accompanied by some signs of a pickup in the demand for credit. Borrower credit qual- ity generally improved, although problems persisted in some sectors of the economy. Concerns about Euro- pean banking and fiscal strains increased again in late 2010 after having eased for a time; however, in contrast to what was observed in the spring, these concerns left little imprint on U.S. financial markets. Real personal consumption expenditures (PCE) increased at an annual rate of about 3¼ percent in the second half of 2010, with a particularly brisk rise in the fourth quarter (figure 3). The spending gains were supported by the continued, though modest, pickup in real household incomes, by some fading of the restraining effects of the earlier sharp declines in households’ net worth, and by a modest improvement in the availability of consumer credit. Outlays for durable goods also may have been boosted to some extent by purchases that had been deferred during the recession. The increases in spending exceeded the rise in income, and the saving rate edged down during the second half of the year, though it remains well above levels that prevailed prior to the recession (figure 4). 3. Real personal consumption expenditures, 2004–11 Billions of chained (2005) dollars NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through January 2011. SOURCE: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis. 4. Personal saving rate, 1987–2010 NOTE: The data are quarterly and extend through 2010:Q4. SOURCE: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis. The increase in consumer outlays in the second half of 2010 partly reflected a step-up in sales of new light motor vehicles (cars, sport utility vehicles, and pickup trucks). Sales of light vehicles rose from an annual rate of 11¼ million units in the second quarter of 2010 to more than 12¼ million units in the fourth quarter and moved up further in the first part of 2011. Sales were supported, in part, by further improvements in credit conditions for auto buyers as well as by more-generous sales incentives from the automakers. Real spending in other goods categories also rose appreciably, while the increase in outlays for services was more subdued. The determinants of consumer outlays showed fur- ther, albeit gradual, improvement during the second half of 2010. The level of real disposable personal income (DPI)—after-tax income adjusted for infla- tion—which rose rapidly in the first half of the year, continued to advance in the second half, as real wages and salaries moved up at an annual rate of 2 percent (figure 5). The increase in real wage and salary income reflected the continued, though tepid, recoveries in both employment and hours worked; in contrast, hourly pay was little changed in real terms. The ratio of household net worth to DPI moved up a little in the third quarter of 2010 and appears to have risen further since then, as increases in equity values likely more than offset further declines in house prices (figure 6). Although the wealth-to-income ratio has trended up since the beginning of 2009 and has returned to the levels that prevailed prior to the late 1990s, it remains well below its highs in 2006 and 2007. Consumer sentiment rose late in the year, boosted by gradual improvements in household assessments of financial and business conditions as well as job pros- pects; nevertheless, these gains only moved sentiment 5. Change in real disposable personal income and in real back to or a bit above the low levels that prevailed at the start of last year (figure 7). Household debt likely fell at just under a 2 percent annual rate in the second half of 2010, a slightly slower pace than in the first half. The contraction for 2010 as a whole, which was due primarily to ongoing decreases in mortgage debt, marked the second consecutive annual decline. The reduction in overall household debt levels, combined with increases in personal income, resulted in a further decline in the ratio of household debt to income and in the debt service ratio—the required principal and interest payments on existing mortgage and consumer debt relative to income (figure 8). 6. Wealth-to-income ratio, 1987–2010 NOTE: The data are quarterly and extend through 2010:Q3. The wealth- to-income ratio is the ratio of household net worth to disposable personal income. 7. Consumer sentiment indexes, 1997–2011 NOTE: The Conference Board data are monthly and extend through February 2011; the series is indexed to equal 100 in 1985. The Thomson Reuters/University of Michigan data are monthly and extend through February 2011; the series is indexed to equal 100 in 1966. The slowdown in the rate at which household debt contracted in the latter part of 2010 stemmed in large part from a modest recovery in consumer credit. Although revolving consumer credit—mostly credit card borrowing—continued to contract, the decline was at a slightly slower rate than in the first half of the year. Nonrevolving consumer credit, which consists largely of auto and student loans and accounts for about two-thirds of total consumer credit, rose 2 per- cent in the second half of 2010 after being about unchanged in the first half of the year. The pickup in nonrevolving consumer credit is consistent with 8. Household debt service, 1980–2010 NOTE: The data are quarterly and extend through 2010:Q3. Debt service payments consist of estimated required payments on outstanding mortgage and consumer debt. responses to the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS) indicating that banks have become increasingly willing to make con- sumer installment loans; however, lending standards for these loans likely remained fairly tight.2 In addi- tion, in the most recent survey, a small net fraction of respondents noted increased demand for consumer loans, the first time stronger demand was reported since mid-2005. Some of the increased willingness to make consumer loans may reflect improvements in consumer credit quality. The delinquency rate on auto loans at captive finance companies moved down in the second half of 2010 to 2.6 percent, close to its longer-run historical average. Delinquency rates on credit cards at commer- cial banks and in securitized pools also moved down to around longer-run averages. However, charge-off rates on such loans remained well above historical norms despite having moved lower in the second half of the year. Changes in interest rates on consumer loans were mixed. Interest rates on new auto loans were little changed, on net, in the second half of 2010 and into 2011. By contrast, interest rates on credit cards gener- ally rose over the same period. A portion of the increase in credit card interest rates may be due to lin- gering adjustments by banks to the imposition of new rules under the Credit Card Accountability Responsi- bility and Disclosure Act (Credit Card Act).3 Issuance of consumer asset-backed securities (ABS) in the second half of 2010 occurred at about the same pace as in the first half of the year. Auto loan ABS issuance continued to be healthy, and the ability to securitize these loans likely held down interest rates on the underlying loans. Issuance of ABS backed by credit card loans, however, remained very weak, as the sharp contraction in credit card lending limited the need for new funding and accounting rule changes implemented at the beginning of 2010 made securitiza- tion of these loans less attractive.4 Yields on ABS secu- rities and the spreads of such yields over comparable- maturity interest rate swap rates were not much 2. The SLOOS is available on the Federal Reserve Board’s website 3. The Credit Card Act includes some provisions that place restrictions on issuers’ ability to impose certain fees and to engage in risk-based pricing. 4. In June 2009, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) published Statements of Financial Accounting Standards Nos. 166 (Accounting for Transfers of Financial Assets, an Amend- ment of FASB Statement No. 140) and 167 (Amendments to FASB Interpretation No. 46(R)). The statements became effective at the start of a company’s first fiscal year beginning after November 15, 2009, or, for companies reporting earnings on a calendar-year basis, after January 1, 2010. 9. Spreads of asset-backed securities yields over rates on comparable-maturity interest rate swaps, 2007–11 NOTE: The data are weekly and extend through February 16, 2011. The spreads shown are the yields on two-year fixed-rate asset-backed securities less rates on two-year interest rate swaps. changed, on net, over the second half of 2010 and early 2011 (figure 9). Housing activity remained depressed in the second half of 2010. Homebuilding continues to be restrained by sluggish demand, the large inventory of foreclosed or distressed properties on the market, and the tight credit conditions faced by homebuilders. In the single- family sector, new units were started at an average annual rate of about 430,000 units from July 2010 to January 2011, just 70,000 units above the quarterly low reached in the first quarter of 2009 (figure 10). In the multifamily market, demand for apartments appears to be increasing and occupancy rates have been edging up, as some potential homebuyers may be choosing to rent rather than to purchase a home. Nevertheless, the inventory of unoccupied multifamily units continues to be elevated, and construction financing remains tight. As a result, starts in the multifamily sector have aver- aged an annual rate of only 135,000 units since the middle of 2010, well below the 300,000-unit rate that had prevailed for much of the previous decade. Home sales surged in the spring ahead of the expira- tion of the homebuyer tax credit, plunged for a few months during a payback period, and then recovered somewhat as the payback effect waned.5 By late 2010 5. In order to receive the homebuyer tax credit, a purchaser had to sign a sales agreement by the end of April 2010 and close on the 10. Private housing starts, 1997–2011 NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through January 2011. SOURCE: Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. and early 2011, sales of existing single-family homes were a bit above levels that prevailed in mid-2009, before the enactment of the first homebuyer tax credit, while sales of new single-family homes remained below their mid-2009 levels. Housing demand has been held back by tight mortgage credit availability, uncertainty about future real estate values, and continued house- hold concerns about the outlook for employment and income. Nonetheless, other determinants of housing demand are favorable and hold the potential to provide support to home sales as the economic recovery pro- ceeds. In particular, the low level of mortgage rates and the earlier declines in house prices have made housing more affordable for those able to obtain mortgages. House prices, as measured by several national indexes, decreased in the latter half of 2010 after hav- ing shown tentative signs of leveling off earlier in the year (figure 11). According to one measure with wide geographic coverage—the CoreLogic repeat-sales index—house prices fell 6 percent between June and December and moved below their mid-2009 trough. House prices continued to be weighed down by the large inventory of unsold homes—especially distressed properties—and by the sluggish demand for housing. Indicators of credit quality in this sector pointed to continued difficulties amid depressed home values and elevated unemployment. Serious delinquency rates on property by the end of September. The first-time homebuyer tax credit, which was enacted in February 2009 as part of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act, was originally scheduled to expire on November 30, 2009. Shortly before it expired, the Congress extended the credit to sales occurring through April 30, 2010, and expanded it to include repeat homebuyers who had owned and occu- pied a house for at least five of the past eight years. Sales of existing homes are measured at closing, while sales of new homes are meas- ured at the time the contract is signed. 11. Prices of existing single-family houses, 2001–10 NOTE: The data are monthly and extend into 2010:Q4. Each index has been normalized so that its peak is 100. Both the CoreLogic price index and the FHFA index (formerly calculated by the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight) only. The S&P/Case-Shiller index reflects all arm’s-length sales transactions in selected metropolitan areas. Agency; for S&P/Case-Shiller, Standard & Poor’s. prime and near-prime mortgages edged down to around 15 percent for adjustable-rate loans and to about 5 percent for fixed-rate loans—levels that remain high by historical standards (figure 12). Delinquency rates for subprime mortgages moved up slightly toward the end of the year and remained extremely elevated. One sign of improvement, however, was that the rate at which mortgages transitioned from being current to 12. Mortgage delinquency rates, 2000–10 Fixed rate Fixed rate NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through December 2010. Delinquency rate is the percent of loans 90 days or more past due or in foreclosure. 13. Mortgage interest rates, 1995–2011 Fixed rate NOTE: The data, which are weekly and extend through February 23, 2011, are contract rates on 30-year mortgages. being newly delinquent trended lower toward the end of 2010. Reflecting the ongoing credit quality issues, the number of homes that entered foreclosure in the third quarter of 2010 jumped to more than 700,000, well above the pace seen earlier in the year. Late in the third quarter, concerns about the mishandling of documen- tation led some institutions to temporarily suspend some or all of their foreclosure proceedings.6 Despite these announced moratoriums, the pace of new fore- closures dipped only slightly in the fourth quarter. Moreover, these moratoriums will likely only extend, and not put an end to, the foreclosure process in most cases. Interest rates on fixed-rate mortgages remained quite low, on net, by historical standards during the second half of 2010 and reached record lows in the fourth quarter (figure 13). The very low levels of mort- gage rates prompted a sizable pickup in refinancing activity for a time, although some households were unable to refinance because of depressed home values, weak credit scores, and tight lending standards for 6. The Federal Reserve, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Office of Thrift Supervision, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation are conducting an in-depth interagency review of practices at the largest mortgage servicing operations to examine foreclosure practices generally, but with an emphasis on the breakdowns that led to inaccurate affidavits and other questionable legal documents being used in the foreclosure process. See Elizabeth A. Duke (2010), “Foreclosure Documentation Issues,” statement before the Financial Services Subcommittee on Housing and Community Opportunity, U.S. House of Representatives, November 18, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/testimony/duke20101118a .htm. mortgages. Mortgage applications for home purchases were generally subdued in the second half of the year. Overall, mortgage debt outstanding likely declined in the second half of 2010 at a pace only slightly slower than that of the first half. Net issuance of mortgage-backed securities (MBS) guaranteed by Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and Ginnie Mae was fairly low in the second half of 2010, consis- tent with the subdued originations of mortgages used to finance home purchases. The securitization market for mortgage loans not guaranteed by a housing- related government-sponsored enterprise (GSE) or the Federal Housing Administration remained essentially closed. Real business spending on equipment and software, which surged in the first half of 2010, rose further in the second half (figure 14). Firms were likely motivated partly by a desire to replace aging equipment and to undertake capital spending that had been deferred dur- ing the recession. Improving business prospects also appear to have been a factor boosting capital expendi- tures. As a group, large firms continue to have ample internal funds, and those with access to capital markets generally have been able to obtain bond financing at favorable terms. Although credit availability for smaller firms and other bank-dependent businesses remains constricted, some tentative signs of easing lending standards have emerged. Overall spending on equipment and software rose at an annual rate of about 10 percent in the second half of 2010. Although business outlays in the volatile transportation equipment category plunged in the fourth quarter, that decline came in the wake of several quarters of sharp increases when vehicle rental firms were rebuilding their fleets of cars and light trucks. Meanwhile, spending on information technology (IT) capital—computers, software, and communications equipment—increased appreciably throughout the sec- ond half. Gains were apparently spurred by outlays to replace older, less-efficient IT capital as well as contin- ued investments by wireless service providers to upgrade their networks. In addition, spending increases for equipment other than transportation and IT—nearly one-half of total equipment outlays—were well maintained and broad based. More recently, new orders for nondefense capital goods other than trans- portation and IT items were little changed, on net, in 14. Change in real business fixed investment, 2004–10 High-tech equipment and software Other equipment excluding transportation NOTE: High-tech equipment consists of computers and peripheral equip- December and January; however, the level of orders remains above shipments, and business surveys sug- gest that respondents are upbeat about business con- ditions as well as their equipment spending plans. than those used for drilling and mining remained depressed, with the level of investment at the end of 2010 down almost 40 percent from its peak in early 2008. However, the rate of decline appears to be abat- ing: Spending fell at an annual rate of nearly 10 per- cent in the second half of 2010 after plunging at a 25 percent rate in the first half. Although outlays for new power facilities jumped in the second half of the year, construction of office buildings, commercial structures, and manufacturing plants all moved down further. A large overhang of vacant space, depressed property prices, and an unwillingness of banks to add to their already high construction loan exposure still weighed heavily on the sector. In contrast, spending on drilling and mining structures continued to rise sharply in response to elevated energy prices. 15. Change in real business inventories, 2004–10 Billions of chained (2005) dollars, annual rate Stockbuilding continued in the second half of 2010 at an average pace about in line with the growth of final sales (figure 15). Inventory investment surged in the third quarter, but the pace of accumulation slowed sharply in the fourth quarter, with the swing magnified by developments in the motor vehicle sector. Vehicle stocks rose appreciably in the third quarter as dealers attempted to rebuild inventories that had become depleted earlier in the year, but inventories fell in the fourth quarter as auto sales moved up more rapidly than expected near the end of the year. As for other items aside from motor vehicles, inventory investment rose during the second half of the year, albeit more rapidly in the third quarter than in the fourth. The inventory-to-sales ratios for most industries covered by the Census Bureau’s book-value data, which had risen significantly in 2009, have moved back to levels that prevailed before the recession, and surveys suggest that inventory positions for most businesses generally are in a comfortable range. Operating earnings per share for S&P 500 firms contin- ued to increase at a solid pace in the third and fourth quarters of 2010. Most industry groups reported gains. In aggregate, earnings per share climbed to near the levels posted in mid-2007, just prior to the financial crisis. The already sturdy credit quality of nonfinancial corporations improved further in the second half of 2010. The aggregate debt-to-asset ratio, which provides an indication of corporate leverage, moved down in the third quarter, as nonfinancial corporations increased their assets by more than they increased their debt. Credit rating upgrades again outpaced downgrades and corporate bond defaults remained sparse. The delinquency rate on commercial and industrial (C&I) loans at commercial banks moved down in the second half of 2010 to 3 percent. By contrast, with fundamen- tals remaining weak, delinquency and charge-off rates on commercial real estate (CRE) loans at commercial banks decreased only modestly from quite elevated levels (figure 16). Moreover, the delinquency rate on CRE loans in securitized pools continued to rise sharply. Borrowing by nonfinancial corporations continued at a robust pace in the second half of 2010, driven by good corporate credit quality, attractive financing con- ditions, and an improving economic outlook (fig- ure 17). Issuance of corporate bonds was heavy for both investment-grade and high-yield issues. Borrow- ing in the syndicated loan market was also sizable, par- ticularly by speculative-grade borrowers, with the dol- lar volume of such loans rebounding sharply from the low levels seen in 2008 and 2009 (not shown in figure). 16. Delinquency rates on commercial real estate loans, 1991–2011 NOTE: The data for commercial banks and life insurance companies are quarterly and extend through 2010:Q4 and 2010:Q3, respectively. The data for commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) are monthly and extend through January 2011. The delinquency rates for commercial banks and CMBS are the percent of loans 30 days or more past due or not accruing interest. The delinquency rate for life insurance companies is the percent of loans 60 days or more past due or not accruing interest. 17. Selected components of net financing for nonfinancial businesses, 2005–10 NOTE: The data for the components except bonds are seasonally adjusted. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Board, flow of funds data. Demand for such loans from institutional investors was strong. Some of the strength in debt origination was reportedly due to corporations taking advantage of low interest rates to reduce debt service costs and extend maturities by refinancing; issuance to finance mergers and acquisitions also reportedly picked up in the second half of the year. Meanwhile, commercial paper outstanding remained about flat. C&I loans on banks’ books decreased during the third quarter but started expanding toward the end of the year, consis- tent with responses to the January 2011 SLOOS that reported some easing of standards and terms and some firming of demand for C&I loans from large firms over the previous three months. Relatively large fractions of respondents to the most recent survey indicated that they narrowed the spread of C&I loan rates over their cost of funds somewhat further during the second half of 2010 (figure 18). Nevertheless, lend- ing standards reportedly remained tight; about one- half of the respondents to special questions included in the October 2010 survey indicated that their lending standards on C&I loans were tighter than longer-run averages and were likely to remain so until at least 2012. Borrowing conditions for small businesses continued to be tighter than for larger firms, although some signs of easing began to emerge. In particular, surveys con- ducted by the National Federation of Independent Business (NFIB) showed a gradual decline in the share of respondents reporting that credit was more difficult to obtain than three months previously (figure 19). Similarly, in the past several surveys, moderate net fractions of SLOOS respondents have indicated that banks have eased some loan terms for smaller borrow- 18. Net percentage of domestic banks tightening standards and widening spreads over the banks’ cost of funds for large and medium-sized business borrowers, 1998–2011 NOTE: The data are drawn from a survey generally conducted four times per year; the last observation is from the January 2011 survey, which covers 2010:Q4. Net percentage is the percentage of banks reporting a tightening of standards or a widening of spreads less the percentage reporting an easing or a narrowing. The definition for firm size suggested for, and generally used by, survey respondents is that large and medium-sized firms have annual sales of $50 million or more. ers. Judging from responses to both the NFIB survey and the SLOOS, loan demand by small businesses remained subdued. Banks’ holdings of CRE loans continued to contract fairly sharply throughout the second half of 2010. Overall commercial mortgage debt declined at an 19. Net percentage of small businesses that reported more difficulty in obtaining credit, 1990–2011 NOTE: The data are drawn from a survey conducted monthly and are seasonally adjusted; the last observation is from the January 2011 survey, which covers December 2010. The data reflect the proportion of borrowers who sought credit in the past three months that reported more difficulty in obtaining credit less the proportion that reported more ease in obtaining credit. annual rate of 6 percent in the third quarter, about the same pace as in the previous quarter. Responses to the January SLOOS suggest that banks have not yet started reversing their tight lending standards in this sector and that demand, while starting to pick up, likely remained weak. Despite the strains in CRE mar- kets, the commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) market showed tentative signs of improve- ment in the second half of 2010 and early 2011. Prices for some of the more highly rated tranches of existing CMBS rose. Although issuance of new securities remained tepid, the pace has been picking up. Responses to special questions on the September Senior Credit Officer Opinion Survey on Dealer Financing Terms (SCOOS) indicated that demand for warehousing of CRE loans for securitization had increased since the beginning of 2010, and that the willingness to fund CRE loans on an interim basis had increased somewhat. offerings for nonfinancial firms were brought to mar- ket in the second half of 2010. Deals included an initial public offering by General Motors that was used to repay a portion of the government’s capital infusion. Nevertheless, equity retirements in the third quarter through cash-financed mergers and acquisitions and share repurchases once again outpaced issuance; pre- liminary data for the fourth quarter (not shown) sug- gest a similar pattern (figure 20). 20. Components of net equity issuance, 2005–10 NOTE: The data for 2010:Q3 are estimates. Net equity issuance is the difference between equity issued by domestic companies in public or private markets and equity retired through share repurchases, domestic cash-financed mergers, or foreign takeovers of U.S. firms. Equity issuance includes funds invested by private equity partnerships and stock option proceeds. The deficit in the federal unified budget has remained very wide. The budget deficit for fiscal year 2010, although down somewhat from fiscal 2009, was $1.3 trillion. The fiscal 2010 figure was equal to 8¾ percent of nominal GDP, substantially above the average value of 2 percent recorded during the three- year period prior to the onset of the recession. The budget deficit continued to be boosted by spending commitments from the American Recovery and Rein- vestment Act (ARRA) and other stimulus policy actions and by the weakness of the economy, which has reduced tax revenues and boosted payments for income support. By contrast, the budget effects of sev- eral financial transactions reduced the deficit in 2010: Outlays related to the Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP), which added significantly to the deficit in 2009, helped to shrink the deficit in 2010 as estimated losses were revised down when many of the larger TARP recipients repaid their obligations to the Treas- ury; in addition, new assistance for the mortgage- related GSEs was extended at a slower pace, and depository institutions prepaid three years’ worth of federal deposit insurance premiums. Moreover, the nascent recovery in the economy led to a small increase in revenues. The deficit is projected by the Congres- sional Budget Office to widen in fiscal 2011 to a level similar to the shortfall recorded in fiscal 2009. Despite increasing 3 percent in fiscal 2010, tax receipts remained at very low levels; indeed, at less than 15 percent of GDP, the ratio of receipts to national income was at its lowest level in 60 years (fig- ure 21). Corporate income taxes surged nearly 40 per- cent in fiscal 2010 as profits increased briskly, and Fed- eral Reserve remittances to the Treasury rose markedly owing to the expansion of its balance sheet. By con- trast, despite rising household incomes, individual income and payroll taxes moved down in fiscal 2010, reflecting the tax cuts put in place by the ARRA. Total tax receipts increased nearly 10 percent over the first four months of fiscal 2011 relative to the comparable year-earlier period; individual income and payroll taxes turned up, a consequence of the further recovery in household incomes, and corporate income taxes continued to rise. Outlays decreased 2 percent in fiscal 2010, a devel- opment attributable to financial transactions. Exclud- ing financial transactions, spending rose 9 percent compared with fiscal 2009, mainly because of the effects of the weak labor market on outlays for income 21. Federal receipts and expenditures, 1990–2010 NOTE: The receipts and expenditures data are on a unified-budget basis and are for fiscal years (October through September); gross domestic product (GDP) is for the four quarters ending in Q3. support programs (such as unemployment insurance and food stamps) as well as increases in Medicaid expenditures and spending associated with the ARRA and other stimulus-related policies. Net interest pay- ments rose 5 percent in fiscal 2010, and Social Security spending increased 3½ percent—its smallest rise in 11 years—as the low rate of consumer price inflation in the previous year resulted in no cost of living adjust- ment. In the first four months of fiscal 2011, total fed- eral outlays rose nearly 5 percent relative to the compa- rable year-earlier period. Excluding financial transactions, outlays were up about 1 percent. The relatively small increase so far this fiscal year for out- lays excluding financial transactions reflects a flatten- ing out of ARRA spending and income support pay- 22. Change in real government expenditures on consumption and investment, 2004–10 ments; by contrast, other spending has been increasing at rates comparable to those recorded during fiscal 2010. As measured in the national income and product accounts (NIPA), real federal expenditures on con- sumption and gross investment—the part of federal spending that is a direct component of GDP—rose at an annual rate of about 4 percent in the second half of 2010, a bit less than in the first half of the year (fig- ure 22). Nondefense outlays increased more slowly than in the first half of the year—when spending for the decennial census ramped up—while defense spend- ing rose at roughly the same pace as in the first half. Federal debt expanded appreciably in the second half of last year, though at a slightly slower pace than in the first half. The ratio of Federal debt held by the public to nominal GDP rose to more than 60 percent at the end of 2010 and is projected to reach nearly 70 percent by the end of 2011 (figure 23). Demand for Treasury securities has been well maintained. Bid-to-cover ratios at auctions, although somewhat mixed, were generally within historical ranges during the second half of 2010 and early 2011. Indicators of foreign participation at auctions as well as a rise in foreign custody holdings of Treasury securities by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York pointed to steady demand from abroad. Demand for these securities may have been supported by a heightened desire for relatively safe and liquid 23. Federal government debt held by the public, 1960–2010 NOTE: The data for debt are as of year-end; the observation for 2010 is an estimate. The corresponding values for gross domestic product (GDP) are for Q4 at an annual rate. Excludes securities held as investments of federal government accounts. Despite the substantial federal aid provided by the ARRA, state and local governments remained under significant fiscal pressure in the second half of 2010. The strains reflect several factors, including a sharp drop in tax revenues in late 2008 and 2009 and increased commitments for Medicaid outlays—a cycli- cally sensitive transfer program—all in the context of balanced budget requirements. To address their budget shortfalls, these governments have been paring back operating expenditures. Indeed, real consumption expenditures of state and local governments, as meas- ured in the NIPA, fell about 1 percent in 2010 after decreasing a similar amount in 2009. The weakness in spending was reflected in the continued reductions in payrolls. Total employment of state and local govern- ments fell 250,000 during 2010, with nearly all of the cutbacks at the local level. Construction spending undertaken by these governments was volatile during 2010 but, on net, was down a bit for the year and remained below the level that prevailed before the recession despite the infrastructure grants provided by the federal government as part of the ARRA. While most capital expenditures are not subject to balanced budget requirements, some of these expenditures are funded out of operating budgets subject to these requirements. In addition, a substantial share of debt service payments on the bonds used to finance capital projects is made out of operating budgets—a factor that may be limiting the willingness of governments to undertake some new infrastructure projects. ernment revenues from income, business, and sales taxes rose in the second half of 2010. Nevertheless, state tax collections remain well below their pre- recession levels, and available balances in reserve funds are low. Tax collections at the local level have fared relatively better. In particular, some localities appear to have adjusted statutory tax rates so that declining real estate assessments, which typically significantly lag market prices, are holding down property tax revenues by less than they otherwise would. However, many localities have seen sharp cutbacks in their grants-in- aid from state governments, and thus have experienced significant fiscal pressures. State and local governments will continue to face considerable budget strains, in part because federal stimulus grants will be winding down. Moreover, many state and local governments will need to set aside additional resources in coming years both to meet their pension obligations and to pay for health benefits provided to their retired employees. Issuance of securities by state and local governments was robust during the latter half of 2010; it surged near the end of the year as state governments sought to take advantage of the Build America Bond program before the program expired.7 Issuance of short-term municipal securities was also strong. Yields on state and local government bonds rose noticeably more than those on comparable-maturity Treasury securities in the second half of 2010 and early 2011. The rise in yields on municipal securities may have reflected increased concerns about the fiscal posi- tion and financial health of state and local govern- ments, although the heavy supply of these securities coming to market likely also played a role. Spreads on credit default swaps for some states remained volatile but narrowed, on net, from their peak levels last sum- mer. Downgrades of the credit ratings of state and local governments continued to outpace upgrades dur- ing the second half of 2010. Nonetheless, the pace of actual defaults on municipal issues continued to come down from its peak in 2008. In recent months, there were substantial outflows from long-term mutual funds that invest in municipal bonds. Supported by the expansion of foreign economic activ- ity, real exports of goods and services continued to increase at a solid pace in the second half of 2010, ris- ing at an annual rate of 8¼ percent (figure 24). Nearly all major categories of exports rose, with exports of machinery, agricultural goods, and services registering the largest gains. Moreover, the increase in export demand was broad based across trading partners. Real imports of goods and services decelerated con- siderably in the second half of 2010, increasing at an annual rate of only 1¼ percent after surging more than 20 percent during the first half of last year. The sharp step-down partly reflected an unusually large decline in real oil imports, but more important, the growth in non-oil imports moderated to a pace more in line with 7. The Build America Bond program allowed state and local governments to issue taxable bonds for capital projects and receive a subsidy payment from the Treasury for 35 percent of interest costs. 24. Change in real imports and exports of goods and services, 2004–10 the expansion in U.S. economic activity. During the second half of 2010, imports of consumer goods, machinery, and services posted the largest increases. As with exports, the increase in imports occurred across a wide range of trading partners. All told, net exports shaved ½ percentage point off real GDP growth last year as the rebound in imports outpaced the recovery in exports for the year as a whole. The current account deficit widened from $378 billion in 2009 to an average of $479 billion at an annual rate, or about 3¼ percent of nominal GDP, in the first three quarters of 2010 (figure 25). crude oil moved higher over the second half of the 25. U.S. trade and current account balances, 2002–10 NOTE: The data are quarterly. For the trade account, the data extend through 2010:Q4; for the current account, they extend through 2010:Q3. GDP is gross domestic product. 26. Prices of oil and nonfuel commodities, 2006–11 The data are monthly. The oil price is the spot price of West Texas Intermediate crude oil, and the last observation is the average for February 1–22, 2011. The price of nonfuel commodities is an index of 45 primary-commodity prices and extends through January 2011. the Commodity Research Bureau; year, rising to an average of $89 per barrel in Decem- ber, about $11 above the average price that prevailed over the first six months of the year (figure 26). The upward movement in oil prices during the second half of the year largely reflected a widespread strengthening in global oil demand, particularly in emerging market economies (EMEs), against a backdrop of constrained supply. The depreciation of the dollar over this period also contributed somewhat to the rise in the price of oil. Spot WTI continued to fluctuate around its December average for much of the first two months of this year but moved up sharply in late February.8 Unrest in several Middle Eastern and North African countries, and uncertainty about its potential implica- tions for global oil supply, has put considerable upward pressure on oil prices in recent weeks. oil (expiring in December 2019) has generally fluctu- ated in the neighborhood of $95 per barrel over the past six months, not much different from the average over the first half of 2010, although it has moved up some recently. Accordingly, the sharply upward sloping futures curve that characterized the oil market since the onset of the financial crisis has flattened consider- ably. Concurrent with this flattening of the futures curve, measured global inventories of crude oil have declined in recent months, although they remain high by historical standards. 8. The prices of other grades of crude oil have risen by more over the first two months of this year as the high level of inventories accu- mulated at Cushing, Oklahoma, the delivery point for WTI, has depressed WTI prices. Nonfuel commodity prices also rose markedly over the second half of the year and into early 2011, with increases broad based across a variety of commodities. As with oil, these prices have been supported by strengthening global economic activity, primarily in China as well as in other EMEs, and, to a lesser extent, by the lower dollar. In addition, adverse weather con- ditions have reduced harvests and curtailed supplies of important agricultural products in a number of key exporting countries, including Russia, Ukraine, and the United States. Prices of non-oil imported goods rose 1¼ percent at an annual rate over the second half of 2010 and have increased at an accelerated pace in January, boosted by higher commodity prices, the depreciation of the U.S. dollar, and foreign inflation. On net, non-oil import prices rose a bit more slowly over the second half of 2010 than in the first half and finished the year 2 per- cent higher than at the end of 2009. Total net national saving—that is, the saving of house- holds, businesses, and governments excluding deprecia- tion charges—remains low by historical standards (fig- ure 27). After having reached 3¾ percent of nominal GDP in 2006, net national saving dropped steadily over the subsequent three years, reaching roughly negative 3 percent in the third quarter of 2009. The widening of the federal budget deficit during the course of the recession more than accounted for the downswing in net saving. Since late 2009, net national 27. Net saving, 1990–2010 NOTE: The data are quarterly and extend through 2010:Q3. Nonfederal saving is the sum of personal and net business saving and the net saving of state and local governments. GDP is gross domestic product. saving has moved up, reflecting a sharp rise in private saving. Nonetheless, the total averaged about negative 1 percent in the third quarter of 2010 (the latest avail- able data), and the large federal deficit will likely keep it at low levels in the near term. Currently, real interest rates are still low despite the depressed rate of national saving. If national saving were to remain low as the economy recovers, interest rates would likely experi- ence upward pressure, capital formation rates would likely be low, and borrowing from abroad would likely be heavy. In combination, such developments would limit the rise in the standard of living of U.S. residents and hamper the ability of the nation to meet the retire- ment needs of an aging population. Conditions in the labor market have continued to improve only slowly since the middle of 2010. Private payroll employment rose just 120,000 per month, on average, over the second half of last year, and payroll employment gains remained lackluster in January of 2011 (figure 28).9 All told, only about one-seventh of the 8¾ million jobs lost from the beginning of 2008 to the trough in private payrolls in February 2010 have been recovered. Rather than adding jobs briskly, busi- nesses have been achieving much of their desired increases in labor input over the past year by lengthen- 9. Total employment—private plus government—exhibited sharp swings from March 2010 to September 2010 as a result of the hiring of temporary workers for the decennial census. 28. Net change in private payroll employment, 2004–11 NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through January 2011. SOURCE: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. 29. Civilian unemployment rate, 1977–2011 NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through January 2011. SOURCE: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. ing the hours worked by their employees; indeed, by January, the average workweek had recouped more than one-half of its decrease during the recession. For most of last year, the overall net increase in hir- ing was barely sufficient to accommodate the increase in the size of the labor force, and the unemployment rate remained at or above 9½ percent through Novem- ber (figure 29). However, the unemployment rate is estimated to have moved down noticeably in December and January, reaching 9.0 percent—about 1 percentage point below the highest reading during this episode. The recent decline in the jobless rate is encouraging, but the extent of the improvement in underlying labor- market conditions is, as yet, difficult to judge. The level of unemployment remains very elevated, and long- duration joblessness continues to account for an espe- 30. Long-term unemployed, 1977–2011 NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through January 2011. The series shown is the percentage of total unemployed persons who have been unemployed for more than 26 weeks. 31. Labor force participation rate, 1977–2011 NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through January 2011. SOURCE: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. cially large share of the total. Indeed, in January, nearly 6¼ million persons among those counted as unemployed—about 44 percent of the total—had been out of work for more than six months, figures that were only a little below record levels observed in the middle of 2010 (figure 30).10 Moreover, the number of individuals who are working part time for economic reasons—another indicator of the underutilization of labor—remained roughly twice its pre-recession value. Meanwhile, the labor force participation rate moved down further in the second half of the year (figure 31). The decline in participation was mainly concentrated among men aged 25 and over without a college degree. Several other indicators of labor market conditions, however, have brightened a bit recently. After showing little progress over the first half of the year, initial claims for unemployment insurance (an indicator of the pace of layoffs) generally have trended down in recent months. Moreover, survey measures of labor market expectations—such as business plans for future hiring and consumer attitudes about future labor mar- ket conditions—improved, on net, over the second half of 2010 and early this year after having softened around the middle of last year. Labor productivity rose further in the second half of 2010. According to the most recent published data, output per hour in the nonfarm business sector increased at an annual rate of about 2½ percent over that period (figure 32). Productivity had surged in 2009 10. The data on the duration of unemployment begin in 1948. 32. Change in output per hour, 1948–2010 NOTE: Nonfarm business sector. Change for each multiyear period is measured to the fourth quarter of the final year of the period from the fourth quarter of the year immediately preceding the period. as firms aggressively eliminated many operational inef- ficiencies and reduced their labor input in an environ- ment of severe economic stress. Although the recent gains in productivity have been less rapid, firms none- theless continue to make efforts to improve the effi- ciency of their operations, and they appear to remain reluctant to increase staffing levels in a climate of lin- gering economic uncertainty. Increases in hourly compensation remained subdued in 2010, restrained by the wide margin of labor market slack (figure 33). The employment cost index (ECI) for 33. Measures of change in hourly compensation, 2000–10 NOTE: The data are quarterly and extend through 2010:Q4. For nonfarm business compensation, change is over four quarters; for the employment cost index (ECI), change is over the 12 months ending in the last month of each quarter. The nonfarm business sector excludes farms, government, nonprofit institutions, and households. The sector covered by the ECI used here is the nonfarm business sector plus nonprofit institutions. private industry workers, which measures both wages and the cost to employers of providing benefits, rose just 2 percent in nominal terms in 2010—up from an especially small increase in 2009 but still lower than the roughly 3 percent pace averaged in the several years preceding the recession. The rise in the ECI last year reflected a pickup in the growth of benefits, after a subdued increase in 2009, and a modest acceleration in wages and salaries. Nominal compensation per hour in the nonfarm business sector—derived from the labor compensation data in the NIPA—increased only 1½ percent in 2010, well below the average gain of about 4 percent in the years before the recession. After adjusting for the rise in consumer prices, hourly com- pensation was little changed in 2010. Because nominal hourly compensation and labor productivity in the nonfarm business sector rose at roughly the same pace in 2010, unit labor costs were about flat last year. Dur- ing the preceding year, unit labor costs had plunged 3½ percent as a result of the moderate rise in nominal hourly compensation and the sizable advance in output per hour. Consumer price inflation has been trending downward, on net, and survey measures of longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable, despite the rapid increases in a variety of commodity prices during the second half of 2010. Overall prices for personal con- sumption expenditures increased 1¼ percent over the 12 months ending in January 2011, compared with a rise of 2½ percent in the preceding 12-month period (figure 2). The core PCE price index—which excludes the prices of energy items as well as those of food and beverages—increased just ¾ percent over the 12 months ending in January, down from a 1¾ percent rise over the preceding 12 months. The index of consumer energy prices, which declined in the first half of 2010, rose rapidly during the second half of the year and early 2011. The index was boosted by a surge in the prices of gasoline and home heating oil, which reflected the run-up in the price of crude oil that began in late summer. In contrast, consumer natu- ral gas prices fell as increases in supply from new domestic wells helped boost inventories above typical levels. All told, the overall index of consumer energy prices rose nearly 7 percent during the 12 months end- ing in January 2011. The index of consumer food prices rose 1¾ percent over the 12 months ending in January 2011 as the prices of beef and pork posted sizable increases. The price of fruits and vegetables ran up briskly early in 2010 following a couple of damaging freezes, but these prices turned down in the second half of the year, leav- ing them up only slightly for the year as a whole. How- ever, spot prices in commodity markets for crops and for livestock moved up sharply toward the end of last year, pointing to some upward pressure on consumer food prices in the first part of 2011. past year was particularly evident in the prices of goods other than food and energy, which fell 0.6 per- cent over the 12 months ending in January 2011. The decline in these core goods prices occurred despite siz- able increases in the prices of some industrial com- modities and materials; the modest degree of pass- through from commodity input costs to retail prices reflects the relatively small weight of materials inputs in total production costs. Prices for services other than energy rose about 1¼ percent over the 12 months end- ing in January, down from an increase of almost 2 per- cent in the preceding 12 months, as the continued weakness in the housing market put downward pres- sure on the rise in housing costs and as the wide mar- gin of economic slack continued to restrain price increases for other services. The widespread slowing in inflation over the past year is also apparent in a variety of alternative indica- tors of the underlying trend in inflation (figure 34). These indicators include trimmed-mean price indexes, which exclude the most extreme price increases and price declines in each period, and market-based mea- sures of core prices, which exclude prices that must be 34. Alternative measures of underlying price changes in personal consumption expenditures, 2005–11 Trimmed mean Market based excluding food and energy Excluding food and energy NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through January 2011. The trimmed-mean personal consumption expenditures price index excludes the bottom 24 percent and the top 31 percent of the distribution of monthly price changes and is based on 178 components. SOURCE: For trimmed mean, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas; for all else, imputed. These imputed prices (often referred to as “nonmarket” prices) tend to be highly erratic. tations have increased in recent months, likely reflect- ing the recent run-up in energy and food prices; in con- trast, survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations have remained relatively stable over the past year. In the Thomson Reuters/University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers, median year-ahead inflation remained between 2¾ percent and 3 percent for most of 2010 but then rose above 3 percent in early 2011. Longer-term expectations in the survey, at 2.9 percent in February, remained in the narrow range that has prevailed over the past few years. In the Sur- vey of Professional Forecasters, conducted by the Fed- eral Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, expectations for the increase in the consumer price index over the next 10 years edged down, on balance, during 2010 after having been essentially unchanged for many years. In light of the disappointing pace of the progress toward the Federal Reserve’s dual objectives of maxi- mum employment and price stability, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) took steps in the second half of the year to reduce downside risk to the sustain- ability of the recovery and to provide further support to economic activity. At its August 2010 meeting, the FOMC decided to keep the Federal Reserve’s holdings of longer-term securities constant at their then-current level by reinvesting principal payments from holdings of agency debt and agency MBS in longer-term Treas- ury securities. In November, the FOMC announced its intention to purchase a further $600 billion in longer- term Treasury securities by the end of the second quar- ter of 2011 (see box “The Effects of Federal Reserve Asset Purchases”). Financial market conditions, which had worsened early in the summer as a result of developments in Europe and concerns about the durability of the global recovery, subsequently improved as investors increas- ingly priced in further monetary policy accommoda- tion. Accordingly, real Treasury yields declined, asset prices increased, and credit spreads narrowed. A brightening tone to the economic news starting in the fall bolstered investor sentiment and, together with a reassessment on the part of investors of the ultimate size of Federal Reserve Treasury purchases, contrib- uted to a backup in interest rates and in measures of inflation compensation that continued through year- end. In contrast to the developments earlier in the year, the reemergence later in the year of concerns about the financial situation in Europe left little imprint on domestic financial markets. In response to indications of a slowing pace of recov- ery in U.S. output and employment and a continued downward trend in measures of underlying inflation, expectations regarding the path for the federal funds rate during 2011 and 2012 were revised down sharply in the third quarter and investors came to anticipate further Federal Reserve asset purchases. The FOMC’s decision to begin additional purchases of longer-term Treasury securities occurred against the backdrop of this downward shift in expectations about monetary policy. Subsequently, expectations regarding the ulti- mate size of such purchases were scaled back as the recovery appeared to strengthen, downside risks to the outlook seemed to recede somewhat, and a tax-cut deal that was seen as supportive of economic activity was passed into law. The current target range for the federal funds rate of 0 to ¼ percent is consistent with the level that investors expected at the end of June 2010. However, the date at which monetary policy tightening is expected to com- mence has moved back somewhat since the time of the July 2010 Monetary Policy Report to the Congress. Quotes on money market futures contracts indicate that, as of late February, investors anticipate that the federal funds rate will rise above its current range in the first quarter of 2012, about a year later than the date implied in July 2010. By the end of 2012, investors expect that the effective federal funds rate will be around 1.3 percent, fairly similar to the level antici- pated in mid-2010.11 Yields on nominal Treasury securities fluctuated considerably in the second half of 2010 and in early 2011 due to shifts in investors’ expectations regarding 11. When interest rates are close to zero, determining the point at which financial market quotes indicate that the federal funds rate will move above its current range can be challenging. The path described in the text is the mean of a distribution calculated from derivatives contracts on federal funds and Eurodollars. The skewness induced in this distribution by the zero lower bound causes the mean to be influ- enced strongly by changes in uncertainty regarding the policy path, complicating its interpretation. Alternatively, one can use similar derivatives to calculate the most likely—or “modal”—path of the federal funds rate, which tends to be more stable. This path has also moved down, on net, since last summer, but it suggests a flatter over- all trajectory for the target federal funds rate, according to which the effective rate does not rise above its current level until around the middle of 2012. Between late 2008 and early 2010, with short-term interest rates already near zero, the Federal Reserve provided additional monetary accommodation by purchasing $1.25 trillion in agency mortgage- backed securities (MBS), about $175 billion in agency debt, and $300 billion in longer-term Treas- ury securities. When incoming economic data in mid-2010 suggested that the recovery might be softening, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) decided to take further action to fulfill its mandated objectives of promoting maximum employment and price stability. First, the Commit- tee decided at its August 2010 meeting to reinvest the principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency MBS in longer-term Treasury secu- rities. Second, it announced in November its inten- tion to purchase an additional $600 billion of longer-term Treasury securities by the end of the second quarter of 2011. Studies of the responses of asset prices to announcements by the Federal Reserve regarding its first round of asset purchases have found that the purchases of Treasury securities, agency debt, and agency MBS significantly reduced the yields on those securities.1 Similarly, analyses of the responses of asset prices to the purchases them- selves also documented an effect on the prices of the acquired securities.2 Spillover effects of the purchase programs to other financial markets, in turn, appear to have resulted in lower interest rates on corporate debt and residential mortgages and to have contributed to higher equity valuations and a somewhat lower foreign exchange value of the dollar. These effects are qualitatively similar to those that typically result from conventional mon- etary policy easing. Recent research by Federal Reserve staff has pro- The theory underlying these asset purchases, which dates back to the early 1950s, posits that asset prices are affected by the outstanding quan- tity of assets. In some models, for example, short- and long-term assets are imperfect substitutes for one another in investors’ portfolios, and the term structure of interest rates can be influenced by changes to the supply of securities at different maturities. As a result, purchases of longer-term securities by the central bank can push up the prices and drive down the yields on those securi- ties. Asset purchases can also affect longer-term interest rates by influencing investors’ expectations of the future path of short-term rates. Similarly, the effect of central bank asset purchases depends on expectations regarding the timing and pace of the eventual unwinding of the purchases. Thus, central bank communication may play a key role in influ- encing the response of financial markets to such a program. vided some estimates of the magnitude of the resulting effects on the economy using the FRB/US macroeconomic model—one of the models devel- oped by the Federal Reserve Board staff and used for policy analysis.3 A simulation exercise suggests 1. See, for example, Joseph Gagnon, Matthew Raskin, Julie Remache, and Brian Sack (2010), “Large-Scale Asset Purchases by the Federal Reserve: Did They Work?” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports 441 (New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, March); and James Hamilton and Jing (Cynthia) Wu (2010), “The Effectiveness of Alternative Monetary Policy Tools in a Zero Lower Bound Environment,” working paper (San Diego: University of California, San Diego, November). Evidence of similar effects in the United Kingdom from asset purchases by the Bank of England was found by Michael Joyce, Ana Lasaosa, Ibrahim Stevens, and Matthew Tong (2010), “The Financial Market Impact of Quantitative Easing,” Working Paper 393 (London: Bank of England, August). 2. See, for example, Stefania D’Amico and Thomas B. King (2010), “Flow and Stock Effects of Large-Scale Asset Treasury Purchases,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2010–52 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Sys- tem, September). Recent empirical work suggests that the Federal Reserve’s asset purchase programs have indeed provided significant monetary accommodation. 3. Hess Chung, Jean-Phillipe Laforte, David Reifschneider, and John Williams (2011), “Have We Underestimated the Like- lihood and Severity of Zero Lower Bound Events?” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper Series 2011–01 the prospects for economic growth and the size of any asset purchase program that would be conducted by the Federal Reserve (figure 35). Recently, Treasury yields declined as investors increased their demand for the relative safety and liquidity of Treasury securities following political turmoil in the Middle East and North Africa. On net, yields on 2-year Treasury notes were up a bit from their levels in mid-2010, while those on 10-year Treasury securities rose approximately 40 basis points. Nonetheless, yields on Treasury securi- ties remained quite low by historical standards. Uncer- tainty about longer-term interest rates, as measured by the implied volatility on 10-year Treasury securities, rose significantly from November to mid-December, likely in part because of increased uncertainty about the ultimate size of the Federal Reserve’s asset pur- chase program. Interest rate uncertainty declined sub- sequentlyandbyearly2011wasonlyabithigher,onnet, than in mid-2010, apparently reflecting coalescing mar- ket expectations regarding Federal Reserve purchases. Measures of medium- and long-term inflation com- pensation derived from inflation-indexed Treasury that the cumulative effect of the Federal Reserve’s asset purchases since 2008—including the original purchases of Treasury securities, agency debt, and agency MBS; the reinvestment of principal pay- ments; and the additional $600 billion in Treasury security purchases now intended—has been to pro- vide significant and mounting support to economic activity over time. Although estimates of these effects are subject to considerable uncertainty, the model results suggest that the purchases have already boosted the level of real gross domestic product 1¾ percent relative to what it would have been if no such purchases had occurred, and that this effect will rise to 3 percent by 2012.4 As a result of this stronger recovery in output, the model also suggests that by 2012 the asset purchase program will boost private employment about 3 million, and trim the unemployment rate 1½ percentage points relative to what they otherwise would be. Finally, the simulation results suggest that inflation is cur- rently 1 percentage point higher than otherwise would have been the case if the FOMC had never initiated securities purchases, implying that, in the absence of such purchases, the economy would now be close to a state of deflation. Although the asset purchase programs seem to have provided significant support to economic activity, some observers have noted that they are not without risk. One concern that has been voiced is that these purchase programs have increased the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet and could result in monetary accommodation being left in place for too long, leading to excessive infla- tion. However, in preparation for removing mon- etary accommodation, the Federal Reserve has 4. These effects are based on certain assumptions regarding the period assets are held and the unwinding of the pur- chases. These, and other, assumptions are described in more detail in Chung and others, “Zero Lower Bound Events,” in box note 3. continued to develop the tools it will need to raise short-term interest rates and drain large volumes of reserves when doing so becomes necessary to achieve the policy stance that best fosters the Fed- eral Reserve’s macroeconomic objectives.5 More- ing inflation suggest that point is not yet near. A second concern is that the asset purchase pro- gram could result in adverse financial imbalances if, rates encouraged potential borrowers to employ excessive leverage to take advantage of low financ- ing costs or led investors to accept an imprudently small amount of compensation for bearing risk in an effort to enhance their rates of return. The Fed- eral Reserve is carefully monitoring financial indica- tors, including credit flows and premiums for credit ity. For example, to monitor leverage provided by 2010 the Federal Reserve launched the Senior Terms. This survey provides information on the intermediated financing, including funding for undermine the stability of the financial system, the Federal Reserve has increased its emphasis on tak- ing a multidisciplinary approach that integrates the ated within the Federal Reserve to coordinate staff efforts to identify and analyze potential risks to the 5. The ongoing development of these tools is discussed in Studies of the responses of asset prices to announcements by the Federal Reserve regarding its first round of asset purchases have found that the purchases of Treasury securities, agency debt, and agency MBS significantly reduced the yields on those securities.1 Similarly, analyses of the responses of asset prices to the purchases them- selves also documented an effect on the prices of the acquired securities.2 Spillover effects of the purchase programs to other financial markets, in turn, appear to have resulted in lower interest rates on corporate debt and residential mortgages and to have contributed to higher equity valuations and a somewhat lower foreign exchange value of the dollar. These effects are qualitatively similar to those that typically result from conventional mon- continued to develop the tools it will need to raise short-term interest rates and drain large volumes of reserves when doing so becomes necessary to achieve the policy stance that best fosters the Fed- eral Reserve’s macroeconomic objectives.5 More- over, the current level of resource slack in the economy and the recent low readings on underly- ing inflation suggest that point is not yet near. that the cumulative effect of the Federal Reserve’s asset purchases since 2008—including the original purchases of Treasury securities, agency debt, and agency MBS; the reinvestment of principal pay- ments; and the additional $600 billion in Treasury security purchases now intended—has been to pro- vide significant and mounting support to economic activity over time. Although estimates of these effects are subject to considerable uncertainty, the model results suggest that the purchases have already boosted the level of real gross domestic product 1¾ percent relative to what it would have been if no such purchases had occurred, and that this effect will rise to 3 percent by 2012.4 As a result of this stronger recovery in output, the model also suggests that by 2012 the asset purchase program will boost private employment about 3 million, and trim the unemployment rate 1½ percentage points relative to what they otherwise would be. Finally, the simulation results suggest that inflation is cur- rently 1 percentage point higher than otherwise would have been the case if the FOMC had never initiated securities purchases, implying that, in the absence of such purchases, the economy would now be close to a state of deflation. provided additional monetary accommodation by purchasing $1.25 trillion in agency mortgage- backed securities (MBS), about $175 billion in ury securities. When incoming economic data in mid-2010 suggested that the recovery might be A second concern is that the asset purchase pro- gram could result in adverse financial imbalances if, for example, the lower level of longer-term interest rates encouraged potential borrowers to employ excessive leverage to take advantage of low financ- ing costs or led investors to accept an imprudently small amount of compensation for bearing risk in an effort to enhance their rates of return. The Fed- eral Reserve is carefully monitoring financial indica- tors, including credit flows and premiums for credit risk, for signs of potential threats to financial stabil- ity. For example, to monitor leverage provided by dealers to financial market participants, in June 2010 the Federal Reserve launched the Senior Credit Officer Opinion Survey on Dealer Financing Terms. This survey provides information on the terms on and availability of various forms of dealer- intermediated financing, including funding for securities positions. Moreover, to better monitor linkages among firms and markets that could undermine the stability of the financial system, the Federal Reserve has increased its emphasis on tak- ing a multidisciplinary approach that integrates the contributions of economists, specialists in particu- lar financial markets, bank supervisors, payments systems experts, and other professionals. An Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research was cre- ated within the Federal Reserve to coordinate staff efforts to identify and analyze potential risks to the financial system and broader economy. (FOMC) decided to take further action to fulfill its mandated objectives of promoting maximum employment and price stability. First, the Commit- tee decided at its August 2010 meeting to reinvest rities. Second, it announced in November its inten- tion to purchase an additional $600 billion of Recent research by Federal Reserve staff has pro- vided some estimates of the magnitude of the resulting effects on the economy using the FRB/US macroeconomic model—one of the models devel- oped by the Federal Reserve Board staff and used for policy analysis.3 A simulation exercise suggests The theory underlying these asset purchases, which dates back to the early 1950s, posits that asset prices are affected by the outstanding quan- tity of assets. In some models, for example, short- and long-term assets are imperfect substitutes for 1. See, for example, Joseph Gagnon, Matthew Raskin, Julie Remache, and Brian Sack (2010), “Large-Scale Asset Purchases by the Federal Reserve: Did They Work?” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports 441 (New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, March); and James Hamilton and Jing (Cynthia) Wu (2010), “The Effectiveness of Alternative Monetary Policy Tools in a Zero Lower Bound Environment,” working paper (San Diego: University of California, San Diego, November). Evidence of similar effects in the United Kingdom from asset purchases by the Bank of England was found by Michael Joyce, Ana Lasaosa, Ibrahim Stevens, and Matthew Tong (2010), “The Financial Market Impact of Quantitative Easing,” Working Paper 393 (London: Bank of England, August). Although the asset purchase programs seem to structure of interest rates can be influenced by have provided significant support to economic activity, some observers have noted that they are not without risk. One concern that has been voiced is that these purchase programs have increased the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet and could result in monetary accommodation being left in place for too long, leading to excessive infla- tion. However, in preparation for removing mon- etary accommodation, the Federal Reserve has securities by the central bank can push up the prices and drive down the yields on those securi- ties. Asset purchases can also affect longer-term interest rates by influencing investors’ expectations effect of central bank asset purchases depends on expectations regarding the timing and pace of the 2. See, for example, Stefania D’Amico and Thomas B. King (2010), “Flow and Stock Effects of Large-Scale Asset Treasury Purchases,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2010–52 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Sys- bank communication may play a key role in influ- encing the response of financial markets to such a 4. These effects are based on certain assumptions regarding the period assets are held and the unwinding of the pur- chases. These, and other, assumptions are described in more detail in Chung and others, “Zero Lower Bound Events,” in box note 3. 3. Hess Chung, Jean-Phillipe Laforte, David Reifschneider, and John Williams (2011), “Have We Underestimated the Like- lihood and Severity of Zero Lower Bound Events?” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper Series 2011–01 Recent empirical work suggests that the Federal Reserve’s asset purchase programs have indeed 5. The ongoing development of these tools is discussed in provided significant monetary accommodation. bonds rose, on balance, during the second half of 2010 but remained within their historical ranges. Both medium- and long-term measures of inflation compen- sation fell early in the third quarter as investors grew more concerned about the durability of the economic recovery, but they then moved back up as the FOMC was seen as taking additional steps to help move infla- tion back toward levels more consistent with its man- date and as economic prospects improved. Rising energy prices may also have contributed to the increases in medium-term inflation compensation. During the second half of 2010 and early 2011, the spreads between the yields on investment-grade corpo- rate bonds and those on comparable-maturity Treas- ury securities narrowed modestly (figure 36). Similar risk spreads on corporate bonds with below- investment-grade ratings narrowed more substan- tially—as much as 200 basis points. This spread com- pression was consistent with continued improvements in corporate credit quality as well as increased investor NOTE: The data are daily and extend through February 22, 2011. SOURCE: Department of the Treasury. confidence in the durability of the recovery. Nonethe- less, bond spreads now stand near the lower end of their historical ranges. In the secondary market for syndicated leveraged loans, the average bid price moved up further, a development that reflected strong investor demand as well as improved fundamentals (figure 37). A notable share of loans traded at or above par in early 2011. Equity prices have risen sharply since mid-2010 (fig- ure 38). The rally began amid expectations of further monetary policy accommodation and was further sup- ported by robust corporate earnings and an improved economic outlook. The gains in equity prices were 36. Spreads of corporate bond yields over comparable off-the-run Treasury yields, by securities rating, 1997–2011 NOTE: The data are daily and extend through February 22, 2011. The spreads shown are the yields on 10-year bonds less the 10-year Treasury yield. SOURCE: Derived from smoothed corporate yield curves using Merrill 37. Secondary-market bid pricing for syndicated loans, 2007–11 37. Secondary-market bid pricing for syndicated loans, 2007–11 NOTE: The data are daily and extend through February 22, 2011. SOURCE: LSTA/Thomson Reuters Mark-to-Market Pricing. broad based. Implied volatility for the S&P 500, calcu- lated from options prices, generally trended down in the second half of 2010 and early 2011 and reached fairly low levels, although it increased recently against a backdrop of rising political turmoil in the Middle East and North Africa (figure 39). With some investors apparently seeking to boost returns in an environment of low interest rates, net inflows into mutual funds that invest in higher-yielding fixed-income instruments, including speculative-grade bonds and leveraged loans, were robust in the second half of 2010 and early 2011. These inflows likely sup- ported strong issuance and contributed to the narrow- ing of bond spreads during this period. Mutual funds focusing on international debt securities also attracted 38. Stock price index, 1995–2011 NOTE: The data are daily and extend through February 22, 2011. SOURCE: Dow Jones Indexes. The data are weekly and extend through the week ending February 25, 2011. The final observation is an estimate based on data through February 23, 2011. The series shown—the VIX—is the implied 30-day volatility of the S&P 500 stock price index as calculated from a weighted average of options prices. strong inflows. Inflows to other categories of bond funds were more modest so that overall inflows to bond funds in the second half of 2010 were similar to those in the first half of the year (figure 40). Despite the strong gains in U.S. equity markets, mutual funds investing in domestic equities experienced sizable out- flows for much of the second half of last year, but these funds attracted net inflows in early 2011. Invest- ments in money market mutual funds changed little in the second half of 2010—following notable outflows earlier in the year—as the assets held by these funds continued to generate very low yields. 40. Net flows into mutual funds, 2006–10 NOTE: The data exclude reinvested dividends and are not seasonally adjusted. Conditions in short-term funding markets, which had experienced notable strains in the spring when inves- tors became concerned about European sovereign debt and banking issues, generally improved early in the second half of 2010. Spreads of London interbank offered rates, or Libor, over comparable-maturity over- night index swap rates—a measure of stress in short- term bank funding markets—reversed the widening observed in the spring and then remained fairly narrow despite the reemergence of concerns about the situa- tion in Europe in the fall (figure 41). Nevertheless, amid the renewed concerns, tiering was reportedly evi- dent in dollar funding markets abroad, as institutions located in peripheral European countries apparently faced reduced access to funding. Issuance of commer- cial paper in the United States by institutions head- quartered in peripheral Europe declined as investors required notably higher rates to hold this paper. Besides these strains and some modest, short-lived year-end pressures, conditions in short-term funding markets continued to be stable. The spreads between yields on lower-quality A2/P2-rated paper and AA-rated asset-backed commercial paper over those on higher-quality AA-rated nonfinancial paper remained narrow through the fall and into 2011 (fig- ure 42). Since last summer, haircuts on securities used as collateral in repurchase agreements (repos), while 41. Libor minus overnight index swap rate, 2007–11 NOTE: The data are daily and extend through February 22, 2011. An overnight index swap (OIS) is an interest rate swap with the floating rate tied to an index of daily overnight rates, such as the effective federal funds rate. At maturity, two parties exchange, on the basis of the agreed notional amount, the difference between interest accrued at the fixed rate and interest accrued by averaging the floating, or index, rate. Libor is the London interbank offered rate. 42. Commercial paper spreads, 2007–11 NOTE: The data are weekly and extend through February 23, 2011. Commercial paper yield spreads are for an overnight maturity and are expressed relative to the AA nonfinancial rate. exhibiting some volatility in the fourth quarter and early 2011, were generally little changed. Information from the Federal Reserve’s quarterly Senior Credit Officer Opinion Survey on Dealer Financing Terms suggested that the major dealers eased credit terms to most types of counterparties dur- ing the second half of 2010, primarily in response to more-aggressive competition from other institutions and to an improvement in the current or expected financial strength of the counterparties. The easing of terms occurred primarily for securities-financing trans- actions, while nonprice terms for over-the-counter derivatives transactions were reportedly little changed on net. Survey respondents also noted a general increase in the demand for funding for all types of securities covered in the survey. While remaining well below pre-crisis levels, the use of dealer-intermediated leverage appears to have gradually increased since the end of the summer, inter- rupted by a brief retrenchment in early December when concerns about developments in Europe intensi- fied. This trend is reflected in the increased funding of equities by hedge funds and other levered investors and in an uptick in demand for the funding of some other types of securities. In addition, recent leveraged finance deals—involving the new issuance of high- yield corporate bonds and syndicated leveraged loans—on average reflected greater levering of the underlying corporate assets, but they nonetheless gen- erated strong interest on the part of investors in a very low interest rate environment. However, there was little evidence that dealer-intermediated funding of less- liquid assets increased materially, and new issuance of structured products that embed leverage and were originated in large volumes prior to the crisis—includ- ing, for example, complex mortgage derivatives—has not resumed on any significant scale. In general, the appetite for additional leverage on the part of most market participants—as reflected in responses to spe- cial questions on the September SCOOS, triparty repo market volumes, and other indicators—appears to have remained generally muted, with most investors not fully utilizing their existing funding capacity. Measures of liquidity and functioning in most financial markets pointed to generally stable conditions since mid-2010. In the Treasury market, various indi- cators, such as differences in prices of securities with similar remaining maturities and spreads between yields on on- and off-the-run issues, suggest that the market continued to operate normally, including dur- ing the period when the Federal Reserve was imple- menting its new asset purchase program. Bid-asked spreads were generally about in line with historical averages, and dealer transaction volumes have contin- ued to reverse the declines observed during the finan- cial crisis. In the syndicated loan market, bid-asked spreads trended down further in the second half of 2010 and in early 2011 as the market continued to recover, although they remained above the levels observed prior to 2007. Estimates of bid-asked spreads in corporate bond markets were within historical ranges, as was the dispersion of dealer quotes in the credit default swap market. Returns on equity and returns on assets for commer- cial banks in the second half of 2010 improved moder- ately from earlier in the year but remained well below the levels that prevailed before the financial crisis (fig- ure 43). Profits for the industry as a whole have ben- efitted considerably in recent quarters from reductions in loan loss provisioning. However, pre-provision net revenue decreased over the second half of the year as net interest margins slid and income from both deposit fees and trading activities declined.12 About 70 of the more than 6,500 commercial banks in the United States failed between July and December 2010, down slightly from the 86 failures that occurred in the first half of the year. Spreads on credit default swaps written on banking organizations generally held steady or moved down, on 12. Pre-provision net revenue is the sum of net interest income and 43. Commercial bank profitability, 1988–2010 NOTE: The data are quarterly and extend through 2010:Q4. SOURCE: Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council, Consolidated net, since mid-2010 (figure 44). Moreover, indicators of credit quality at commercial banks showed signs of improvement. Aggregate delinquency and charge-off rates moved down, although they remain high. Loss provisioning stayed elevated, but the recent reductions generally exceeded the declines in charge-offs, which suggests that banks expect credit quality to improve further in coming quarters. Indeed, for every major loan type, significant net fractions of banks reported on the January Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey that they expect credit quality to improve during the current year if economic activity progresses in line with consensus forecasts. 44. Spreads on credit default swaps for selected U.S. banks, 2007–11 Large bank holding companies NOTE: The data are daily and extend through February 22, 2011. Median spreads for six bank holding companies and nine other banks. Equity prices of commercial banks moved higher, on net, since mid-2010 (figure 45). During this period, large commercial banks generally reported earnings that beat analysts’ expectations, and improved eco- nomic prospects were seen as boosting loan demand and supporting loan quality going forward, develop- ments that would buoy banks’ profitability. Neverthe- less, investors were anxious about the degree to which future profitability might be negatively affected by a number of factors, including the quality of assets on banks’ books, changes in the regulatory landscape, mortgage documentation and foreclosure issues, and the potential for some nonperforming mortgages in securitized pools to be put back to some of the large banks. Total assets of commercial banks changed little, on net, during the second half of 2010, although there were notable compositional shifts. With demand weak and lending standards tight, total loans contracted (figure 46). Nevertheless, the pace at which loans decreased was not as rapid as in the first half of the year, in part because banks’ holdings of commercial and industrial loans picked up and their holdings of closed-end residential mortgages grew steadily. Partly offsetting the declines in total loans, banks expanded their holdings of Treasury securities and agency MBS, although the growth in their securities holdings slowed late in the year and into 2011. Regulatory capital ratios at commercial banks moved higher, on balance, over the second half of 2010. The upward trend in capital ratios over the past several years has been most pronounced at the largest banks as they accumulated capital while risk-weighted assets decreased and tangible assets were about 45. Equity price index for banks, 2009–11 NOTE: The data are daily and extend through February 22, 2011. SOURCE: Standard & Poor’s. 46. Change in total bank loans, 1990–2010 NOTE: The data, which are seasonally adjusted, are quarterly and extend through 2010:Q4. Data have been adjusted for banks’ implementation of certain accounting rule changes (including the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s Statements of Financial Accounting Standards Nos. 166 and 167) and for the effects of large nonbank institutions converting to commercial banks or merging with a commercial bank. unchanged. Capital requirements for many of these banks will increase significantly under the new interna- tional capital standards, which will restrict the defini- tion of regulatory capital and increase the risk weights assigned to some assets and off-balance-sheet expo- sures. In addition, the Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act requires that the Federal Reserve issue rules by January 31, 2012, that will subject bank holding companies with more than $50 billion in assets to additional capital and liquidity requirements. The M2 monetary aggregate has expanded at a moder- ate pace since mid-2010 after rising only slightly in the first half of last year (figure 47); for the year as a whole, M2 grew 3.2 percent, the slowest annual increase since 1994.13 As has been the case for some 13. M2 consists of (1) currency outside the U.S. Treasury, Federal Reserve Banks, and the vaults of depository institutions; (2) traveler’s checks of nonbank issuers; (3) demand deposits at commercial banks (excluding those amounts held by depository institutions, the U.S. government, and foreign banks and official institutions) less cash items in the process of collection and Federal Reserve float; (4) other checkable deposits (negotiable order of withdrawal, or NOW, accounts and automatic transfer service accounts at depository insti- tutions; credit union share draft accounts; and demand deposits at thrift institutions); (5) savings deposits (including money market deposit accounts); (6) small-denomination time deposits (time depos- 47. M2 growth rate, 2005–10 NOTE: For definition of M2, see text note 13. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Board, Statistical Release H.6, “Money Stock time, the strongest increase was in liquid deposits, the largest component of M2, while small time deposits and retail money market mutual fund assets continued to contract. Liquid deposits tended to pay slightly more-favorable interest rates than did their close sub- stitutes. The currency component of the money stock expanded at a faster rate in the second half of 2010 than it had earlier in the year. The monetary base— essentially equal to the sum of currency in circulation and the reserve balances of depository institutions held at the Federal Reserve—contracted slightly during the second half of 2010, although the downward trend started to reverse late in the period in response to the Federal Reserve’s new Treasury security purchase program. The size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet remained at a historically high level throughout the second half of 2010. In early 2011, the balance sheet stood at about $2.5 trillion, an increase of around $200 billion from its level in early July (table 1). The expansion of the balance sheet was more than accounted for by an increase in holdings of Treasury securities, which were up nearly $450 billion since the summer. The additional holdings of Treasury securities resulted from the FOMC’s August decision to reinvest the proceeds from paydowns of agency debt and MBS in longer-term Treasury securities and the asset pur- chase program announced at the November FOMC meeting. To provide operational flexibility and to ensure that it is able to purchase the most attractive its issued in amounts of less than $100,000) less individual retirement account (IRA) and Keogh balances at depository institutions; and (7) balances in retail money market mutual funds less IRA and Keogh balances at money market mutual funds. 1. Selected components of the Federal Reserve balance sheet, 2009–11 Selected assets Credit extended to other market participants Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility ...................... Net portfolio holdings of Commercial Paper Funding Facility LLC ................................... Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility .......................................................... Support of critical institutions Net portfolio holdings of Maiden Lane LLC, Maiden Lane II LLC, and Maiden Lane III LLC1 ....... Credit extended to American International Group, Inc. ............................................... Preferred interests in AIA Aurora LLC and ALICO Holdings LLC ................................... Selected liabilities NOTE: LLC is a limited liability company. 1. The Federal Reserve has extended credit to several LLCs in conjunction with efforts to support critical institutions. Maiden Lane LLC was formed to acquire certain assets of The Bear Stearns Companies, Inc. Maiden Lane II LLC was formed to purchase residential mortgage-backed securities from the U.S. securities lending reinvest- ment portfolio of subsidiaries of American International Group, Inc. (AIG). Maiden Lane III LLC was formed to purchase multisector collateralized debt obligations on which the Financial Products group of AIG has written credit default swap contracts. 2. Includes only MBS purchases that have already settled. 3. The Federal Reserve retains ownership of securities lent through the Term Securities Lending Facility. ... Not applicable. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Board, Statistical Release H.4.1, “Factors Affecting Reserve Balances of Depository Institutions and Condition Statement of Federal Reserve securities on a relative-value basis, the Federal Reserve temporarily relaxed its 35 percent per-issue limit on System Open Market Account (SOMA) holdings of individual Treasury securities and will allow SOMA holdings to rise above the previous threshold in modest increments up to a 70 percent per-issue limit; holdings of particular issues exceed the previous limit for only a small number of securities. In contrast, holdings of agency debt and agency MBS declined about $180 bil- lion between early July and early 2011. The wave of mortgage refinancing that occurred in the autumn in the wake of the drop in mortgage rates contributed notably to the sharp decline in Federal Reserve hold- ings of MBS. In addition, holdings of agency debt declined as these securities matured. Use of regular discount window lending facilities, such as the primary credit facility, has been minimal for some time. The Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) was closed on June 30, 2010. Loans outstanding under the TALF declined from $42 billion in mid-2010 to $21 billion in early 2011 as improved conditions in some securitization markets resulted in prepayments of loans made under the facility. The other broad-based credit facilities that the Federal Reserve had introduced to provide liquidity to finan- cial institutions and markets during the financial crisis were closed early in 2010. All loans extended through these programs had been repaid by the summer. The portfolio holdings of Maiden Lane LLC, Maiden Lane II LLC, and Maiden Lane III LLC, which were created to acquire certain assets from troubled systemically important institutions during the crisis, have generally changed little, on net, since mid- 2010. Current estimates of the fair values of the port- folios of the three Maiden Lane LLCs exceed the cor- responding loan balances outstanding to each limited liability company from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Consistent with the terms of the Maiden Lane LLC transaction, on July 15, 2010, this limited liability company began making distributions to repay the loan received from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. On January 14, 2011, American Interna- tional Group, Inc., or AIG, repaid the credit extended by the Federal Reserve under the revolving credit line, and the Federal Reserve was paid in full for its pre- ferred interests in the special purpose vehicles AIA Aurora LLC and ALICO Holdings LLC, thereby reducing the balances in these accounts to zero. Stresses in European dollar funding markets in May led to the reestablishment of liquidity swap lines between the Federal Reserve and foreign central banks. Only a small amount of credit has been issued under the reestablished facilities, which in December were extended through August 1, 2011. On the liability side, Federal Reserve notes in circu- lation increased a bit, from $908 billion to $956 billion. Reverse repos edged down. Deposits held at the Fed- eral Reserve by depository institutions rose to about $1.3 trillion. The Supplementary Financing Account declined early in 2011 following the announcement by the Treasury that it was suspending new issuance under the Supplementary Financing Program and that it would allow that account to fall to $5 billion as part of its efforts to maximize flexibility in debt manage- ment as federal debt approached the statutory debt limit. The foreign exchange value of the dollar declined over much of the third quarter of 2010 (figure 48). This decline was spurred in part by some reversal of flight- to-safety flows—as financial system strains in Europe temporarily diminished following the July release of the results of the European Union (EU) stress tests— and by fears that the recovery in the United States was slowing. Mounting expectations that the Federal Reserve might undertake further asset purchases in response to the weakening economic outlook also weighed on the dollar. Although the dollar initially 48. U.S. dollar nominal exchange rate, broad index, 2006–11 NOTE: The data, which are in foreign currency units per dollar, are daily. The last observation for the series is February 22, 2011. The broad index is a weighted average of the foreign exchange values of the U.S. dollar against the currencies of a large group of the most important U.S. trading partners. The index weights, which change over time, are derived from U.S. export shares and from U.S. and foreign import shares. dropped a bit more following the Federal Reserve’s announcement in early November that it would pur- chase additional long-term Treasury securities, it sub- sequently reversed course as data on economic activity in the United States began to strengthen and as inves- tors began to scale back their expectations of the ulti- mate size of the Federal Reserve’s purchase program. In the first two months of this year, the dollar edged down again as the outlook for economic activity abroad appeared to strengthen and the financial situa- tion in Europe stabilized. On net, the dollar declined 7 percent on a trade-weighted basis against a broad set of currencies over the second half of last year and into the first two months of this year. Foreign benchmark sovereign yields also declined over much of the third quarter as concerns about the U.S. recovery and worries that China’s economy might decelerate more quickly than had been expected led investors to question the overall strength of global eco- nomic growth (figure 49). However, foreign yields sub- sequently rose as confidence in the global recovery strengthened, leaving foreign benchmark yields 15 to 60 basis points higher on net. Foreign equity markets rallied following the release of the EU stress tests in July, and, although those mar- kets gave back part of these gains in August over heightened worries about the pace of global economic growth, they nonetheless ended the third quarter higher. Over the fourth quarter and into this year, for- eign equity prices rose further as the global economic 49. Yields on benchmark government bonds in selected NOTE: The data, which are for 10-year bonds, are daily. The last observation for each series is February 22, 2011. outlook improved, notwithstanding renewed stresses in peripheral Europe. On net, headline equity indexes in the euro area and Japan are up about 10 to 20 percent from their levels in mid-2010, while indexes in the major emerging market economies are about 20 per- cent higher; all those indexes increased, on balance, even after having declined a bit recently in the face of uncertainties about the Middle East and North Africa (figures 50 and 51). Although some banks in the euro-area periphery countries, particularly in Spain, seemed to have better 50. Equity indexes in selected advanced foreign economies, 2008–11 July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. NOTE: The data are daily. The last observation for each series is 51. Aggregate equity indexes for emerging market economies, 2008–11 51. Aggregate equity indexes for emerging market economies, 2008–11 July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. The data are daily. The last observation for each series is February 22, 2011. The Latin American economies are Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, and Peru; the emerging Asian economies are China, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Pakistan, the Philippines, South Korea, Taiwan, and Thailand. access to capital markets immediately following the stress test, their costs of funding rose again late in the year as market concerns about the Irish and Spanish banking sectors resurfaced. Banks in the euro-area periphery relied heavily on the weekly and longer-term funding operations of the European Central Bank (ECB) over much of this period. The strains neverthe- less spilled over into increased funding costs in dollars for some European banks, although the reaction was less severe than it had been in May. Reportedly, many European banks had already met their dollar funding needs through year-end before these strains occurred. Market participants welcomed the announcement that the swap lines between the Federal Reserve and the ECB, the Bank of England, the Swiss National Bank, the Bank of Japan, and the Bank of Canada would be extended through August 1. With the yen at a 15-year high against the dollar in nominal terms, Japanese authorities intervened in cur- rency markets on September 15 (figure 52). Japan’s Ministry of Finance purchased dollars overnight to weaken the value of the yen, its first intervention operation since March 2004. The operation caused the yen to depreciate immediately about 3 percent against the dollar, but this movement was fairly short lived, as theyenrosepastitspre-interventionlevelwithinamonth. During the third quarter, the EMEs saw an increase in capital inflows, which added to upward pressures on their currencies and reportedly triggered further inter- vention in foreign exchange markets by EME authori- ties. Authorities in several EMEs also announced new 52. U.S. dollar exchange rate against selected major NOTE: The data, which are in foreign currency units per dollar, are daily. The last observation for each series is February 22, 2011. measures to discourage portfolio capital inflows in an attempt to ease upward pressures on their currencies and in their asset markets. Although capital flows to EMEs appeared to moderate late in the year as long- term interest rates in the advanced economies rose, intervention and the imposition of capital control measures continued. Financial flows in 2010 reflected changes in investor sentiment over the course of the year, driven in part by concerns over fiscal difficulties in Europe. Foreign pri- vate investors made large purchases of U.S. Treasury securities in the first half of the year, but these “flight to quality” demands eased somewhat in the third quar- ter with the improvement in conditions in European markets (figure 53). Indicators for the fourth quarter are mixed but suggest that foreign private demand for U.S. Treasury securities picked up again late in the year as tensions in European markets reemerged. Foreign demand for other U.S. securities strengthened in the second half of the year. Net private purchases of both U.S. agency debt and U.S. equities were strong, and foreign investors made small net purchases of corpo- rate debt securities, in contrast to net sales over the previous several quarters. U.S. residents continued to purchase sizable amounts of foreign bonds and equi- ties, including both emerging market and European securities (figure 54). 53. Net foreign purchases of U.S. securities, 2006–10 NOTE: Other U.S. securities include corporate equities and bonds, agency Banks located in the United States continued to lend abroad, on net, in the third quarter, but at a slower pace than in the first half of the year, as dollar funding pressures in European interbank markets eased and banks abroad relied less on U.S. counterparties for funding. As a result, inflows from increased foreign private purchases of U.S. securities more than offset the banking outflows in the third quarter, generating net private financial inflows for the first time since late 2008 (figure 55). Inflows from foreign official institutions increased in the third quarter, with inflows primarily coming from countries seeking to counteract upward pressure on their currencies by purchasing U.S. dollars in foreign currency markets. These countries then used the pro- ceeds to acquire U.S. assets, primarily Treasury securi- 54. Net U.S. purchases of foreign securities, 2006–10 indicate a balance of payments outflow associated with positive U.S. purchases of foreign securities. 55. U.S. net financial inflows, 2006–10 Private (including banking) U.S. official Foreign official NOTE: U.S. official flows include the foreign currency acquired when foreign central banks draw on their swap lines with the Federal Reserve. SOURCE: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis. ties. Available data for the fourth quarter indicate that foreign official purchases of U.S. Treasury securities slowed as the dollar stabilized. Economic growth in the advanced foreign economies stepped down in the second half of 2010. To a large extent, this slowdown reflected standard business cycle dynamics, as support from fiscal stimulus and the rebound in global trade and inventories diminished over the course of the year. In Canada, signs of the maturing recovery were most evident in the domestic sector, whereas in Japan, exports decelerated as growth in emerging Asian economies moderated. In Europe, the recovery was further restrained by a reemergence of concerns over fiscal sustainability and banking sector vulnerabilities in some countries. (See box “An Update on the European Fiscal Crisis and Policy Responses.”) However, recent indicators of economic activity across the advanced foreign economies suggest that perfor- mance improved moderately toward the end of 2010. In the manufacturing sector, purchasing managers indexes have resumed rising and point to solid expan- sion. Moreover, the recovery appears to be gradually spilling over to the retail and service sectors, with household demand benefiting from improving labor market conditions and rising incomes. Toward year-end, consumer prices in the advanced foreign economies were boosted by a run-up in food and energy prices (figure 56). Japanese 12-month head- line consumer price inflation turned slightly positive for the first time since early 2009, in part because of a 56. Change in consumer prices for major foreign economies, 2007–11 56. Change in consumer prices for major foreign economies, 2007–11 NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through January 2011; the percent change is from one year earlier. hike in the tobacco tax, and headline inflation in Canada and the euro area recently moved above 2 per- cent. However, inflation in core consumer prices, which excludes food and energy prices, remained subdued amid considerable slack in these economies. One exception was the United Kingdom, where consumer price inflation—both headline and core—persisted above 3 percent throughout 2010, driven by prior exchange rate depreciation and increases in the value- added tax. 57. Official or targeted interest rates in selected advanced foreign economies, 2007–11 NOTE: The data are daily and extend through February 22, 2011. The data shown are, for Canada, the target for the overnight rate; for the euro area, the minimum bid rate on main refinancing operations; for Japan, the target for the call rate; and, for the United Kingdom, the official bank rate. SOURCE: The central bank of each area or country shown. The European fiscal crisis has remained a source of concern in global financial markets despite official responses over the past year. The crisis began early in 2010 after large upward revisions to the statistics on Greek government deficits led to an erosion of market confidence in the ability of Greece to meet its fiscal obligations. This situation created spill- overs to other euro-area countries with high debt or deficit levels. In early May, the European Union (EU) and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) announced a joint €110 billion financial support package for Greece; in addition, the EU established lending facilities of up to €500 billion, and the European Central Bank (ECB) began purchasing sovereign securities to ensure the depth and liquid- ity of euro-area debt markets. In response to signs of renewed pressures in dollar funding markets, the Federal Open Market Committee reopened dollar swapfacilitieswithanumberofforeigncentralbanks. Financial tensions moderated somewhat over the summer, in part because of favorable market reaction to the results of Europe-wide bank stress tests released in July. Nevertheless, the spreads of yields on the sovereign bonds of the most vulner- able euro-area countries over those of German bonds remained elevated (figure A). In the autumn, peripheral European sovereign bond spreads, par- ticularly those of Ireland, widened further. Two developments contributed to the heightened ten- sions: (1) the discussion of a proposal for a more permanent financial stability mechanism for the euro area starting in 2013, which could eventually require the restructuring of private holdings of sov- ereign debt; and (2) increased concerns over the growing real estate loan losses of Irish banks and the associated funding difficulties. Afflicted in part by deposit flight and difficulties raising funds in the interbank market, Irish banks became increasingly dependent on funding from the ECB. With access to market funding increasingly lim- ited, Ireland agreed on November 28 to a €67.5 bil- lion financial support package from the EU and the IMF, with an additional €17.5 billion of Ireland’s own funds going to stabilize and recapitalize the country’s banking sector. Ireland agreed to imple- ment a four-year fiscal consolidation effort equal to 9 percent of gross domestic product, two-thirds of NOTE: The data are weekly. The last observation for each series is February 25, 2011. The spreads shown are the yields on 10-year bonds less the 10-year German bond yield. which will be spending cuts, on top of the austerity measuresalreadyadoptedintheprevioustwoyears. Following this announcement, markets appeared to shift their focus to the possibility that official assistance would also be required for other euro- area countries with high fiscal deficits or debts and vulnerable banking systems. This development led to a rise in the sovereign bond spreads of Portugal, Spain, and, to a lesser extent, Italy and Belgium. The fear that the Irish problems might spread was exacerbated by concerns that funds available under existing support mechanisms could be insuf- ficient if Spain were to need external assistance. Partly in response to the increase in financial strains, the ECB temporarily stepped up its pur- chases of the debt of vulnerable euro-area coun- tries and announced following its December policy meeting that it would delay exit from its nonstan- dard liquidity measures. In addition, European leaders have increasingly indicated their desire to expand or broaden the mandate of current support facilities, and European governments are organiz- ing another round of bank stress tests. mies have maintained an accommodative monetary policy stance (figure 57), although some have taken steps to remove the degree of accommodation. The Bank of Canada raised its target for the overnight rate 50 basis points in the third quarter but since then has held its policy rate at 1 percent. The ECB discontinued refinancing operations at 6- and 12-month maturities but extended fixed-rate refinancing at shorter maturi- ties and kept its main refinancing rate at 1 percent. The Bank of England maintained its policy rate at 0.5 percent and the size of its Asset Purchase Facility at £200 billion. The Bank of Japan took additional steps to ease policy by cutting its target interest rate from 10 basis points to a range of 0 to 10 basis points. In addition, it extended from three to six months the term for its fixed-rate funds-supplying operation, and it established an asset purchase program of ¥5 trillion to buy a broad range of financial assets, including gov- ernment securities, commercial paper, corporate bonds, exchange-tradedfunds,andrealestateinvestmenttrusts. After a robust expansion in the first half of 2010, eco- nomic activity in the EMEs stepped down in the third quarter before bouncing back to solid growth in the fourth. On average over the two quarters, real GDP growth in the EMEs was well above that observed in the advanced economies. Economic activity in the EMEs was boosted by domestic demand, supported by accommodative monetary and fiscal policies. However, with output appearing to approach capacity for most countries, authorities in many EMEs have begun to unwind the stimulus measures, both monetary and fiscal, put in place during the crisis. The withdrawal of monetary stimulus has also been driven by a recent pickup in consumer price inflation, which has reflected, in part, a rise in commodity prices. Monetary policy tightening in the EMEs has likely been tempered by uncertainties about the pace and durability of the economic recovery in advanced economies, which remain an important source of demand for the EMEs. In addition, the exit from accommodative stances has been complicated by the return of private capital flows to these economies. Capital inflows appear to have exerted some upward pressure on currencies and have raised concerns about the possibility of an overheating in asset prices. EME authorities have so far adopted a variety of strategies to cope with increased capital flows, including inter- vention in foreign exchange markets to slow the upward movement of domestic currencies, prudential measures targeted to specific markets (such as the property market), and, in several cases, capital controls. Real GDP growth in China slowed a bit in the first half of last year, but it moved back up in the second half along with a pickup in inflation, prompting Chi- nese authorities to continue to tighten monetary policy. Since last June, bank reserve requirements increased a total of 250 basis points for the largest banks, and the benchmark one-year bank lending rate has risen 75 basis points. Chinese authorities have also raised the minimum down payment required for resi- dential property investment in order to slow rising property prices. Since the announcement last June by Chinese authorities that they would allow more exchange rate flexibility, the renminbi has appreciated about 4 percent against the dollar. However, on a real multilateral, trade-weighted basis, which gauges the renminbi’s value against China’s major trading part- ners and adjusts for differences in inflation rates, the renminbi has depreciated slightly. In emerging Asia excluding China, the pace of eco- nomic growth softened in the third quarter of last year. There was a steep decline in Singapore’s real GDP, which often exhibits wide quarterly swings. Consider- able weakness in third-quarter economic activity was also observed in Malaysia, the Philippines, and Thai- land. However, available indicators suggest that fourth- quarter GDP growth in the region has picked up again. In Latin America, real GDP in Mexico and Brazil also decelerated in the third quarter. Mexican output has yet to recover fully from the financial crisis; total manufacturing output slowed over the final two quar- ters of the year, largely reflecting lower U.S. manufac- turing growth, which has depressed demand for exports from Mexico. Economic activity in Brazil, though having slowed from a very brisk pace in the first half of the year, has remained solid, supported by continued fiscal stimulus and high commodity prices. Brazil’s central bank tightened reserve requirements in December, prompted by concerns about both the pace of credit creation and the quality of the credit being extended. In addition, the Brazilian central bank raised its policy rate 50 basis points in January of this year. The new Brazilian government has announced some spending cuts to reduce aggregate demand and infla- tionary pressures. The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) main- tained a target range for the federal funds rate of 0 to ¼ percent throughout the second half of 2010 and into 2011 (figure 58). In the statement accompanying each regularly scheduled FOMC meeting, the Committee noted that economic conditions, including low rates of resource utilization, subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations, were likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period. With the unemployment rate elevated and measures of underlying inflation somewhat low relative to levels that the Committee judged to be con- sistent, over the long run, with its dual mandate of maximum employment and price stability, the FOMC took steps during the second half of 2010 to provide additional monetary accommodation in order to pro- mote a stronger pace of economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, returns to levels consis- tent with its mandate. In August, the FOMC announced that it would keep constant the Federal Reserve’s holdings of longer-term securities at their then-current level by reinvesting principal payments from agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securi- ties (MBS) in longer-term Treasury securities. Then, in November, the FOMC announced that it intended to purchase an additional $600 billion of longer-term Treasury securities by the end of the second quarter of 2011. The Committee noted that it would regularly review the pace of its securities purchases and the over- all size of the asset purchase program in light of incoming information. The information reviewed at the August 10 FOMC meeting indicated that the pace of the economic recov- ery had slowed in recent months and that inflation remained subdued. Private employment had increased slowly in June and July, and industrial production was little changed in June after a large increase in May. Consumer spending continued to rise at a modest rate in June. However, housing activity dropped back, and nonresidential construction remained weak. In addi- tion, the trade deficit widened sharply in May. Condi- tions in financial markets had become somewhat more supportive of economic growth since the June meeting, in part reflecting perceptions of diminished risk of financial dislocations in Europe. Moreover, partici- 58. Selected interest rates, 2008–11 NOTE: The data are daily and extend through February 22, 2011. The 10-year Treasury rate is the constant-maturity yield based on the most actively traded securities. The dates on the horizontal axis are those of regularly scheduled Federal Open Market Committee meetings. pants saw some indications that credit conditions for households and smaller businesses were beginning to improve, albeit gradually. A further decline in energy prices and unchanged prices for core goods and ser- vices led to a fall in headline consumer prices in June. Against this backdrop, the Committee agreed to make no change in its target range for the federal funds rate at the August meeting. The economic expansion was seen as continuing, and most members believed that inflation was likely to stabilize in coming quarters at rates near recent low readings and then gradually rise toward levels they considered more consistent with the Committee’s dual mandate. Nonetheless, members generally judged that the economic outlook had soft- ened somewhat more than they had anticipated, and some saw increased downside risks to the outlook for both economic growth and inflation. The Committee noted that the decline in mortgage rates since the spring was generating increased mortgage refinancing activity, which would accelerate repayments of princi- pal on MBS held in the System Open Market Account (SOMA), and that private investors would have to hold more longer-term securities as the Federal Reserve’s holdings ran off, making longer-term interest rates somewhat higher than they would have been otherwise. The Committee concluded that it would be appropriate to begin reinvesting principal payments received from agency debt and MBS held in the SOMA by purchas- ing longer-term Treasury securities; such an action would keep constant the face value of securities held in the SOMA and thus avoid the upward pressure on longer-term interest rates that might result if those holdings were allowed to decline. As of the September 21 FOMC meeting, the data continued to suggest that the economic expansion was decelerating and that inflation remained low. Private businesses increased employment modestly in August, but the length of the workweek was unchanged and the unemployment rate remained elevated. The rise in business outlays for equipment and software seemed to have moderated following outsized gains in the first half of the year. Housing activity weakened further, and nonresidential construction remained depressed. Industrial production advanced at a solid pace in July and rose further in August. Consumer spending con- tinued to increase at a moderate rate in July and appeared to be moving up again in August. After fall- ing in the previous three months, headline consumer prices had risen in July and August as energy prices retraced some of their earlier declines, and prices for core goods and services edged up slightly. Credit was viewed by participants as remaining readily available for larger corporations with access to capital markets, and some reports suggested that credit conditions had begun to improve for smaller firms. Asset prices had been relatively sensitive to incoming economic data over the intermeeting period but generally ended the period little changed on net. Stresses in European financial markets were seen by participants as broadly contained but were thought to bear watching going forward. Although participants did not expect that the economy would reenter a recession, many expressed concern that output growth, and the associated prog- ress in reducing the level of unemployment, could be slow for some time. Participants noted a number of factors that were restraining economic growth, includ- ing low levels of household and business confidence, heightened risk aversion, and the still-weak financial conditions of some households and small businesses. The Committee agreed at the September meeting to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate of 0 to ¼ percent and to leave unchanged the level of its combined holdings of Treasury securities, agency debt, and agency MBS in the SOMA. In addition, members agreed that the statement to be released following the meeting should be adjusted to clarify their assessment that underlying inflation had been running below levels that the Committee judged to be consistent with its dual mandate for maximum employment and price stability. The clarification was intended, in part, to help anchor inflation expectations and to reinforce the indication that economic conditions were likely to war- rant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period. In light of the considerable uncertainty about the trajectory of the economy, mem- bers saw merit in accumulating further information before reaching a decision about providing additional monetary stimulus. In addition, members wanted to consider further the most effective framework for cali- brating and communicating any additional steps to provide such stimulus. They noted that unless the pace of economic recovery strengthened or underlying infla- tion moved up toward levels consistent with the FOMC’s mandate, the Committee would consider tak- ing appropriate action soon. On October 15, the Committee met by videoconfer- ence to discuss issues associated with its monetary policy framework, including alternative ways to express and communicate the Committee’s objectives, possi- bilities for supplementing the Committee’s communi- cation about its policy decisions, the merits of making smaller and more-frequent adjustments in the Federal Reserve’s intended securities holdings rather than larger and less-frequent adjustments, and the potential costs and benefits of targeting a term interest rate. The agenda did not encompass consideration of any policy actions, and none were taken. The information reviewed at the November 2–3 FOMC meeting continued to indicate that the eco- nomic recovery was proceeding at a modest rate, with only a gradual improvement in labor market condi- tions. Moreover, measures of underlying inflation were somewhat low relative to levels that the Committee judged to be consistent, over the longer run, with its dual mandate. Consumer spending, business invest- ment in equipment and software, and exports posted further gains in the third quarter, and nonfarm inven- tory investment stepped up. However, construction activity in both the residential and nonresidential sec- tors remained depressed, and a significant portion of the rise in domestic demand was again met by imports. U.S. industrial production slowed noticeably in August and September, hiring remained modest, and the unemployment rate stayed elevated. While participants considered it quite unlikely that the economy would slide back into recession, they noted that continued slow growth and high levels of resource slack could leave the economic expansion vulnerable to negative shocks. Participants saw financial conditions as having become more supportive of economic growth over the course of the intermeeting period; most, though not all, of the change appeared to reflect investors’ increased anticipation of a further easing of monetary policy. Headline consumer price inflation had been subdued in recent months, despite a rise in energy prices, as core consumer price inflation trended lower. Though the economic recovery was continuing, FOMC members considered progress toward meeting the Committee’s dual mandate of maximum employ- ment and price stability as having been disappointingly slow. Moreover, members generally thought that prog- ress was likely to remain slow. Accordingly, most mem- bers judged it appropriate to provide additional policy accommodation. In their discussion of monetary policy for the period immediately ahead, Committee members agreed to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and to continue the Committee’s existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its securities holdings into longer-term Treasury securities. The Committee also announced its intention to purchase a further $600 billion of longer- term Treasury securities at a pace of about $75 billion per month through the second quarter of 2011. Pur- chases of additional Treasury securities were expected to put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, boost asset prices, and lead to a modest reduc- tion in the foreign exchange value of the dollar. These changes in financial conditions were expected to pro- mote a somewhat stronger recovery in output and employment while also helping return inflation, over time, to levels consistent with the Committee’s mandate. The data presented at the December 14 FOMC meeting indicated that economic activity was increas- ing at a moderate rate but that the unemployment rate remained elevated. The pace of consumer spending picked up in October and November, exports rose rap- idly in October, and the recovery in business spending on equipment and software appeared to be continuing. In contrast, residential and nonresidential construction activity was still depressed. Manufacturing production registered a solid gain in October. Nonfarm businesses continued to add workers in October and November, and the average workweek moved up. The fiscal pack- age agreed to by the Administration and the Congress was generally expected by participants to support the pace of recovery in 2011. Participants noted that inter- est rates at intermediate and longer maturities had risen substantially over the intermeeting period, while credit spreads were roughly unchanged and equity prices had risen moderately. Financial pressures in peripheral Europe had increased, leading to a financial assistance package for Ireland. Longer-run inflation expectations were stable, but core inflation continued to trend lower. Overall, the information received dur- ing the intermeeting period pointed to some improve- ment in the near-term outlook, and participants expected economic growth to pick up somewhat going forward. A number of factors, however, were seen as likely to continue restraining the recovery, including the depressed housing market, employers’ continued reluctance to add to payrolls, and ongoing efforts by some households and businesses to reduce leverage. Moreover, the recovery remained subject to some downside risks, such as the possibility of a more extended period of weak activity and lower prices in the housing sector as well as potential financial and economic spillovers if the banking and sovereign debt problems in Europe were to worsen further. Members noted that, while incoming information over the intermeeting period had increased their confi- dence that the economic recovery would be sustained, progress toward the Committee’s dual objectives of maximum employment and price stability continued to be modest, and unemployment and inflation appeared likely to deviate from the Committee’s objectives for some time. Accordingly, in their discussion of mon- etary policy for the period immediately ahead, Com- mittee members agreed to continue expanding the Fed- eral Reserve’s holdings of longer-term securities as announced in November. The Committee also decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and to reiterate its expectation that economic conditions were likely to warrant exception- ally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period. While the economic outlook was seen as improving, members generally felt that the change in the outlook was not sufficient to warrant any adjust- ments to the asset purchase program, and some noted that more time was needed to accumulate information on the economy before considering any adjustment. Members emphasized that the pace and overall size of the purchase program would be contingent on eco- nomic and financial developments; however, some indi- cated that they had a fairly high threshold for making changes to the program. extension through August 1, 2011, of its temporary U.S. dollar liquidity swap arrangements with the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the European Cen- tral Bank, the Bank of Japan, and the Swiss National Bank. The authorization of the swap arrangements had previously been set to expire on January 31, 2011. The data reviewed at the January 25–26 FOMC meeting indicated that the economic recovery was gaining a firmer footing, though the expansion had not yet been sufficient to bring about a significant improvement in labor market conditions. Consumer spending had risen strongly late in 2010, and the ongo- ing expansion in business outlays for equipment and software appeared to have been sustained in recent months. Industrial production had increased solidly in November and December. However, construction activity in both the residential and nonresidential sec- tors remained weak. Modest gains in employment had continued, but the unemployment rate remained elevated. Conditions in financial markets were viewed by participants as having improved somewhat further over the intermeeting period, as equity prices had risen and credit spreads on the debt of nonfinancial corpo- rations had continued to narrow while yields on longer-term nominal Treasury securities were little changed. Credit conditions were still tight for smaller, bank-dependent firms, although bank loan growth had picked up in some sectors. Despite further increases in commodity prices, measures of underlying inflation remained subdued and longer-run inflation expecta- tions were stable. The information received over the intermeeting period had increased members’ confidence that the economic recovery would be sustained, and the down- side risks to both economic growth and inflation were viewed as having diminished. Nevertheless, members noted that the pace of the recovery was insufficient to bring about a significant improvement in labor market conditions, and that measures of underlying inflation were trending downward. Moreover, the economic pro- jections submitted for this meeting indicated that unemployment was expected to remain above, and inflation to remain somewhat below, levels consistent with the Committee’s objectives for some time. Accordingly, the Committee decided to maintain its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its securities holdings and reaffirmed its intention to purchase $600 billion of longer-term Treasury securi- ties by the end of the second quarter of 2011. Mem- bers emphasized that the Committee would continue to regularly review the pace of its securities purchases and the overall size of the asset purchase program. In addition, the Committee maintained the target range of 0 to ¼ percent for the federal funds rate and reiter- ated its expectation that economic conditions were likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period. Although the FOMC continues to anticipate that eco- nomic conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period, ultimately the Federal Reserve will need to begin to tighten monetary conditions to prevent the development of inflationary pressures as the economy recovers. The Federal Reserve has the tools it needs to remove policy accommodation at the appropriate time. One tool is the interest rate paid on reserve balances. By increasing the rate paid on reserves, the Federal Reserve will be able to put significant upward pressure on short-term market interest rates because banks will not supply short-term funds to the money markets at rates significantly below what they can earn by simply leaving funds on deposit at the Federal Reserve Banks. Two other tools, executing term reverse repurchase agreements (RRPs) with the primary dealers and other counterparties and issuing term deposits to depository institutions through the Term Deposit Facility (TDF), can be used to reduce the large quantity of reserves held by the banking system; such a reduction would improve the Federal Reserve’s control of financial con- ditions by tightening the relationship between the interest rate paid on reserves and other short-term interest rates. The Federal Reserve could also reduce the quantity of reserves in the banking system by redeeming maturing and prepaid securities held by the Federal Reserve without reinvesting the proceeds or by selling some of its securities holdings. Bank of New York (FRBNY) conducted a series of small-scale triparty RRP transactions with primary dealers using all eligible collateral types, including, for the first time, agency debt and agency MBS from the SOMA portfolio.14 The Federal Reserve also con- ducted a series of small-scale triparty RRP transac- tions with a set of counterparties that had been expanded to include approved money market mutual funds, using Treasury securities, agency debt, and agency MBS as collateral. ized a program of regularly scheduled small-value offerings of term deposits under the TDF.15 The auc- tions, which are to occur about every other month, are intended to ensure the operational readiness of the TDF and to increase the familiarity of eligible partici- pants with the auction procedures. Since September, the Federal Reserve has conducted three auctions, each of which offered $5 billion in 28-day deposits. All of these auctions were well subscribed. Transparency is an essential principle of modern cen- tral banking because it appropriately contributes to the accountability of central banks to the government and the public and because it can enhance the effectiveness of central banks in achieving macroeconomic objec- tives. The Federal Reserve provides detailed informa- tion concerning the conduct of monetary policy.16 During the financial crisis, the Federal Reserve devel- oped a public website that contains extensive informa- tion on its credit and liquidity programs, and, in 2009, 14. In a triparty repurchase agreement, both parties to the agree- ment must have cash and collateral accounts at the same triparty agent, which is by definition also a clearing bank. The triparty agent will ensure that collateral pledged is sufficient and meets eligibility requirements, and all parties agree to use collateral prices supplied by the triparty agent. 15. A few TDF auctions had occurred previously, but they were 16. Immediately following each meeting, the FOMC releases a statement that lays out the rationale for the policy decision. Detailed minutes of each FOMC meeting are made public three weeks follow- ing the meeting. Lightly edited transcripts of FOMC meetings are released to the public with a five-year lag. FOMC statements, minutes, and transcripts, as well as other related information, are available on the Federal Reserve Board’s website. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Federal Open Market Committee,” webpage, www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/ fomc.htm. the Federal Reserve began issuing detailed monthly reports on these programs.17 Recently, the Federal Reserve has taken further steps to enhance its transparency and expand the amount of information it provides to the public. First, on Decem- ber 1, the Federal Reserve posted detailed information on its public website about the individual credit and other transactions conducted to stabilize markets dur- ing the financial crisis, restore the flow of credit to American families and businesses, and support eco- nomic recovery and job creation in the aftermath of the crisis.18 As mandated by the Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 (Dodd–Frank Act), transaction-level details from December 1, 2007, to July 21, 2010, were provided about entities that participated in the agency MBS pur- chase program, used Federal Reserve liquidity swap lines, borrowed through the Term Auction Facility, or received loans or other financial assistance through a program authorized under section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act. Many of these transactions were con- ducted through a variety of broad-based lending facili- ties and provided liquidity to financial institutions and markets through fully secured, mostly short-term loans. Other transactions involved purchases of agency MBS and supported mortgage and housing markets; these transactions lowered longer-term interest rates and fostered economic growth. Dollar liquidity swap lines with foreign central banks posed no financial risk to the Federal Reserve because the Federal Reserve’s counterparties were the foreign central banks them- selves, not the institutions to which the foreign central banks then lent the funds; these swap facilities helped stabilize dollar funding markets abroad, thus contrib- uting to the restoration of stability in U.S. markets. Other transactions provided liquidity to particular institutions whose disorderly failure could have severely stressed an already fragile financial system. A second step toward enhanced transparency involves disclosures going forward. The Dodd–Frank Act established a framework for the disclosure of information on credit extended after July 21, 2010, through the discount window under section 10B of the Federal Reserve Act or from a section 13(3) facility, as 17. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Credit and Liquidity Programs and the Balance Sheet,” webpage, www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/bst.htm; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Monthly Report on Credit and Liquidity Programs and the Balance Sheet,” webpage, www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/clbsreports.htm. 18. These data are available at Board of Governors of the Federal well as information on all open market operation (OMO) transactions. Generally, this framework requires the Federal Reserve to publicly disclose cer- tain information about discount window borrowers and OMO counterparties approximately two years after the relevant loan or transaction; information about borrowers under future section 13(3) facilities will be disclosed one year after the authorization for the facility is terminated. The information to be dis- closed includes the name and identifying details of each borrower or counterparty, the amount borrowed, the interest rate paid, and information identifying the types and amounts of collateral pledged or assets transferred in connection with the borrowing or transaction. Finally, the Federal Reserve has also increased trans- parency with respect to the implementation of mon- etary policy. In particular, the Federal Reserve took steps to provide additional information about its secu- rity purchase operations with the objective of encour- aging wider participation in such operations. The FRBNY publishes, on an ongoing basis, schedules of purchase operations expected to take place over the next four weeks; details provided include lists of operation dates, settlement dates, security types to be purchased, the maturity date range of eligible issues, and an expected range for the size of each operation. Results of each purchase operation are published shortly after it has concluded. In addition, the FRBNY has commenced publication of information on the prices paid for individual securities in its pur- chase operations.19 19. General information on OMOs, including links to the prices paid in recent purchases of Treasury securities, is available on the FRBNY’s website at www.newyorkfed.org/markets/pomo/display/ index.cfm. The following material appeared as an addendum to the minutes of the January 25–26, 2011, meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee. In conjunction with the January 25–26, 2011, Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting, the mem- bers of the Board of Governors and the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks, all of whom participate in the deliberations of the FOMC, submitted projections for growth of real output, the unemployment rate, and inflation for the years 2011 to 2013 and over the longer run. The projections were based on information avail- able through the end of the meeting and on each par- ticipant’s assumptions about factors likely to affect economic outcomes, including his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy. “Appropriate monetary policy” is defined as the future path of policy that each participant deems most likely to foster outcomes for economic activity and inflation that best satisfy his or her interpretation of the Federal Reserve’s dual objec- tives of maximum employment and stable prices. Longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge over time under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks. As depicted in figure 1, FOMC participants’ projec- tions for the next three years indicated that they expect a sustained recovery in real economic activity, marked by a step-up in the rate of increase in real gross domes- tic product (GDP) in 2011 followed by further modest acceleration in 2012 and 2013. They anticipated that, over this period, the pace of the recovery would exceed their estimates of the longer-run sustainable rate of increase in real GDP by enough to gradually lower the unemployment rate. However, by the end of 2013, par- ticipants projected that the unemployment rate would still exceed their estimates of the longer-run unemploy- ment rate. Most participants expected that inflation would likely move up somewhat over the forecast period but would remain at rates below those they see as consistent, over the longer run, with the Commit- tee’s dual mandate of maximum employment and price stability. As indicated in table 1, relative to their previous pro- jections in November 2010, participants anticipated somewhat more rapid growth in real GDP this year, but they did not significantly alter their expectations for the pace of the expansion in 2012 and 2013 or for the longer run. Participants made only minor changes to their forecasts for the path of the unemployment Longer run Longer run                                                           NOTE: Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP) and in inflation are from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. PCE inflation and core PCE inflation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) and the price index for PCE excluding food and energy. Projections for the unemployment rate are for the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indi- cated. Each participant’s projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy. Longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. The November pro- jections were made in conjunction with the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on November 2–3, 2010. 1. The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each year. 2. The range for a variable in a given year consists of all participants’ projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year. 3. Longer-run projections for core PCE inflation are not collected. Figure 1. Central tendencies and ranges of economic projections, 2011–13 and over the longer run Longer run Longer run Longer run NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the notes to table 1. The data for the actual values of the variables are annual. The data for the change in real GDP, PCE inflation, and core PCE inflation shown for 2010 incorporate the advance estimate of GDP for the fourth quarter of 2010, which the Bureau of Economic Analysis released on January 28, 2011. This information was not available to FOMC meeting participants at the time of their meeting. rate and for the rate of inflation over the next three years. Although most participants anticipated that the economy would likely converge to sustainable rates of increase in real GDP and prices over five or six years, a number of participants indicated that they expected that the convergence of the unemployment rate to its longer-run level would require additional time. As they did in November, participants judged the level of uncertainty associated with their projections for real economic activity and inflation as unusually high relative to historical norms. Most continued to see the risks surrounding their forecasts of GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation over the next three years to be generally balanced. However, fewer noted downside risks to the likely pace of the expan- sion and, accordingly, upside risks to the unemploy- ment rate than in November; fewer also saw downside risks to inflation. The central tendency of participants’ forecasts for the change in real GDP in 2011 was 3.4 to 3.9 percent, somewhat higher than in the November projections. Participants stated that the economic information received since November indicated that consumer spending, business investment, and net exports increased more strongly at the end of 2010 than expected earlier; industrial production also expanded more rapidly than they previously anticipated. In addi- tion, after the November projections were prepared, the Congress approved fiscal stimulus measures that were expected to provide further impetus to household and business spending in 2011. Moreover, participants noted that financial conditions had improved since November, including a rise in equity prices, a pickup in activity in capital markets, reports of easing of credit conditions in some markets, and an upturn in bank lending in some sectors. Many participants viewed the stronger tenor of the recent information, along with the additional fiscal stimulus, as suggesting that the recovery had gained some strength—a development seen as likely to carry into 2011—and that the expan- sion was on firmer footing. Participants expected that the expansion in real economic activity this year would continue to be supported by accommodative monetary policy and by ongoing improvement in credit and financial market conditions. The strengthening in pri- vate demand was anticipated to be led by increases in consumer and business spending; over time, improve- ments in household and business confidence and in labor market conditions would likely reinforce the rise in domestic demand. Nonetheless, participants recog- nized that the information available since November also indicated that the expansion remained uneven across sectors of the economy, and they expected that the pace of economic activity would continue to be moderated by the weakness in residential and nonresi- dential construction, the still relatively tight credit con- ditions in some sectors, an ongoing desire by house- holds to repair their balance sheets, business caution about hiring, and the budget difficulties faced by state and local governments. Participants expected that the economic expansion would strengthen further in 2012 and 2013, with the central tendencies of their projections for the growth in real GDP moving up to 3.5 to 4.4 percent in 2012 and then to 3.7 to 4.6 percent in 2013. Participants cited, as among the likely contributors to a sustained pickup in the pace of the expansion, a continued improvement in financial market conditions, further expansion of credit availability to households and businesses, increasing household and business confidence, and a favorable outlook for U.S. exports. Several participants noted that, in such an environment, and with labor market conditions anticipated to improve gradually, the restraints on household spending from past declines in wealth and the desire to rebuild savings should abate. A number of participants saw such con- ditions fostering a broader and stronger recovery in business investment, with a few noting that the market for commercial real estate had recently shown signs of stabilizing. Nonetheless, participants saw a number of factors that would likely continue to moderate the pace of the expansion. Most participants expected that the recovery in the housing market would remain slow, restrained by the overhang of vacant properties, pros- pects for weak house prices, and the difficulties in resolving foreclosures. In addition, some participants expected that the fiscal strains on the budgets of state and local governments would damp their spending for a time and that the federal government sector would likely be a drag on economic activity after 2011. Participants anticipated that a gradual but steady reduction in the unemployment rate would accompany the pickup in the pace of the economic expansion over the next three years. The central tendency of their fore- casts for the unemployment rate at the end of 2011 was 8.8 to 9.0 percent—a decline of less than 1 percentage point from the actual rate in the fourth quarter of 2010. Although participants generally expected further declines in the unemployment rate over the subsequent two years—to a central tendency of 6.8 to 7.2 percent at the end of 2013—they anticipated that, at the end of that period, unemployment would remain noticeably higher than their estimates of the longer-run rate. Many participants thought that, with appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks, the unemployment rate would continue to converge gradually toward its longer-run rate within five to six years, but a number of participants indicated that the convergence process would likely be more extended. While participants viewed the projected pace of the expansion in economic activity as the principal factor underlying their forecasts for the path of the unem- ployment rate, they also indicated that their projections were influenced by a number of other factors that were likely to contribute to a relatively gradual recovery in the labor market. In that regard, several participants noted that dislocations associated with the uneven recovery across sectors of the economy might retard the matching of workers and jobs. In addition, a number of participants viewed the modest pace of hiring in 2010 as, in part, the result of business caution about the durability of the recovery and of employers’ efforts to achieve additional increases in productivity; several participants also cited the particularly slow recovery in demand experienced by small businesses as a factor restraining new job creation. With demand expected to strengthen across a range of businesses and with busi- ness confidence expected to improve, participants antic- ipatedthathiringwouldpickupovertheforecastperiod. Participants continued to expect that inflation would be relatively subdued over the next three years and kept their longer-run projections of inflation unchanged. Many participants indicated that the per- sistence of large margins of slack in resource utiliza- tion should contribute to relatively low rates of infla- tion over the forecast horizon. In addition, participants noted that appropriate monetary policy, combined with stable longer-run inflation expectations, should help keep inflation in check. The central tendency of their projections for overall personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation in 2011 was 1.3 to 1.7 percent, while the central tendency of their fore- casts for core PCE inflation was lower—1.0 to 1.3 per- cent. Increases in the prices of energy and other com- modities, which were very rapid in 2010, were anticipated to continue to push headline PCE inflation above the core rate this year. The central tendency of participants’ forecasts for inflation in 2012 and 2013 widened somewhat relative to 2011 and showed that inflation was expected to drift up modestly. In 2013, the central tendency of forecasts for both the total and core inflation rates was 1.2 to 2.0 percent. For most participants, inflation in 2013 was not expected to have converged to the longer-run rate of inflation that they individually considered most consistent with the Fed- Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges NOTE: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root mean squared error of projections for 1990 through 2009 that were released in the win- ter by various private and government forecasters. As described in the box “Fore- cast Uncertainty,” under certain assumptions, there is about a 70 percent probabil- ity that actual outcomes for real GDP, unemployment, and consumer prices will be in ranges implied by the average size of projection errors made in the past. Fur- ther information is in David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip (2007), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook from Historical Forecasting Errors,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2007-60 (Washington: Board of Gover- nors of the Federal Reserve System, November). 1. For definitions, refer to general note in table 1. 2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure that has been most widely used in government and private economic forecasts. Projection is per- cent change, fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. eral Reserve’s dual mandate for maximum employment and stable prices. However, a number of participants anticipatedthatinflationwouldreachitslonger-runrate within the next three years. Most participants continued to share the view that their projections for economic activity and inflation were subject to a higher level of uncertainty than was the norm during the previous 20 years.20 They identi- fied a number of uncertainties that compounded the inherent difficulties in forecasting output growth, unemployment, and inflation. Among them were uncertainties about the nature of economic recoveries from recessions associated with financial crises, the effects of unconventional monetary policies, the persis- tence of structural dislocations in the labor market, the future course of federal fiscal policy, and the global economic outlook. Almost all participants viewed the risks to their fore- casts for the strength of the recovery in real GDP as broadly balanced. By contrast, in November, the distri- bution of views had been somewhat skewed to the downside. In weighing the risks to the projected growth rate of real economic activity, some participants noted the upside risk that the recent strengthening of aggre- 20. Table 2 provides estimates of forecast uncertainty for the change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, and total consumer price inflation over the period from 1990 to 2009. At the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty” discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty in the economic forecasts and explains the approach used to assess the uncertainty and risks attending the participants’ projections. gate spending might mark the beginning of a more normal cyclical rebound in economic activity in which consumer spending might be spurred by pent-up demand for household durables and in which business investment might be accelerated by the desire to rebuild stocks of fixed capital. A more-rapid-than- expected easing of credit availability was also seen as a factor that might boost the pickup in private demand. As to the downside risks, many participants pointed to the recent declines in house prices and the potential for a slower resolution of existing problems in mortgage and real estate markets as factors that could have more-adverse-than-expected consequences for house- hold spending and bank balance sheets. In addition, several participants expressed concerns that, in an envi- ronment of only gradual improvement in labor market and credit conditions, households might be unusually focused on reducing debt and boosting saving. A num- ber of participants also saw a downside risk in the pos- sibility that the fiscal problems of some state and local governments might lead to a greater retrenchment in their spending than currently anticipated. Finally, sev- eral participants expressed concerns that the financial and fiscal strains in the euro area might spill over to U.S. financial markets. The risks surrounding participants’ forecasts of the unemployment rate were also broadly balanced and generally reflected the risks attending participants’ views of the likely strength of the expansion in real activity. However, a number of participants noted that the unemployment rate might decline less than they projected if businesses were to remain hesitant to expand their workforces because of uncertainty about the durability of the expansion or about employment costs or if mismatches of workers and jobs were more persistent than anticipated. Most participants judged the risks to their inflation outlook over the period from 2011 to 2013 to be broadly balanced as well. Compared with their views in November, several participants no longer saw the risks as tilted to the downside, and an additional participant viewed the risks as weighted to the upside. In assessing the risks, a number of participants indicated that they saw the risks of deflation or further unwanted disinfla- tion to have diminished. Many participants identified the persistent gap between their projected unemploy- ment rate and its longer-run rate as a risk that inflation could be lower than they projected. A few of those who indicated that inflation risks were skewed to the upside expressed concerns that the expansion of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet, if left in place for too long, might erode the stability of longer-run inflation expectations. Alternatively, several participants noted that upside risks to inflation could arise from persis- tently rapid increases in the costs of energy and other commodities. Figures 2.A and 2.B detail the diversity of partici- pants’ views regarding the likely outcomes for real GDP growth and the unemployment rate in 2011, 2012, 2013, and over the longer run. The dispersion in these projections reflected differences in participants’ assessments of many factors, including the likely evolu- tion of conditions in credit and financial markets, the timing and the degree to which various sectors of the economy and the labor market will recover from the dislocations associated with the deep recession, the outlook for economic and financial developments abroad, and appropriate future monetary policy and its effects on economic activity. For 2011 and 2012, the dispersions of participants’ forecasts for the strength in the expansion of real GDP and for the unemployment rate were somewhat narrower than they were last November, while the ranges of views for 2013 and for the longer run were little changed. Figures 2.C and 2.D provide the corresponding information about the diversity of participants’ views regarding the outlook for total and core PCE inflation. These distributions were somewhat more tightly con- centrated for 2011, but for 2012 and 2013, they were much the same as they were in November. In general, the dispersion in the participants’ inflation forecasts for the next three years represented differences in judg- ments regarding the fundamental determinants of inflation, including estimates of the degree of resource slack and the extent to which such slack influences inflation outcomes and expectations as well as esti- mates of how the stance of monetary policy may influ- ence inflation expectations. Although the distributions of participants’ inflation forecasts for 2011 through 2013 continued to be relatively wide, the distribution of projections of the longer-run rate of overall inflation remained tightly concentrated. The narrow range illus- trates the broad similarity in participants’ assessments of the approximate level of inflation that is consistent with the Federal Reserve’s dual objectives of maximum employment and price stability. Figure 2.A. Distribution of participants’ projections for the change in real GDP, 2011–13 and over the longer run Longer run NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. Figure 2.B. Distribution of participants’ projections for the unemployment rate, 2011–13 and over the longer run Longer run NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. Figure 2.C. Distribution of participants’ projections for PCE inflation, 2011–13 and over the longer run Longer run NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. The economic projections provided by the mem- bers of the Board of Governors and the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks inform discussions of monetary policy among policymakers and can aid public understanding of the basis for policy actions. Considerable uncertainty attends these projections, however. The economic and statistical models and relationships used to help produce economic forecasts are necessarily imperfect descriptions of the real world. And the future path of the economy can be affected by myriad unfore- seen developments and events. Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, participants consider not only what appears to be the most likely eco- nomic outcome as embodied in their projections, but also the range of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of their occurring, and the potential costs to the economy should they occur. Table 2 summarizes the average historical accu- racy of a range of forecasts, including those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports and those prepared by Federal Reserve Board staff in advance of meetings of the Federal Open Market Commit- tee. The projection error ranges shown in the table illustrate the considerable uncertainty associated with economic forecasts. For example, suppose a participant projects that real gross domestic prod- uct (GDP) and total consumer prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty attending those projections is similar to that experienced in the past and the risks around the projections are broadly balanced, the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a probability of about 70 percent that actual GDP would expand within a range of 1.7 to 4.3 percent in the current year, 1.3 to 4.7 percent in the second year, and 1.2 to 4.8 percent in the third year. The corresponding 70 percent confidence intervals for overall inflation would be 1.0 to 3.0 percent in the current and second years, and 0.9 to 3.1 percent in the third year. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over history, partici- pants provide judgments as to whether the uncer- tainty attached to their projections of each variable is greater than, smaller than, or broadly similar to typical levels of forecast uncertainty in the past as shown in table 2. Participants also provide judg- ments as to whether the risks to their projections are weighted to the upside, are weighted to the downside, or are broadly balanced. That is, partici- pants judge whether each variable is more likely to be above or below their projections of the most likely outcome. These judgments about the uncer- tainty and the risks attending each participant’s pro- jectionsaredistinctfromthediversityofparticipants’ views about the most likely outcomes. Forecast uncertainty is concerned with the risks associated with a particular projection rather than with diver- gences across a number of different projections. emerging market economy London interbank offered rate limited liability company The Board of Governors is pleased to submit its Monetary Policy Report pursuant to section 2B of the Federal Reserve Act. Statement on Longer-run goaLS and monetary PoLicy Strategy Adopted effective January 24, 2012; as amended effective January 29, 2019 The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) is firmly committed to fulfilling its statutory mandate from the Congress of promoting maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates. The Committee seeks to explain its monetary policy decisions to the public as clearly as possible. Such clarity facilitates well-informed decisionmaking by households and businesses, reduces economic and financial uncertainty, increases the effectiveness of monetary policy, and enhances transparency and accountability, which are essential in a democratic society. Inflation, employment, and long-term interest rates fluctuate over time in response to economic and financial disturbances. Moreover, monetary policy actions tend to influence economic activity and prices with a lag. Therefore, the Committee’s policy decisions reflect its longer-run goals, its medium- term outlook, and its assessments of the balance of risks, including risks to the financial system that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. The inflation rate over the longer run is primarily determined by monetary policy, and hence the Committee has the ability to specify a longer-run goal for inflation. The Committee reaffirms its judgment that inflation at the rate of 2 percent, as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, is most consistent over the longer run with the Federal Reserve’s statutory mandate. The Committee would be concerned if inflation were running persistently above or below this objective. Communicating this symmetric inflation goal clearly to the public helps keep longer-term inflation expectations firmly anchored, thereby fostering price stability and moderate long-term interest rates and enhancing the Committee’s ability to promote maximum employment in the face of significant economic disturbances. The maximum level of employment is largely determined by nonmonetary factors that affect the structure and dynamics of the labor market. These factors may change over time and may not be directly measurable. Consequently, it would not be appropriate to specify a fixed goal for employment; rather, the Committee’s policy decisions must be informed by assessments of the maximum level of employment, recognizing that such assessments are necessarily uncertain and subject to revision. The Committee considers a wide range of indicators in making these assessments. Information about Committee participants’ estimates of the longer-run normal rates of output growth and unemployment is published four times per year in the FOMC’s Summary of Economic Projections. For example, in the most recent projections, the median of FOMC participants’ estimates of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment was 4.4 percent. In setting monetary policy, the Committee seeks to mitigate deviations of inflation from its longer-run goal and deviations of employment from the Committee’s assessments of its maximum level. These objectives are generally complementary. However, under circumstances in which the Committee judges that the objectives are not complementary, it follows a balanced approach in promoting them, taking into account the magnitude of the deviations and the potentially different time horizons over which employment and inflation are projected to return to levels judged consistent with its mandate. The Committee intends to reaffirm these principles and to make adjustments as appropriate at its annual organizational meeting each January. Note: The Committee did not reaffirm this statement in January 2020 in light of its ongoing review of its monetary policy strategy, tools, and communications practices. This statement is a reprint of the statement affirmed in January 2019. Disparities in Job Loss during the Pandemic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 Federal Fiscal Policy Response to COVID-19 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 Small Businesses during the COVID-19 Crisis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24 Developments Related to Financial Stability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30 Policy Response to COVID-19 in Foreign Economies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38 Federal Reserve Actions to Ensure Smooth Functioning of Treasury and MBS Markets . . . . . . 45 Developments on the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50 note: This report reflects information that was publicly available as of 2 p.m. EDT on June 10, 2020. Unless otherwise stated, the time series in the figures extend through, for daily data, June 9, 2020; for monthly data, May 2020; and, for quarterly data, 2020:Q1. In bar charts, except as noted, the change for a given period is measured to its final quarter from the final quarter of the preceding period. For figures 16 and 31, note that the S&P 500 Index and the Dow Jones Bank Index are products of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates and have been licensed for use by the Board. Copyright © 2020 S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC, a division of S&P Global, and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Redistribution, reproduction, and/or photocopying in whole or in part are prohibited without written permission of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC. For more information on any of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC’s indices please visit www.spdji.com. S&P® is a registered trademark of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC, and Dow Jones® is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. Neither S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC, Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC, their affiliates nor their third party licensors make any representation or warranty, express or implied, as to the ability of any index to accurately represent the asset class or market sector that it purports to represent, and neither S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC, Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC, their affiliates nor their third party licensors shall have any liability for any errors, omissions, or interruptions of any index or the data included therein. summary The COVID-19 outbreak is causing tremendous human and economic hardship across the United States and around the world. The virus and the measures taken to protect public health have induced a sharp decline in economic activity and a surge in job losses, with the unemployment rate, which had been at a 50-year low, soaring to a postwar record high. Weaker demand and significantly lower oil prices are holding down consumer price inflation. The disruptions to economic activity here and abroad significantly affected financial conditions and impaired the flow of credit to U.S. households and businesses. In response to these developments, the Federal Reserve quickly lowered its policy rate to close to zero to support economic activity and took extraordinary measures to stabilize markets and bolster the flow of credit to households, businesses, and communities. Financial conditions have improved, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit. The Federal Reserve is committed to using its full range of tools to support the U.S. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum- employment and price-stability goals. Economic activity. In response to the public health emergency precipitated by the spread of COVID-19, many protective measures were adopted to limit the transmission of the virus. These social-distancing measures effectively closed parts of the economy, resulting in a sudden and unprecedented fall in economic activity and historic increases in joblessness. Although virus mitigation efforts in many places did not begin until the final two weeks of March, real personal consumption expenditures (PCE) plummeted 6.7 percent in March and an unprecedented 13.2 percent in April. Indicators suggest spending rose in May, but the April data and May indicators taken together point to a collapse in second-quarter real PCE. Likewise, in the housing market, residential sales and construction in April posted outsized declines that are close to some of the largest ever recorded, and heightened uncertainty and weak demand have led many businesses to put investment plans on hold or cancel them outright. These data, along with other information, suggest that real gross domestic product will contract at a rapid pace in the second quarter after tumbling at an annual rate of 5 percent in the first quarter of 2020. The labor market. The severe economic repercussions of the pandemic have been especially visible in the labor market. Since February, employers have shed nearly 20 million jobs from payrolls, reversing almost 10 years of job gains. The unemployment rate jumped from a 50-year low of 3.5 percent in February to a post–World War II high of 14.7 percent in April and then moved down to a still very elevated 13.3 percent in May. The most severe job losses have been sustained by those with lower earnings and by the socioeconomic groups that are disproportionately represented among low- wage jobs. Inflation. Consumer price inflation has slowed abruptly. The 12-month change in the price index for PCE was just 0.5 percent in April. The 12-month measure of PCE inflation that excludes food and energy items (so-called core inflation), which historically has been a better indicator of where overall inflation will be in the future than the total figure, fell from 1.8 percent in February to 1.0 percent in April. This slowing reflected monthly readings for March and April that were especially low because of large price declines in some categories most directly affected by social distancing. Overall inflation also has been held down by substantially lower energy prices, which more than offset the effects of surging prices for food. Despite the sharp slowing in inflation, survey-based measures of longer- run inflation expectations have generally been stable at relatively low levels. However, market- based measures of inflation compensation have moved down to some of the lowest readings ever seen. Financial conditions. In late February and over much of March as COVID-19 spread, equity prices plunged and nominal Treasury yields dropped substantially, with yields on longer-term securities reaching all-time record lows. Spreads of yields on corporate bonds over those on comparable-maturity Treasury securities widened significantly as the credit quality of firms declined and market functioning deteriorated; in addition, loans were unavailable for most firms, particularly firms below investment grade. At the most acute phase of this period, trading conditions became extremely illiquid and some critical markets stopped functioning properly. Consumer borrowing also fell as spending slumped. Several markets supporting consumer lending experienced severe strains around this period, including the agency residential mortgage-backed securities (MBS) market as well as the auto, credit card, and student loan securitization markets. In response, the Federal Reserve took unprecedented measures to restore smooth market functioning and to support the flow of credit in the economy, including the creation of a number of emergency credit and liquidity facilities.1 These actions, along with the aggressive response of fiscal policy, stabilized financial markets and led to a notable improvement in financial conditions for both firms and households as well as state and local governments. Even so, lending standards for both households and businesses have become less accommodative, and borrowing conditions are tight for low- rated households and businesses. established by the Federal Reserve in response to COVID-19 is available on the Board’s website at https:// www.federalreserve.gov/funding-credit-liquidity-and- loan-facilities.htm. Financial stability. The COVID-19 pandemic has abruptly halted large swaths of economic activity and led to swift financial repercussions. Despite increased resilience from the financial and regulatory reforms adopted since 2008, financial system vulnerabilities—most notably those associated with liquidity and maturity transformation in the nonbank financial sector—have amplified some of the economic effects of the pandemic. Accordingly, financial-sector vulnerabilities are expected to be significant in the near term. The strains on household and business balance sheets from the economic and financial shocks since March will likely create persistent fragilities. Financial institutions may experience strains as a result. The Federal Reserve, with approval of the Secretary of the Treasury, established new credit and liquidity facilities under section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act to alleviate severe dislocations that arose in a number of financial markets and to support the flow of credit to households, businesses, and state and local governments. Furthermore, as financial stresses abroad risked spilling over into U.S. credit markets, the Federal Reserve and several other central banks announced the expansion and enhancement of dollar liquidity swap lines. In addition, the Federal Reserve introduced a new temporary repurchase agreement facility for foreign monetary authorities. The Federal Reserve has also made a number of adjustments to its regulatory and supervisory regime to facilitate market functioning and reduce regulatory impediments to banks supporting households, businesses, and municipal customers affected by COVID-19. (See the box “Developments Related to Financial Stability” in Part 1.) International developments. The spread of COVID-19 throughout the world and the measures taken to contain it have produced devastating effects on the global economy. Amid widespread and stringent shutdowns, recent data suggest that global economic activity in the first half of the year has experienced a sharp and synchronized contraction greater than that in the Global Financial Crisis. The many mandated closures of nonessential businesses abroad and the collapse in consumer demand contributed to a significant deterioration in labor markets and subdued inflation. Unlike past recessions, services activity in the foreign economies has dropped more sharply than manufacturing, with restrictions on movement having severely curtailed spending on travel, tourism, restaurants, and recreation. Against this backdrop, foreign governments and central banks have responded strongly and swiftly to support incomes and to improve market liquidity and the provision of credit. More recently, economic activity has begun to revive in some foreign economies as authorities eased social-distancing restraints. The rapid spread of COVID-19 weighed heavily on global risk sentiment, with financial stresses intensifying and liquidity conditions deteriorating in many foreign financial markets. Aggressive fiscal and monetary policy responses in the United States and abroad, however, helped boost sentiment and improve market functioning. On balance, financial conditions abroad remain tighter than at the beginning of the year, especially in some emerging market economies. Since February, global equity prices moved lower, sovereign interest rates in the European periphery increased somewhat, and measures of sovereign spreads in emerging market economies widened significantly. In many advanced economies, long-term interest rates reached historically low levels. Easing monetary policy. In light of the effects of COVID-19 on economic activity and on risks to the outlook, the FOMC rapidly lowered the target range for the federal funds rate. Specifically, at two meetings in March, the FOMC lowered the target range for the federal funds rate by a total of 1½ percentage points, bringing it to the current range of 0 to ¼ percent. The Committee expects to maintain this target range until it is confident that the economy has weathered recent events and is on track to achieve its maximum-employment and price-stability goals. The Committee noted that it would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook, including information related to public health, as well as global developments and muted inflation pressures, and that it would use its tools and act as appropriate to support the economy. Safeguarding market functioning. Market functioning deteriorated in many markets in late February and much of March, including the critical Treasury and agency MBS markets. The Federal Reserve swiftly took a series of policy actions to address these developments. The FOMC announced it would purchase Treasury securities and agency MBS in the amounts needed to ensure smooth market functioning and the effective transmission of monetary policy to broader financial conditions. The Open Market Desk began offering large-scale overnight and term repurchase agreement operations. The Federal Reserve coordinated with other central banks to enhance the provision of liquidity via the standing U.S. dollar liquidity swap line arrangements and announced the establishment of temporary U.S. dollar liquidity arrangements (swap lines) with additional central banks. The Federal Reserve also established a temporary repurchase agreement facility for foreign and international monetary authorities. (Separately, the Board introduced several facilities with the backing of the U.S. Treasury to more directly support the flow of credit to the economy.) Since these policy actions were announced, the functioning of Treasury and MBS markets has gradually improved. (See the box “Federal Reserve Actions to Ensure Smooth Functioning of Treasury and MBS Markets” in Part 2.) Reflecting these policy responses, the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet increased significantly. (See the box “Developments on the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet” in Part 2.) Fed Listens. The Federal Reserve has released a report on its Fed Listens initiative. This initiative is part of a broad review of the monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices the Federal Reserve uses to pursue its statutory dual-mandate goals of maximum employment and price stability. A key component of the review was a series of public Fed Listens events aimed at consulting with a broad range of stakeholders in the U.S. economy on issues pertaining to the dual-mandate objectives. Disparities in job loss during the pandemic. The deterioration in labor market conditions since February has been sudden, severe, and widespread. At the same time, workers in some industries, occupations, demographic groups, and locations have experienced more significant employment declines than others. Although disparities in labor market outcomes often arise during recessions, factors unique to this episode have also contributed to the recent divergence. Job losses have been especially severe for those with lower earnings and for the socioeconomic groups that are disproportionately represented among low- wage jobs. (See the box “Disparities in Job Loss during the Pandemic” in Part 1.) Small businesses during the COVID-19 crisis. Small businesses make up nearly half of U.S. private-sector employment and play key roles in local communities. The pandemic poses acute risks to the survival of many small businesses. Their widespread failure would adversely alter the economic landscape of local communities and potentially slow the economic recovery and future labor productivity growth. The Congress, the Federal Reserve, and other federal agencies are making aggressive efforts to support small businesses. (See the box “Small Businesses during the COVID-19 Crisis” in Part 1.) Federal fiscal policy response to COVID-19. While the economic consequences resulting from the pandemic have been historically large, the amount of fiscal support that has been enacted constitutes the fastest and largest fiscal response to any postwar economic downturn. The pieces of legislation enacted since the arrival of the pandemic that have composed this response are expected to raise government outlays and reduce tax revenues by nearly $2 trillion in the current fiscal year. (See the box “Federal Fiscal Policy Response to COVID-19” in Part 1.) Policy response to COVID-19 in foreign economies. Authorities in many foreign economies have implemented fiscal, monetary, and regulatory measures to mitigate disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. Sizable fiscal packages targeted the sudden loss of income by firms and households. Actions by central banks, including purchases of sovereign and private bonds, have aimed to restore market functioning, sustain the provision of credit to businesses and households during the pandemic, and support the economic recovery. Regulatory changes have focused on ensuring that banks sustain their capacity to absorb pandemic-related losses while continuing to lend to households and firms. (See the box “Policy Response to COVID-19 in Foreign Economies” in Part 1.) The COVID-19 outbreak has led to an acute weakening in the labor market since February In response to the public health crisis caused by the spread of COVID-19, households, businesses, and governments took dramatic measures to slow the spread of the virus. As a result, many sectors of the economy were effectively closed from mid-March through April but have seen some gradual lifting of restrictions since then. The severity, scope, and speed of the ensuing downturn in economic activity have been significantly worse than any recession since World War II. After posting strong gains in both January and February, payroll employment plummeted by an unprecedented 22 million in March and April before adding back 2.5 million jobs in May (figure 1). The unemployment rate jumped to 14.7 percent in April, the highest level since the Great Depression. In May, the unemployment rate fell to 13.3 percent, which was almost 10 percentage points above the February level (figure 2). Although unemployment soared for all major racial and ethnic groups, the unemployment rate for Hispanics posted the largest increase over this period (figure 3). (For more discussion of the pandemic’s effects on the labor market, see the box “Disparities in Job Loss during the Pandemic.”) 1. Nonfarm payroll employment 2. Civilian unemployment rate Data received since the survey week for payroll employment in May suggest that job gains have continued.2 Although initial claims for 2. The Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) conducts a monthly survey, the Current Employment Statistics survey, to estimate payroll employment. In that survey, employers are asked to report the number of workers on their payrolls during the reference period, which is the pay period that includes the 12th of the month. The unemployment and labor force participation rates (along with other data) are estimated based on a separate monthly survey conducted by the Census Bureau for the BLS, the Current Population Survey, which references the week including the 12th of the month. 3. Unemployment rate, by race and ethnicity NOTE: Unemployment rate measures total unemployed as a percentage of the labor force. Persons whose ethnicity is identified as Hispanic or Latino may be of any race. The shaded bar with top cap indicates the period of the Great Recession as defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER). The NBER has determined that recent economic activity peaked in February 2020. SOURCE: Bureau of Labor Statistics via Haver Analytics. 4. Labor force participation rates and employment-to-population ratio unemployment insurance have remained high, it is unclear whether these new claims reflect additional large numbers of layoffs or that states are clearing their backlogs of applications. In addition, weekly employment data from the payroll processor ADP indicate that rehiring has continued and that payroll employment will likely move up again in June, albeit from what remains a very low level. The labor force participation rate (LFPR)— the share of the population that is either working or actively looking for work—fell from around 63½ percent early this year to 60.8 percent in May (figure 4). The May LFPR reading was one of the lowest since the early 1970s.3 Poor employment prospects or concerns about safety in the workplace might have caused some of the newly unemployed to exit the labor force or induced others to refrain from entering.4 However, with so much NOTE: The data are monthly. The prime-age labor force participation rate is a percentage of the population aged 25 to 54. The labor force participation rate and the employment-to-population ratio are percentages of the population aged 16 and over. 3. The LFPR in April, at 60.2 percent, was the lowest 4. Individuals who have been placed on temporary layoff or expect to be recalled are classified as in the labor force and unemployed. Recently, the BLS reported of the labor market shut in and most new hiring at a standstill, the distinction between being unemployed and out of the labor force likely has become especially blurred. The employment-to-population ratio for individuals 16 and over—the share of that segment of the population who are working— combines movements in both unemployment and labor force participation. This measure was 51.3 percent in April and 52.8 percent in May, the lowest readings in the history of this series, which began in 1948. Wages are likely being held down, although compositional shifts have temporarily boosted some wage measures While reliable data are limited, anecdotal evidence suggests that the economic downturn is putting downward pressure on wages. The series on wage growth computed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, which tracks the median 12-month wage growth of individuals reporting to the Current Population Survey, has changed little in recent months (figure 5).5 In contrast, measures that look at average wage costs have jumped because of compositional effects, as COVID-19 mitigation efforts and weaker demand have disproportionately affected lower-wage workers and left relatively more higher-wage workers on payrolls. Indeed, average hourly earnings from the payroll survey jumped 6.7 percent over the 12 months ending in May, largely reflecting this change in the composition of private payrolls. In the first quarter, both the employment cost index (ECI) and compensation per hour, which include both wages and benefits, posted moderate that a large number of job losers on temporary layoff improperly classified themselves as being “employed but on unpaid absence” in March, April, and May. If these respondents had correctly classified themselves as unemployed but on temporary layoff, the unemployment rate would have been 5 percentage points higher in April and 3 percentage points higher in May. 5. The Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta’s measure differs from others in that it measures the wage growth only of workers who were employed both in the current survey month and 12 months earlier. 5. Measures of change in hourly compensation NOTE: Business-sector compensation is on a 4-quarter percent change basis. For the private-sector employment cost index, change is over the 12 months ending in the last month of each quarter; for private-sector average hourly earnings, the data are 12-month percent changes and begin in March 2007; for the Atlanta Fed’s Wage Growth Tracker, the data are shown as a 3-month moving average of the 12-month percent change and extend through April 2020. groups, and locations, employment was substantially lower in May than in February. While job loss has been pervasive, some groups have experienced more severe employment declines than others, particularly workers with lower earnings and the socioeconomic groups that are disproportionately represented among low-wage jobs; employment declines have also been larger in some states than in others. Although disparities in labor market outcomes across groups often widen during recessions, certain factors unique to this episode—in particular, the social-distancing measures taken by households, businesses, and governments to limit in-person interactions—have contributed to the recent divergence. Because jobs differ in the degree to which they involve personal contact and physical proximity, in whether they provide an “essential function,” and in whether their business operations can be conducted remotely, social-distancing measures have had disparate consequences across industries and, in turn, on particular types of workers who tend to work in heavily affected industries. For example, the net proportion of jobs lost since February has been greater in industries such as accommodation and food services (where social-distancing regulations have severely affected many businesses and where workers are frequently unable to work from home) and smaller in industries such as professional and business services and fi nancial activities (where workers may be less affected by social distancing and are generally more able to conduct work from home).1 In keeping with this pattern, states that rely heavily on tourism—such as Hawaii and Nevada—saw exceptionally large increases in unemployment through April (the most recent month for which state unemployment rate data are available). large among lower-paid workers who may be less able to fi nancially weather an extended period of unemployment. Indeed, estimates of employment declines based on a worker’s previous wage (using data from the payroll provider ADP), shown in fi gure A, also indicate this disproportionate pattern of job loss. From February to mid-April, employment fell substantially more for workers who were previously earning wages in the bottom fourth of wage earners, compared with other workers. Despite somewhat more rapid job growth for lower-wage earners in subsequent weeks, employment for lower-wage earners remains roughly 35 percent lower than in February, compared with 5 to 15 percent lower employment for higher-wage earners. These differences are also consistent with results from a recent survey conducted by the Federal Reserve Board that indicated that among households with an annual income of $40,000 or less, nearly 40 percent of individuals who were employed in February experienced job loss in March or early April, compared with 20 percent of the population overall.2 Figure B illustrates that the decline in employment (as a fraction of the population) has also been especially large for people aged 16 to 24 compared with older workers, for people without a bachelor’s degree compared with those with at least a bachelor’s degree, and for Hispanics compared with other races and ethnicities. In addition, employment rates have dropped somewhat more for women than for men, and for Asians and African Americans compared with whites. In general, the groups with the larger employment declines are most commonly employed in the industries that have experienced the greatest net employment declines thus far, such as accommodation, food service, and retail trade; these demographic groups are also less likely to report being able to work from home. Net job loss since February thus far has been concentrated in lower-wage industries, suggesting that employment declines have been disproportionately 1. In May, employment in the accommodation and food service industry was 40 percent lower than in February. By contrast, employment in professional and business services was around 10 percent lower than in February, and employment in fi nancial activities was 3 percent lower. Responses to a 2017–18 survey by the U.S. Census Bureau indicated that less than 20 percent of workers in accommodation and food service reported being able to work from home, compared with more than 50 percent in professional and business services and fi nancial activities. See Bureau of Labor Statistics (2019), “Job Flexibilities and Work Schedules—2017–2018 Data from the American Time Use Survey,” press release, September 24, https://www.bls.gov/ news.release/pdf/flex2.pdf. unemployed and underemployed—both overall and for particularly hard-hit groups of workers—will largely depend on the course of the COVID-19 outbreak itself and on actions taken to halt its spread. Recent job losses differ from those of previous recessions not only in the suddenness and severity with which they occurred, but also in the unusually high share of (continued) 2. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2020), Report on the Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households in 2019, Featuring Supplemental Data from April 2020 (Washington: Board of Governors, May) https:// www.federalreserve.gov/publications/files/2019-report- economic-well-being-us-households-202005.pdf. NOTE: Data are weekly and extend through May 10, 2020. Wage quartiles are defined using the February wage distribution. workers who expect them to be temporary.3 Research has shown that workers who return to their previous employers after a temporary layoff tend to earn wages similar to what they were making previously, whereas laid-off workers who do not return to their previous employer experience a longer-lasting decline in earnings.4 If public health conditions improve quickly so that social-distancing measures can be further relaxed and consumers become more willing to engage in a wider range of commercial activities, 3. Among unemployed job losers surveyed in the Current Population Survey, fully 90 percent of those surveyed in mid-April reported that they expected to be recalled by their previous employer. This proportion declined slightly to 87 percent among those surveyed in mid-May. In addition, the Federal Reserve Board’s recent survey of U.S. households reports that around 90 percent of individuals who experienced job loss in March or early April said that their employer indicated that they would return to their job at some point; see Board of Governors, Report on the Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households in 2019, in box note 2. By comparison, the share of job losers who expected to be recalled by their previous employer never exceeded 50 percent at any point during the Great Recession. 4. See Louis S. Jacobson, Robert J. LaLonde, and Daniel G. Sullivan (1993), “Earnings Losses of Displaced Workers,” American Economic Review, vol. 83 (September), pp. 685–709; Shigeru Fujita and Giuseppe Moscarini (2017), “Recall and Unemployment,” American Economic Review, vol. 107 (December), pp. 3875–916; and Marta Lachowska, Alexandre Mas, and Stephen A. Woodbury (forthcoming), “Sources of Displaced Workers’ Long-Term Earnings Losses,” American Economic Review. Less than a high school diploma High school graduates, no college Some college or associate’s degree Bachelor’s degree and higher NOTE: The data are seasonally adjusted and represent the change from workers’ expectations of being recalled may prove true, and many recent job losses may turn out to be temporary layoffs from which workers can quickly recover. However, if economic activity remains weak for a prolonged period, businesses that had intended to reopen at full capacity may instead be compelled to shutter completely or to resume operations at a diminished scale, turning many temporary layoffs into permanent job losses. Perhaps refl ecting this possibility, the number of unemployed workers reporting that they had permanently separated from their previous employer rose by roughly 300,000 between April and May, even as the total number of unemployed persons began to decline. As lower-paid workers are disproportionately employed by small businesses—which typically have fewer fi nancial resources than larger fi rms—they may be at heightened risk of seeing their former employers shut down and hence experiencing the scarring effects of permanent separations.5 5. See Gregory Acs and Austin Nichols (2007), “Low- Income Workers and Their Employers: Characteristics and Challenges,” paper presented at “Public and Private Roles in the Workplace: What Are the Next Steps in Supporting Working Families?” a roundtable held at the Urban Institute, Washington, May 23, http://webarchive.urban.org /UploadedPDF/411532_low_income_workers.pdf; and Nicholas Bloom, Fatih Guvenen, Benjamin S. Smith, Jae Song, and Till von Wachter (2018), “The Disappearing Large-Firm Wage Premium,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, vol. 108 (May), pp. 317–22. 6. Change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures Trimmed mean Excluding food and energy NOTE: The data extend through April 2020. SOURCE: For trimmed mean, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas; for all gains, with neither series reflecting much of the pandemic’s repercussions.6 Price inflation has moved significantly lower As measured by the 12-month change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), inflation was just 0.5 percent in April, compared with 1.6 percent over the same period a year ago (figure 6). The abrupt slowing in total PCE price inflation this year partly reflects sharp declines in consumer energy prices that resulted from the collapse in oil prices. In contrast, food prices have moved higher despite declines in food commodity prices, likely reflecting higher demand at retail grocery stores in combination with pandemic- related supply chain issues. In addition to the drop in energy prices, the unprecedented reductions in demand for some services as a result of social distancing have led to sharp drops in prices for airfares and lodging away from home. These price declines led the 12-month measure of core PCE inflation—that is, inflation excluding volatile consumer food and energy prices—to move significantly lower, falling from 1.8 percent in February to just 1.0 percent in April, as the monthly readings for March and April were exceptionally low. An appreciation of the dollar has also contributed to the slowing in core inflation. The trimmed mean measure of PCE price inflation constructed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas provides an alternative way to purge measured inflation of transitory influences, and it is less sensitive than the core measure to extreme price movements such as the recent outsized swings in airfares and lodging.7 The 12-month change in this measure 6. The ECI references the March survey week, a period before most of the pandemic-induced layoffs. The wage component of compensation per hour also references the March survey week but was adjusted by the BLS with additional information to better capture job losses during the latter half of March. 7. The trimmed mean price index excludes whichever prices showed the largest increases or decreases in a given month. Over the past 20 years, changes in the trimmed edged down to 1.9 percent in April from 2.1 percent in February. Oil prices are notably lower this spring Against the backdrop of a global collapse in the demand for oil and a rapid increase in oil inventories, the Brent price of crude oil plunged from about $65 per barrel in early January to around $20 per barrel at the end of April (figure 7).8 More recently, prices have rebounded to about $40 per barrel, as an agreement between OPEC (Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries) and Russia to cut oil production by nearly 10 percent of global output appears to have taken effect. Additionally, the dramatic downturn in global oil demand appears to be abating as countries begin to ease their COVID-19 lockdown policies. The decline in oil prices has contributed to similar movements in retail gasoline prices, which have also fallen in recent months. Reported prices of imports other than energy fell After rising early this year, nonfuel import prices fell in April, as the dollar appreciated and the sharp decline in global demand put downward pressure on non-oil commodity prices—a substantial component of nonfuel import prices (figure 8). Prices of industrial metals fell sharply in the first months of the year but edged up in May, as economic activity in some economies began to revive. mean index have averaged about ¼ percentage point above core PCE inflation and 0.1 percentage point above total PCE inflation. 8. On April 20, the price of front-month oil futures contracts for West Texas Intermediate (WTI) closed at negative $38 per barrel. These WTI futures contracts are settled by physical delivery; as worries about the lack of available storage space intensified, prices spiraled downward. Few contracts were actually traded at these negative prices, and prices recovered in the following days. 7. Spot and futures prices for crude oil NOTE: The data are weekly averages of daily data. The weekly data begin on Thursdays and extend through June 3, 2020. 8. Nonfuel import prices and industrial metals indexes NOTE: The data for nonfuel import prices are monthly and extend through April 2020. The data for industrial metals are monthly averages of daily data and extend through May 31, 2020. 9. Surveys of inflation expectations NOTE: The series are medians of the survey responses. The Michigan survey data are monthly. The Survey of Professional Forecasters data for inflation expectations for personal consumption expenditures are quarterly, begin in 2007:Q1, and extend through 2020:Q2. The NY Fed survey data are monthly and begin in June 2013. 10. 5-to-10-year-forward inflation compensation NOTE: The data are weekly averages of daily data and extend through June 5, 2020. TIPS is Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities. However, survey-based measures of long-run inflation expectations have been broadly stable . . . Despite the tumultuous situation of recent months, survey-based measures of inflation expectations at medium- and longer-term horizons, which likely influence actual inflation by affecting wage- and price-setting decisions, so far have changed little (figure 9). In the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers, the median value for inflation expectations over the next 5 to 10 years was 2.7 percent in May and has fluctuated around 2½ percent since the end of 2016. In the Survey of Consumer Expectations, conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the median of respondents’ expected inflation rate three years ahead moved lower, on net, in the second half of last year and has averaged 2.5 percent since. In the Survey of Professional Forecasters, conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, the median expectation for the annual rate of increase in the PCE price index over the next 10 years edged down to 1.9 percent in the second-quarter survey, below the 2 percent level that had been reported for some time. . . . but market-based measures of inflation compensation are notably lower Market-based measures of inflation compensation can also be used to make inferences about inflation expectations. However, the inference is not straightforward because market-based measures can be importantly affected by changes in premiums that provide compensation for bearing inflation and liquidity risks. Measures of longer-term inflation compensation—derived either from differences between yields on nominal Treasury securities and those on comparable-maturity Treasury Inflation- Protected Securities (TIPS) or from inflation swaps—have decreased, on net, since the end of 2019 (figure 10). The 5-year and 5-to-10-year-forward measures of inflation compensation are about 60 basis points and 40 basis points lower, respectively, than at the beginning of the year.9 Both measures dropped sharply in March, with the 5-year measure reaching the lowest level since the Global Financial Crisis and the 5-to-10-year measure hitting new historical lows. These declines partly reflected a reduction in the relative liquidity of TIPS compared with nominal Treasury securities. As liquidity improved, inflation compensation partially retraced. The TIPS-based measure of 5-to-10-year-forward inflation compensation and the analogous measure from inflation swaps are now about 1½ percent and 1¾ percent, respectively.10 Real gross domestic product has contracted severely and with unprecedented speed After posting a moderate gain in 2019, real gross domestic product (GDP) fell at an annual rate of 5 percent in the first quarter, with that decline likely all occurring in the final weeks of the quarter (figure 11). In the second quarter, real GDP appears to be plummeting at a breathtaking pace. Indeed, many professional forecasters are projecting second-quarter real GDP to fall at an annual rate of 30 to 40 percent. This severe contraction reflects a steep drop in consumer spending associated with measures to contain the spreading virus. Uncertainty about the economic outlook also likely has pushed down business fixed investment, and events abroad have led to a steep drop in exports. In the manufacturing sector, output fell sharply in March and posted its largest decline on record in April as many factories closed temporarily for all or most of 9. Inflation compensation implied by the TIPS breakeven inflation rate is based on the difference, at comparable maturities, between yields on nominal Treasury securities and yields on TIPS, which are indexed to the total consumer price index (CPI). Inflation swaps are contracts in which one party makes payments of certain fixed nominal amounts in exchange for cash flows that are indexed to cumulative CPI inflation over some horizon. Inflation compensation derived from inflation swaps typically exceeds TIPS-based compensation, but week-to-week movements in the two measures are highly correlated. 10. As these measures are based on CPI inflation, one should probably subtract about ¼ percentage point—the average differential with PCE inflation over the past two decades—to infer inflation compensation on a PCE basis. 11. Change in real gross domestic product and gross domestic income 12. Change in real personal consumption expenditures and disposable personal income Personal consumption expenditures Disposable personal income NOTE: The values for 2020:H1 are the annualized April/Q4 changes. SOURCE: Bureau of Economic Analysis via Haver Analytics. 13. Personal saving rate NOTE: The data extend through April 2020. SOURCE: Bureau of Economic Analysis via Haver Analytics. NOTE: The data are monthly. SOURCE: University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers; Conference both months. This decrease in factory output included nearly all motor vehicle and civilian aircraft manufacturers. However, amid some easing of restrictions, there are signs that manufacturing activity moved up in May, partly as a result of the ramp-up in automotive production. Social distancing has led to a dramatic plunge in household spending and earnings After having increased at a solid 2.7 percent pace in 2019, real PCE fell at an annual rate of 6.8 percent in the first quarter of 2020, one of the largest quarterly drops in the history of this series (figure 12).11 As concerns about the virus outbreak grew and government restrictions mounted, real PCE collapsed, falling 6.7 percent in March and a record 13.2 percent in April. Although indicators point to an increase in May—which is consistent with some relaxation of government restrictions—taken together, the April data and May indicators point to an unprecedented decline in second-quarter consumer outlays. Real disposable personal income (DPI), a measure of households’ after-tax purchasing power, fell in the first quarter, mostly because of a drop in household income from wages and salaries. However, in April, real DPI jumped 13½ percent, pushing its April level up relative to the fourth quarter at an annual rate of more than 30 percent. Although aggregate earnings from employment collapsed in April, this income loss was more than offset by government income support from unemployment insurance and stimulus payments.12 With households unwilling or unable to spend a commensurate amount of their available aggregate income, the April saving rate shot up to 33 percent (figure 13). 11. Quarterly real PCE begins in the first quarter 12. These programs boosted aggregate DPI; however, the income of many individuals and households was lower in April than in February either because they did not qualify for benefits or because of delays between job loss and the receipt of those benefits. Consumer sentiment has tumbled . . . Households’ concerns about their economic situation, as reflected in consumer sentiment, may be leading them to save more for precautionary reasons. The University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers index of consumer sentiment dropped almost 29 points between February and May (figure 14), with declines in both the current and expected conditions indexes. The Conference Board survey measure in May also was down sharply from February, with respondents similarly grim about current prospects but somewhat more upbeat than in the Michigan survey about future conditions. . . . and overall household wealth fell in the first quarter In the first quarter, the ratio of aggregate household net worth to household income fell, driven by sharp declines in equity prices (figure 15). House prices—which tend to respond to economic developments more slowly than equity prices and are of particular importance for the value of assets held by a large portion of households—continued to increase in the first quarter and moved up further in April (figure 16). Since March, equity prices have posted sizable gains but are still below their February peak. Consumer lending standards have become less accommodative, but credit is still available to households with strong credit profiles Since the onset of the pandemic, consumer lending standards have become less accommodative on balance. Borrowing conditions are tight for individuals with low credit ratings, but credit remains available to those with strong credit profiles. Nevertheless, consumer borrowing has fallen as spending has slumped (figure 17). While banks have tightened lending standards on credit card and auto loans, according to the April Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS), captive auto lenders have rolled out generous loan incentives to boost 15. Wealth-to-income ratio NOTE: The series is the ratio of household net worth to disposable incorporates preliminary 16. Prices of existing single-family houses NOTE: The data for the S&P/Case-Shiller index extend through March 2020. The data for the Zillow index and CoreLogic index extend through April 2020. SOURCE: CoreLogic Home Price Index; Zillow; S&P/Case-Shiller U.S. National Home Price Index. The S&P/Case-Shiller index is a product of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. (For Dow Jones Indices licensing information, see the note on the Contents page.) 17. Consumer credit flows NOTE: The data are seasonally adjusted by the Federal Reserve Board. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Board, Statistical Release G.19, “Consumer 18. Mortgage rates NOTE: The data are weekly through June 4, 2020. SOURCE: Freddie Mac Primary Mortgage Market Survey. 19. New and existing home sales Existing home sales NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through April 2020. New home sales includes only single-family sales. Existing home sales includes single-family, condo, townhome, and co-op sales. sales.13 Due to the high cost of servicing loans in forbearance and uncertainty about whether borrowers will be able to resume making payments when the forbearance period ends, mortgages have become hard to obtain for borrowers with low credit scores or with incomes that are difficult to document. Credit conditions have also tightened significantly for other higher-risk loans, such as jumbo loans and cash-out refinances, and the increase in costs and risks associated with originating mortgages has raised primary mortgage rates relative to yields on mortgage-backed securities (MBS). Nevertheless, mortgage rates currently have fluctuated around the lowest levels seen in the past 10 years (figure 18). Housing-sector activity has fallen sharply after starting the year on a solid footing . . . After turning up starting around the middle of 2019 as mortgage rates moved lower, new home sales, existing home sales, and single- family starts and permits have posted outsized declines beginning in March that are all close to the largest ever recorded (figures 19 and 20). Similarly, the COVID-19 outbreak and mitigation efforts have caused households’ perceptions of homebuying conditions and builders’ ratings of current sales to move down despite historically low mortgage rates. . . . and business fixed investment has tumbled . . . The pandemic has curtailed business investment, as many investment projects were delayed or canceled because of lower profit expectations, concerns about future demand, reduced credit availability, and uncertainty about how businesses will operate in the future. Real business fixed investment—that is, private expenditures for equipment, structures, research and development (R&D), and other intellectual property—contracted at an annual rate of about 8.0 percent in the first quarter of 2020, coming off a drop of 0.4 percent for 2019 as a whole (figure 21). The decline was centered in equipment investment as well as in outlays for nonresidential buildings. In addition, lower oil prices contributed to a drop in investment in drilling and mining structures. Investment in intellectual property like software, R&D, and entertainment originals recorded a tepid increase in the first quarter after posting solid gains in 2019. Forward- looking indicators of business spending, such as new orders of nondefense capital goods, excluding the volatile aircraft category, have plunged recently amid sharply lower business sentiment and profit expectations from industry analysts. . . . while corporate financing conditions have deteriorated Financing conditions for nonfinancial firms were robust early in the year but tumbled during the global spread of COVID-19 (figure 22). The gross issuance of corporate bonds in the investment-grade segment was solid until late February, when it became intermittent at best as market functioning deteriorated. Meanwhile, issuance in the speculative-grade segment was essentially nonexistent following the broad risk-off sentiment in the market over the public health crisis. While investment-grade issuance recovered at a strong pace following the March Federal Reserve announcement on corporate credit funding facilities, high-yield issuance began to pick up only after the April announcement to expand the facilities to include support for some recent “fallen angels”—bonds downgraded to a speculative- grade credit rating from an investment-grade rating because of declining credit quality— and high-yield exchange-traded funds.14 The solvency outlook of corporate bonds for both the investment- and speculative-grade segments of the market dropped over the first 14. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2020), “Federal Reserve Announces Extensive New Measures to Support the Economy,” press release, March 23, https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/ pressreleases/monetary20200323b.htm; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2020), “Federal Reserve Takes Additional Actions to Provide Up to $2.3 Trillion in Loans to Support the Economy,” press release, April 9, https://www.federalreserve.gov/ newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20200409a.htm. 20. Private housing starts and permits NOTE: The data extend through April 2020. SOURCE: Census Bureau via Haver Analytics. 21. Change in real business fixed investment NOTE: Business fixed investment is known as “private nonresidential fixed investment” in the national income and product accounts. SOURCE: Bureau of Economic Analysis via Haver Analytics. 22. Selected components of net debt financing for nonfinancial businesses 23. Change in real imports and exports of goods and services half of the year as the pace of downgrades intensified and the volume of defaults picked up. Furthermore, the monthly volume of fallen angels reached a record high in March, and market analysts forecast this trend to continue with a record annual volume of debt being downgraded to high yield this year amid declining earnings and elevated leverage. Spreads on corporate bond yields over comparable-maturity Treasury securities have widened substantially amid worsening credit conditions. Institutional leveraged loan issuance volume was robust to start the first quarter, but it subsequently came to a standstill in March because of the pandemic. Newly launched volume increased somewhat starting in April but remains at subdued levels. Banks tightened standards and terms significantly on commercial and industrial (C&I) loans, according to respondents to the April SLOOS, and demand for C&I loans strengthened amid concerns about the pandemic. C&I loan growth at banks has picked up in the first half of the year, largely driven by soaring credit-line drawdowns since the beginning of March, as firms with existing credit lines sought to increase their internal cash buffers, and by lending to smaller businesses through the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) since April.15 Both exports and imports declined sharply in the first quarter The sudden drop in global demand and production and stifled global value chains took a toll on international trade. U.S. real exports of goods and services in the first quarter declined at an annual rate of nearly 9 percent, as exports of services—including travel to the United States—plunged (figure 23). Real imports fell just over 15 percent, as U.S. consumers and firms cut back on spending, travel abroad halted, and shipments of imported goods were delayed. The trade 15. For a more detailed description of the economic conditions for small businesses, including a discussion of the support provided by Federal Reserve facilities, see the box “Small Businesses during the COVID-19 Crisis.” deficit, relative to GDP, narrowed in the first quarter compared with 2019 (figure 24). Federal fiscal stimulus will provide substantial support to economic activity in 2020 while also significantly boosting the budget deficit and debt . . . Federal fiscal policy measures enacted in response to the pandemic have provided income support for households and businesses; increased grants-in-aid to state and local governments; and facilitated loans to businesses, households, states, and localities. The Congressional Budget Office (CBO) projects that in fiscal year 2020, the additional federal government expenditures and foregone revenues from these policies will total more than $2 trillion, around 10 percent of nominal GDP.16 (For a more detailed discussion of these policies, see the box “Federal Fiscal Policy Response to COVID-19.”) In addition, the decline in economic activity has pushed down tax collections while pushing up outlays for certain transfer programs—most notably for unemployment insurance and Medicaid (figure 25). These tax decreases and transfer 16. The CBO’s forecasts and estimates can be found at Congressional Budget Office (2020), “Discretionary Spending under Division A, the Coronavirus Preparedness and Response Supplemental Appropriations Act, 2020” (table 1), March 4, https:// www.cbo.gov/system/files/2020-03/hr6074.pdf; Phillip L. Swagel (2020), “Preliminary Estimate of the Effects of H.R. 6201, the Families First Coronavirus Response Act,” Congressional Budget Office, letter to Nita M. Lowey, April 2, https://www.cbo.gov/system/ files/2020-04/HR6201.pdf; Phillip L. Swagel (2020), “Preliminary Estimate of the Effects of H.R. 748, the CARES Act, Public Law 116-136, Revised, with Corrections to the Revenue Effect of the Employee Retention Credit and to the Modification of a Limitation on Losses for Taxpayers Other Than Corporations,” Congressional Budget Office, letter to Mike Enzi, revised April 27, https://www.cbo.gov/system/files/2020-04/ hr748.pdf; Congressional Budget Office (2020), “Changes in Direct Spending under Division A, Small Business Programs” (table 1), April 22, https://www. cbo.gov/system/files/2020-04/hr266.pdf; and Phillip L. Swagel (2020), “CBO’s Current Projections of Output, Employment, and Interest Rates and a Preliminary Look at Federal Deficits for 2020 and 2021, CBO Blog, April 24, https://www.cbo.gov/publication/56335. 24. U.S. trade and current account balances NOTE: GDP is gross domestic product. The black dot refers to the trade balance in 2020:Q1. The data for the current account balance are through 2019. 25. Federal receipts and expenditures NOTE: The data extend through April 2020 and are 12-month moving consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic, federal lawmakers have enacted a variety of measures. These measures are expected to raise government outlays and reduce tax revenues—the sum of which we refer to as fi scal support—by nearly $2½ trillion over 10 years, of which about $2 trillion is expected in the current fi scal year, according to the Congressional Budget Offi ce (CBO) (fi gure A, row 5). The legislation also included $454 billion for the Department of the Treasury to fund lending facilities established by the Federal Reserve and $46 billion to provide loans to the airline industry.1 Consistent with the historically large economic consequences resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, the amount of fi scal support that has been enacted constitutes the fastest and largest fi scal response to any postwar economic downturn. Figure B breaks down the estimated fi scal support for fi scal year 2020 (fi gure A, column 1) into four broad categories: (1) direct aid to households, (2) loans or grants to small businesses, (3) other aid to businesses, and (4) government purchases of goods and services or grants to state and local governments. The rest of this discussion provides a brief overview of the main components of the four stimulus bills, focusing on the CBO’s estimate of fi scal support (increased outlays minus reduced tax revenues) for fi scal 2020, organized by the four categories assigned in the fi gure. The largest component of income support is roughly $290 billion in one-time payments to households. These stimulus checks provide households with a one-time refundable tax credit of $1,200 per adult and $500 per child 16 and under, with a phaseout at incomes between $75,000 and $100,000 for individuals and between $150,000 and $200,000 for couples. By the end of May, according to the NOTE: The full title of the act in row 1 is Coronavirus Preparedness and Response Supplemental Appropriations Act, 2020. Values are in billions of dollars. Funding for the Department of the Treasury to provide loans to the airline industry and to fund lending facilities established by the Federal Reserve are not included. Fiscal support is smaller over the 2020–30 period than over the 2020–21 period mainly because of the payment of deferred payroll tax liabilities. SOURCE: Congressional Budget Offi ce. Treasury Department, nearly all of the stimulus checks had been disbursed. The second major piece of household income support is $230 billion in expanded unemployment insurance (UI) benefi ts. UI benefi ts were increased by $600 per week through the end of July; eligibility was expanded through December for “gig” workers, the self-employed, and those who are unable to work as a result of the COVID-19 outbreak; and benefi t durations were extended by 13 weeks through December. According to the CBO, around $70 billion in the more generous weekly benefi ts had been paid through the end of May. The legislation also provides student loan and mortgage relief, suspending loan payments and interest accrual on federal student loans until the end of September and reducing or suspending mortgage payments for mortgages backed by government-sponsored enterprises.2 Another component of the legislation provides federally mandated paid sick leave for workers at employers with (continued) 1. The CBO estimates that the amounts committed will signifi cantly increase total lending by the Treasury Department and the Federal Reserve. However, the CBO does not expect the lending will result in budgetary outlays as calculated on a net present value basis, and so it is not included in our measure of fi scal support. 2. The CBO did not provide an explicit estimate of the mortgage relief provisions, and their effects are not included in the $740 billion total because they were partially implemented by the various agencies involved before the passage of the CARES Act. fewer than 500 employees. The cost of the sick leave is rebated to employers through refundable payroll tax credits, which are expected to total about $90 billion in fi scal 2020. Employees are entitled to up to two weeks of paid leave equal to normal earnings for employees or family members who are directly affected by COVID-19 or COVID-19-related closures; additionally, employees are entitled to 10 weeks of paid leave at two-thirds normal pay for those caring for a child whose school or daycare is closed. In addition, about $90 billion in tax relief was provided to households in fi scal 2020, primarily through expanding the deductibility of certain business losses from individual tax liabilities. The Paycheck Protection Program provides about $670 billion in support to businesses with fewer than 500 employees through loans of up to 250 percent of monthly payroll costs before the crisis (subject to a cap of $10 million). These loans will be forgiven if employment and compensation are maintained relative to a pre-crisis level. In addition, small businesses are supported by about $90 billion in Small Business Administration (SBA) Economic Injury Disaster Loans and by six-month loan payment deferrals for new and existing SBA borrowers. Businesses are aided by several provisions that reduce tax revenues in fi scal 2020, with the largest reduction coming from delayed payment of employer- side payroll taxes until 2021 and 2022, which is expected to reduce tax payments by $210 billion in fi scal 2020 but mostly be made up in subsequent years. An additional roughly $90 billion reduction in fi scal 2020 tax liability results from modifi cations of the treatment of net operating losses and interest expenses for corporations. The legislation also provides nearly $50 billion in payroll tax relief for businesses signifi cantly affected by COVID-19 shutdowns in order to retain employees. Aside from tax relief, about $20 billion in loans and grants are expected to go to passenger and cargo air carriers and related contractors to support payroll expenses for aviation workers affected by the pandemic. In addition, about $50 billion in funds are expected to go to hospitals to support health-care-related expenses or provide relief for lost revenues. Finally, while they do not show up in the CBO’s estimates of fi scal support, the legislation provided up to $454 billion for the Treasury Department to fund lending facilities established by the Federal Reserve to offer loans to businesses as well as state and local governments and provided up to $46 billion to offer loans to the airline industry. The largest part of this aid category consists of about $150 billion in relief funding to state and local governments for expenses related to dealing with the COVID-19 pandemic. State governments will also receive an extra $30 billion through a temporary increase in the share of Medicaid expenditures that the federal government covers. In addition, the Federal Emergency Management Agency is expected to spend $50 billion in disaster relief funds to provide assistance to individuals and organizations affected by the COVID-19 crisis. 26. Federal government debt held by the public NOTE: The data for gross domestic product (GDP) are at an annual rate. Federal debt held by the public equals federal debt less Treasury securities held in federal employee defined-benefit retirement accounts, evaluated at the end of the quarter. The data for federal debt begin in 1947 and are annual from 1947 to 1950. The value for 2020:Q1 incorporates preliminary estimates. increases, working in tandem with the discretionary stimulus, will support aggregate demand and help blunt the extent of the economic downturn. The combination of the discretionary stimulus measures and the response of receipts and expenditures to the decline in economic activity—referred to as automatic stabilizers— are expected to cause the budget deficit to balloon from its already elevated level. The CBO expects the federal unified budget deficit to widen from 4½ percent of nominal GDP in fiscal 2019 to 18 percent of nominal GDP in fiscal 2020, the largest annual deficit as a share of GDP in the post–World War II era.17 The ratio of federal debt held by the public to nominal GDP is expected to rise from 79 percent in fiscal 2019 to 101 percent by the end of fiscal 2020, the highest debt-to-GDP ratio since 1947 (figure 26). . . . and state and local governments confront a fiscal crisis as tax revenue shrinks A sharp reduction in tax revenues due to a collapse in income and retail sales tax revenue is placing significant stress on state governments. Local governments, which rely on more cyclically stable property taxes, will be somewhat less directly affected. Nevertheless, local governments rely on aid from their state governments, particularly for primary and secondary education, and the budget strains at the state level will therefore likely be passed down to localities. In April and May, state and local governments shed more than 1½ million jobs as schools and universities closed early and local governments reduced their noneducation workforce. These state and local budget strains will be partially offset by grants from the federal government. (See the box “Federal Fiscal Policy Response to COVID-19” for further details.) 17. See Phillip L. Swagel (2020), “CBO’s Current Projections of Output, Employment, and Interest Rates and a Preliminary Look at Federal Deficits for 2020 and 2021,” CBO Blog, April 24, https://www.cbo.gov/ publication/56335. Risks to the outlook are greater than usual The path ahead is extraordinarily uncertain. First and foremost, the pace of recovery will ultimately depend on the evolution of the COVID-19 outbreak in the United States and abroad and the measures undertaken to contain it. Importantly, some small businesses and highly leveraged firms might have to shut down permanently or declare bankruptcy, which could have longer-lasting repercussions on productive capacity. (For a more in-depth discussion of the potential consequences of the shutdowns on small businesses, see the box “Small Businesses during the COVID-19 Crisis.”) In addition, there is uncertainty about future labor demand and productivity as firms shift their production processes to increase worker safety, realign their supply chains, or move services online. Furthermore, if employees are not called back to their former jobs, their period of unemployment could increase, potentially leading to lower wages when they do eventually find a job. Finally, applications for employer identification numbers, which are an early indicator of new business formations, are tracking well below levels from recent years and may suggest a slower pace of future job creation through this channel. The expected path of the federal funds rate over the next several years has fallen to near zero The expected path of the federal funds rate over the next several years has declined since early January and is now flat at the effective lower bound for the next few years (figure 27). Before the Federal Reserve lowered the target range for the federal funds rate to 0 to ¼ percent in March, policy expectations dropped substantially in late February and early March as COVID-19 concerns intensified. Market-based measures suggest that the expected federal funds rate remains below 0.25 percent through mid-2023.18 27. Market-implied federal funds rate path NOTE: The federal funds rate path is implied by quotes on overnight index swaps—a derivative contract tied to the effective federal funds rate. The implied path as of January 1, 2020, is compared with that as of June 9, 2020. The path is estimated with a spline approach, assuming a term premium of 0 basis points. The January 1, 2020, path extends through January 2024 and the June 9, 2020, path through May 2024. Small businesses employ nearly half of U.S. private- sector workers, play key roles in local communities, and provide income to milli ons of business owners. The COVID-19 pandemic poses acute risks to the survival of many small businesses. Widespread failure of small businesses would create economic insecurity for millions of workers and business owners, slow down the economic recovery, and alter the economic landscape of local communities. The Congress, the Federal Reserve, and other federal agencies are making aggressive efforts to support small businesses. More than 99 percent of U.S. fi rms have fewer than 500 employees, and almost 90 percent have fewer than 20 employees. Altogether, businesses with fewer than 500 employees account for almost half of private- sector jobs.1 Small businesses and small nonprofi t organizations are particularly prevalent in service industries and include examples such as car dealers, restaurants, barber shops, medical offi ces, legal offi ces, home repair contractors, and religious organizations. These businesses and organizations are part of the economic and social landscape of local communities and neighborhoods. Small businesses are also prevalent in manufacturing supply chain industries.2 Moreover, the businesses that spur innovation, contribute to nationwide job and productivity growth, and turn into large household names typically start out as small businesses.3 Small businesses are particularly vulnerable to social distancing for two main reasons. First, small businesses are prevalent in sectors that have seen especially large declines in revenue due to social distancing; small businesses make up about 60 percent of employment in the “leisure and hospitality” sector and about 85 percent of employment in the “other services” sector (which includes assorted neighborhood fi xtures like churches and beauty salons). Second, small fi rms tend to be more fi nancially constrained than larger fi rms. For example, bank account data suggest that roughly half of small businesses entered the COVID-19 crisis with cash reserves suffi cient for fewer than 15 days of operations without revenue.4 Moreover, even under normal circumstances, many small fi rms face fi nancial challenges and lack access to liquid fi nancial markets, relying instead on bank loans, credit cards, and the personal resources of owners.5 A wide variety of data reveal an alarming picture of small business health during the COVID-19 crisis. Surveys of small businesses suggest that pessimism about business viability is prevalent.6 The majority of small businesses have seen revenue losses, and half of (continued) 4. See JPMorgan Chase & Co. Institute (2019), Place 5. See Federal Reserve System (2019), Small Business 1. See U.S. Census Bureau (2020), 2017 SUSB Annual Data Tables by Establishment Industry, https://www.census.gov/ data/tables/2017/econ/susb/2017-susb-annual.html. The data in this discussion refer to “employer” businesses—the roughly six million businesses with formal employees. There are also roughly 26 million “nonemployer” businesses in the United States, such as freelance consultants or ride-sharing drivers. 2. For example, small businesses constitute at least 80 percent of employment in machine shops; precision turned product manufacturing; miscellaneous fabricated metal product manufacturing; commercial screen printing; and electroplating, plating, polishing, anodizing, and coloring. 3. See Ryan Decker, John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda (2014), “The Role of Entrepreneurship in U.S. Job Creation and Economic Dynamism,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 28 (Summer), pp. 3–24. Credit Survey: 2019 Report on Employer Firms (New york: Federal Reserve Bank of New york), https://www. fedsmallbusiness.org/medialibrary/fedsmallbusiness/files/2019/ sbcs-employer-firms-report.pdf; and Michael Siemer (2019), “Employment Effects of Financial Constraints during the Great Recession,” Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 101 (March), pp. 16–29. 6. See John Eric Humphries, Christopher Neilson, and Gabriel Ulyssea (2020), “The Evolving Impacts of COVID-19 on Small Businesses since the CARES Act,” Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper 2230 (New Haven, Conn.: Cowles Foundation for Research in Economics, April), https://cowles. yale.edu/sites/default/files/files/pub/d22/d2230.pdf; and MetLife and U.S. Chamber of Commerce (2020), Special Report on Coronavirus and Small Business (Washington: Chamber of Commerce, April 3), https://www.uschamber.com/ report/special-report-coronavirus-and-small-business. small businesses do not expect to return to their usual level of operations within the next six months.7 Employment declines have been deeper among small businesses than among larger businesses (fi gure A). Moreover, the share of total job losses accounted for by small businesses stopping paycheck issuance entirely (that is, going inactive) is substantial (light blue areas in fi gure A).8 Data from Homebase, a provider of scheduling and time sheet services for small local businesses, show that between 30 and 40 percent of establishments in sectors deeply affected by social distancing have gone inactive since February 15.9 Data from Womply, a provider of credit card transaction processing services, suggest that spending at small restaurants was down 80 percent (versus a year earlier) by early April and was still down 50 percent in early June.10 Taken together, these data suggest considerable risk of failure for a large number of small businesses. The infl ow of new businesses (which are typically small businesses) also plummeted, as shown in fi gure B. The Census Bureau reports that, in late March, applications for new employer business tax identifi ers were down more than 40 percent relative to a year (continued on next page) 7. Data are from the U.S. Census Bureau’s Small Business Pulse Survey for the week ending May 30, 2020. Survey results are available at https://portal.census.gov/pulse/data. 8. Figure A reports results from staff calculations on administrative payroll data from ADP; see Tomaz Cajner, Leland Crane, Ryan Decker, John Grigsby, Adrian Hamins- Puertolas, Erik Hurst, Christopher Kurz, and Ahu yildirmaz (2020), “The U.S. Labor Market during the Beginning of the Pandemic Recession,” NBER Working Paper Series 27159 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, May), https://www.nber.org/papers/w27159. 9. Homebase data initially included about 60,000 active businesses. Business inactivity is defi ned as zero hours worked during the week ending May 30 in the leisure and hospitality and the other services sectors. More information is available on the Homebase website at https://joinhomebase.com/blog/ real-time-covid-19-data. 10. For additional details, see Womply (2020), “Data Dashboard: How Coronavirus/COVID-19 Is Impacting Local Business Revenue across the U.S.,” Womply Blog, May 28, https://www.womply.com/blog/data-dashboard-how-coronavirus- covid-19-is-impacting-local-business-revenue-across-the-u-s. Continuing firms Inactive firms NOTE: Employment declines are relative to February 15 and extend through May 9, 2020. The key identifies bars in order from top to bottom. SOURCE: Cajner and others (2020) (see box note 8); Federal Reserve Board staff calculations using ADP, LLC, microdata. NOTE: The data extend through May 30, 2020. The data are derived from applications for employment identification numbers that list a planned date for initial wage payments. Small Businesses during the COVID-19 Crisis (continued) earlier; the series has only gradually recovered and was still just below last year’s pace as of late May. Business entry is a key contributor to job creation; with business exits and associated job destruction likely to be elevated during the COVID-19 episode, new fi rm creation is even more important than usual.11 agencies have acted swiftly to help address the risk of widespread small business failure. As part of the CARES Act (Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act), the Congress created the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) to provide small businesses with funds to retain employees for roughly two months. The Federal Reserve is bolstering the effectiveness of the PPP through the Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility, which extends credit to eligible fi nancial institutions to fi nance PPP loans. About three-fourths of small businesses with employees have applied for PPP assistance, suggesting the program is extremely valuable and timely, and a large share of these applications have been approved; however, some industries may face an ongoing need after the program expires.12 The Federal Reserve is also supporting lending to small businesses through the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility, which lends to holders of, among others, securities backed by loans guaranteed by the Small Business Administration. In addition, the Federal Reserve has established the Main Street Lending Program (MSLP), which features a range of facilities designed to provide support to small and medium- sized fi rms.13 Small businesses make vital contributions to labor markets and their local communities, and a critical subset of small businesses are young, innovative fi rms with the potential to create many jobs and increase overall productivity. The nature of the economic recovery that follows the COVID-19 crisis will depend in part on the survival of small businesses. Small business failures not only destroy jobs, but also erase the productive knowledge within the fi rms, deplete the assets of business owners, alter the character of communities and neighborhoods, and, in some cases, deprive the country of innovations. The Federal Reserve will continue to monitor the conditions of small businesses and support this fundamental segment of the economy. 11. Research suggests that a drop in new business formation and the resulting “lost generation” of fi rms during the Great Recession contributed to a slow recovery in output and employment. See, for example, Petr Sedláček (2020), “Lost Generations of Firms and Aggregate Labor Market Dynamics,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 111 (May), pp. 16–31. 13. A current description of the MSLP is available on 12. Data are from the U.S. Census Bureau’s Small Business Pulse Survey; see box note 7. the Board’s website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/ monetarypolicy/mainstreetlending.htm. Survey-based measures of the expected path of the policy rate also moved down from the levels observed at the end of 2019. According to the results of the Survey of Primary Dealers and Survey of Market Participants, both conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York in April, the median of respondents’ modal projections implies a flat trajectory for the target range of the federal funds rate at the effective lower bound for the next few years.19 The U.S. nominal Treasury yield curve has shifted down sharply . . . After moving lower over the second half of 2019, nominal Treasury yields fell sharply in late February and early March as investors’ concerns regarding the implications of the COVID-19 outbreak for the economic outlook led to both falling policy expectations and flight-to-safety flows, with longer- term Treasury security yields dropping to historically low levels (figure 28). Longer- term yields increased moderately and realized volatility spiked for a period in March as selling pressures grew, leading to dealer balance sheet capacity constraints and impaired trading conditions, before falling back again after the Federal Reserve’s actions helped restore smooth market functioning. (See the box “Federal Reserve Actions to Ensure Smooth Functioning of Treasury and MBS Markets” in Part 2 for a more detailed description of the Treasury market during March.) More recently, yields on longer-term Treasury securities rose somewhat, linked at least partially to the expected increase in the issuance of longer-term Treasury securities as well as some improvement in investor sentiment. Options prices suggest that near- term uncertainty about longer-dated Treasury yields rose sharply in March to levels not seen since the Global Financial Crisis before retracing. 19. The results of the Survey of Primary Dealers and the Survey of Market Participants are available on the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s website at https:// www.newyorkfed.org/markets/primarydealer_survey_ questions.html and https://www.newyorkfed.org/ markets/survey_market_participants, respectively. 28. Yields on nominal Treasury securities 29. Yield and spread on agency mortgage-backed securities NOTE: Data are daily and extend through June 8. Yield shown is for the Fannie Mae 30-year current coupon, the coupon rate at which new mortgage-backed securities would be priced at par, or face, value. Spread shown is to the average of the 5- and 10-year nominal Treasury yields. 30. Corporate bond yields, by securities rating and municipal bond yield NOTE: Investment-grade corporate is the 10-year triple-B, which reflects the effective yield of the ICE BofAML 7-to-10-year triple-B U.S. Corporate Index (C4A4). High-yield corporate is the 10-year high yield and reflects the effective yield of the ICE BofAML 7-to-10-year U.S. Cash Pay High Yield Index (J4A0). Municipal is the Municipal Market Advisors 20-year yield. . . . but spreads of other long-term debt to Treasury securities rose Yields on 30-year agency MBS—an important determinant of mortgage interest rates— decreased somewhat, on balance, though less than the yields on nominal Treasury securities, since the start of the year and remained very low by historical standards (figure 29). Early in the year, yields on both investment- and speculative-grade corporate bonds as well as primary- and secondary-market municipal bonds were near record lows (figure 30). Spreads on corporate bond yields over comparable-maturity Treasury yields were in the lower end of their historical distribution. Since mid-February, corporate spreads have increased appreciably as market functioning deteriorated and credit quality declined. In March, spreads to comparable- maturity Treasury securities increased sharply for corporate debt but remained below those observed during the 2008 Global Financial Crisis. Spreads started to normalize following the Federal Reserve announcements of corporate bond facilities in late March, particularly for investment-grade corporate debt, but remain higher than at the end of 2019. Similarly, yields and spreads for municipal debt rose strikingly in March, with spreads to comparable-maturity Treasury securities spiking to their highest level since the Global Financial Crisis as market functioning declined and concerns about municipal credit quality arose. Yields on municipal debt partially recovered following Federal Reserve announcements in late March and April of support to municipal debt markets through liquidity facilities. Liquidity in markets for Treasury securities and mortgage-backed securities deteriorated sharply before recovering following various Federal Reserve actions A number of indicators of Treasury market functioning—including bid-ask spreads, bid sizes, estimates of transaction costs, and measures of market depth—deteriorated significantly in late February and March, but conditions improved considerably following Federal Reserve asset purchases and the creation of credit and liquidity facilities. (See the box “Federal Reserve Actions to Ensure Smooth Functioning of Treasury and MBS Markets” in Part 2.) Bid-ask spreads remain higher than those seen at the end of the year in the off-the-run market and for the 30-year bond in the on-the-run market, and market depth remains low. MBS spreads have fallen back markedly, but prepayment risk and uncertainty about forbearance continue to put upward pressure on spreads. Strains remain in some less liquid parts of the market. Broad equity prices dropped notably amid the global spread of COVID-19 before rebounding Equity prices continued to increase early in the year before tumbling in March, dropping as much as 34 percent from peak to trough. Prices have mostly recovered against a background of unprecedented, forceful, and rapid monetary and fiscal policy responses as well as recent tentative signs of economic revival associated with the easing of restrictions and in the face of bleak forecasts for U.S. firms’ earnings in 2020 (figure 31). The decline in stock prices was widespread across all sectors, with the largest declines in the energy and banking sectors. Measures of implied and realized stock price volatility for the S&P 500 index—the VIX and the 20-day realized volatility—spiked to levels that were most recently observed during the financial crisis (figure 32). They have since retraced much of that increase but remain at elevated levels. (For a discussion of financial stability issues, see the box “Developments Related to Financial Stability.”) 31. Equity prices SOURCE: S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC via Bloomberg. (For Dow Jones Indices licensing information, see the note on the Contents page.) 32. S&P 500 volatility Realized volatility NOTE: The VIX is a measure of implied volatility that represents the expected annualized change in the S&P 500 index over the following 30 days. For realized volatility, 5-minute S&P 500 returns are used in an exponentially weighted moving average with 75 percent of weight distributed over the past 20 days. The COVID-19 pandemic has abruptly halted large swaths of economic activity and led to swift fi nancial repercussions. Despite increased resilience from the fi nancial and regulatory reforms adopted since 2008, fi nancial system vulnerabilities—most notably those associated with liquidity and maturity transformation in the nonbank fi nancial sector—have amplifi ed some of the economic effects of the pandemic. Accordingly, fi nancial-sector vulnerabilities are expected to be signifi cant in the near term. This discussion reviews vulnerabilities in the U.S. fi nancial system at the onset of the pandemic and describes some of the extraordinary measures taken by the Federal Reserve to mitigate the brunt of the shock. levels were high relative to either business assets or gross domestic product, with the riskiest fi rms accounting for most of the increase in debt in recent years. Against this backdrop, the COVID-19 outbreak poses severe risks to businesses and millions of households. For businesses, as economic activity continues to contract, the related reduction in earnings and additional debt needed to bridge the downturn will increase the debt burden and default risk. For households, the sudden and outsized increase in unemployment and sharp decline in family incomes may give rise to widespread delinquencies and defaults. In the fi nancial sector, banks, as of the fourth quarter pressures in the United States were elevated. Spreads, risk premiums, and implied volatility were at the low ends of their historical distributions among several large asset categories, including domestic equities and corporate bonds. Beginning in late February, expectations for global economic growth plummeted and uncertainty increased sharply, driving down risky asset prices and putting downward pressure on Treasury yields. Equity prices plunged as concern over the COVID-19 outbreak grew and volatility surged to extreme levels. Trading conditions became impaired across several markets, posing signifi cant challenges to price discovery and increasing trading costs. yields on corporate bonds over comparable-maturity Treasury securities widened to the highest levels since the Global Financial Crisis (GFC). Leveraged loan spreads also widened, especially for lower-rated loans. Since late March, however, investors’ tolerance for risk increased somewhat following interventions by the Federal Reserve; subsequently, risky asset prices partially retraced their course and market functioning improved. While the data on real estate prices mostly predate the COVID-19 outbreak, commercial real estate markets, in particular, had elevated valuation pressures at the beginning of 2020, making them vulnerable to signifi cant price declines stemming from the unfolding effects of the pandemic. On the eve of the pandemic, vulnerabilities associated with total private-sector debt stood at a moderate level relative to their historical norms. However, this assessment masks differences across the business and household sectors. Household borrowing advanced more slowly than overall economic activity and remained heavily concentrated among borrowers with high credit scores. By contrast, business debt of 2019, were well capitalized relative to historical levels, in part due to the regulatory reforms enacted after the GFC. To date, banks have been able to meet surging demand for draws on credit lines while also building loan loss reserves to absorb higher expected defaults. Leverage at broker-dealers changed little in the second half of 2019 and remained at historically low levels. However, in March, constraints on dealers’ intermediation capacity, including internal risk- management practices and regulatory constraints on the bank holding companies under which many dealers operate, were cited as possible reasons for deteriorating liquidity in even usually liquid markets. Leverage at life insurance companies has reached post-2008 highs. Moreover, the capitalization of the life insurance sector is likely to deteriorate in coming quarters because of lower-than-expected asset valuations and lower long-term interest rates. Some measures suggest that hedge fund leverage continued to expand through the end of 2019. Higher leverage left hedge funds vulnerable to asset price declines and to the increase in market volatility accompanying the COVID-19 shock. The subsequent deleveraging by hedge funds likely contributed to market dislocations in February and March. Funding markets proved less fragile than during the 2007–09 episode in the face of the COVID-19 outbreak and the associated fi nancial market turmoil. The subdued reliance of large bank holding companies on short-term funding and their robust holdings of high- quality liquid assets have prevented any considerable stress in the banking sector. Nonetheless, signifi cant strains emerged and emergency Federal Reserve actions were required to stabilize short-term funding markets. Recent growth in prime money market mutual funds (MMFs) and large holdings of corporate debt (continued) by other mutual funds increased the vulnerabilities in the fi nancial system. These vulnerabilities produced considerable strains in March as asset prices fell and investors became more risk averse. Prime MMFs and bond mutual funds experienced signifi cant outfl ows in March, leading to severe strains in markets funded by these institutions—notably, commercial paper (CP) and corporate bond markets. The tensions began to ease only after the Federal Reserve took several actions targeted at these markets, as will be discussed. is uncertain. In the near term, risks associated with the course of COVID-19 and its effects on the U.S. and global economies remain high. In addition, there is potential for stresses to interact with preexisting vulnerabilities stemming from fi nancial system or fi scal weaknesses in Europe, China, and emerging market economies. In turn, these risks have the potential to interact with the vulnerabilities identifi ed in this discussion and produce additional strains for the U.S. fi nancial system. Facilities to Support the Economy since the COVID-19 Outbreak The Federal Reserve, with the approval of the Secretary of the Treasury, established new credit and liquidity facilities under section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act to alleviate severe dislocations that arose in a number of fi nancial markets and to support the fl ow of credit to households and businesses.1 These actions fall into two categories: stabilizing short-term funding markets and providing more direct support for the extension of credit across the economy. As investors moved rapidly toward cash and the most liquid assets, an acute liquidity squeeze emerged in short-term funding markets in mid-March. In the CP market, funding dried up even for companies in good fi nancial standing. At the same time, investors contributed to the stress by starting to pull away from some prime MMFs, which typically hold CP and other highly liquid, short-term debt instruments. In response, the Federal Reserve set up the Commercial Paper Funding Facility, for which the Treasury Department has provided $10 billion of credit protection. In addition, 1. A list of funding, credit, liquidity, and loan facilities established by the Federal Reserve in response to COVID-19 is available on the Board’s website at https://www.federalreserve. gov/funding-credit-liquidity-and-loan-facilities.htm. the Federal Reserve established the Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility (MMLF), for which the Treasury Department will provide up to $10 billion of credit protection. The Federal Reserve established a companion facility, the Primary Dealer Credit Facility, to provide loans against high-quality collateral to primary dealers that are critical intermediaries in short- term funding markets. The announcement of these facilities strongly affected the targeted markets. After an initial wave of borrowing from the facilities, market strains eased and the use of these facilities has abated. To provide more direct support for credit across the economy, the Federal Reserve established a number of facilities in March and April. The Treasury’s equity investments in many of these facilities were authorized by the CARES Act (Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act). Together, these facilities will support the fl ow of up to $2.6 trillion of credit to large employers, small and medium-sized businesses, households, and state and local governments. The Primary Market Corporate Credit Facility (PMCCF) and the Secondary Market Corporate Credit Facility (SMCCF) were established to support employment and spending of large, investment-grade businesses. Following the announcement of the PMCCF and the SMCCF, spreads of both investment- and speculative- grade corporate bonds declined notably, and issuance of investment-grade corporate bonds strengthened. To support the longer-term, market-based fi nancing that is critical to real economic activity, the Federal Reserve reestablished the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility to purchase securities backed by auto loans, equipment leases, credit card loans, and other lending. The Municipal Liquidity Facility was set up to help U.S. state and local governments manage cash fl ow pressures by providing credit secured through their short-term obligations. The Federal Reserve established the Main Street Lending Program to provide up to $600 billion in four-year loans for small and medium- sized businesses that were in good fi nancial standing before the pandemic. Finally, the Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility (PPPLF) was established to bolster the effectiveness of the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) of the Small Business Administration. The CARES Act created the PPP program to provide loans that can help small businesses keep their workers on payrolls. The PPPLF extends credit to eligible fi nancial institutions to fi nance PPP loans, taking the loans as collateral. (continued on next page) The Federal Reserve is deeply committed to transparency and recognizes that the need for transparency is heightened when it is called upon to use its emergency powers. Transparency helps promote the accountability of the Federal Reserve to the Congress and the public. Specifi cally, the Board of Governors will report substantial amounts of information on a monthly basis for the liquidity and lending facilities using CARES Act funding as well as for the PPPLF, including the names and details of participants in each facility; amounts borrowed and interest rate charged; and overall costs, revenues, and fees for each facility. For the few programs that are targeting fi nancial mark et functioning, the Federal Reserve will provide a full accounting of transactions in these facilities. Real-time disclosure would risk stigmatizing participation in these facilities and undermining the Federal Reserve’s ability to provide assurance that these systemically important markets will continue their critical function in times of severe market stress. The delay in disclosure will be no longer than necessary to ensure that participants do not hesitate to participate. While the facilities are operating, the Federal Reserve will disclose extensive and regular aggregate information on total borrowing, collateral and fees, and interest income. The Federal Reserve has taken actions to help maintain the fl ow of credit to U.S. households and businesses by reducing fi nancial stresses abroad, which can spill over into U.S. credit markets. The Federal Reserve’s dollar liquidity swap lines improve liquidity conditions in dollar funding markets in the United States and abroad by providing foreign central banks with the capacity to deliver U.S. dollar funding to institutions in their jurisdictions during times of market stress. These swap lines provide U.S. dollars to a foreign central bank in exchange for the equivalent amount of funds in that central bank’s currency based on the market exchange rate at the time of the transaction. The Federal Reserve and each participating foreign central bank agree to swap back the same quantities of their two currencies at a specifi ed date in the future. During the week of March 15, 2020, the network of swap lines was expanded and enhanced by adding additional central bank counterparties, lowering the price on the lines, and increasing the frequency and maturity of dollar operations. In addition to the swap line enhancements, on March 31, the Federal Reserve announced a new program to support dollar funding markets, the temporary FIMA (Foreign and International Monetary Authorities) Repo Facility. This facility should help support the smooth functioning of the U.S. Treasury market by providing a temporary source of U.S. dollars to a broad range of countries, many of which do not have swap line arrangements with the Federal Reserve. Under this facility, FIMA account holders can enter into overnight repurchase agreements (repos) with the Federal Reserve, temporarily exchanging U.S. Treasury securities they hold at the Federal Reserve for U.S. dollars. The repos are overnight but can be rolled over as needed. The facility reduces the need for central banks to sell their Treasury securities outright, thus (continued) helping to avoid disruptions to the Treasury market and upward pressure on yields. Since its inception, take-up at the facility has been modest. The Federal Reserve has also made several adjustments to its regulatory and supervisory regime to facilitate market functioning and reduce regulatory impediments to banks supporting households, businesses, and municipal customers affected by COVID-19. These actions fall into the following four categories: 1. acceleration of previously planned, permanent adjustments to certain regulatory requirements to address specifi c impediments to market functioning 2. provision of additional time for banking organizations to phase in new regulatory requirements temporary relaxation of certain regulatory requirements or requirements imposing supervisory burden 3. 4. supervisory statements encouraging banks to support those affected by COVID-19 The fi rst category includes changing the defi nition of eligible retained income to ensure capital and total loss-absorbing capacity buffers function as intended; allowing early adoption of a new method for certain banking organizations to measure counterparty credit risk derivatives contracts; reducing reserve requirement ratios to zero; and amending Regulation D (Reserve Requirements of Depository Institutions) to delete the six-per-month limit on convenience transfers from the “savings deposit” defi nition. The second category includes allowing certain banking organizations additional time to delay the effects of the Current Expected Credit Losses accounting standard in their regulatory capital and extending the initial compliance with the Single-Counterparty Credit Limit rule by 18 months. The third category includes excluding Treasury securities and reserves from the supplementary leverage ratio denominator; modifying the liquidity and capital rules to allow banking organizations to neutralize the regulatory effects of participating in the PPPLF and MMLF programs; introducing a change to support the favorable treatment of term primary credit loans from the discount window under the liquidity rules; providing temporary waivers to banks for limits on transactions with nonbank affi liates that offer credit and intermediation; temporarily lowering the community bank leverage ratio to 8 percent; giving banks fl exibility in the timing of regulatory reports; and granting mortgage servicers fl exibility to work with struggling consumers affected by COVID-19. Finally, the fourth category includes encouraging banks to use their capital and liquidity buffers to work constructively with borrowers and to make short-term loan modifi cations on a good faith basis, as well as encouraging lenders to offer responsible small-dollar loans to consumers and small businesses and to support low- and moderate-income borrowers through loans and banking fee waivers. 33. Selected money market rates NOTE: The Secured Overnight Financing Rate (SOFR) is a broad measure of rates on overnight Treasury general collateral repurchase agreement (repo) transactions and bilateral Treasury repo transactions. CP refers to overnight double-A nonfinancial commercial paper. 34. Commercial and industrial loan growth NOTE: Data are calculated as monthly year-over-year growth rates and extend through April 2020. While overnight money market rates generally moved down in line with decreases in the Federal Open Market Committee’s target range, short-term funding markets experienced strains before the announcement and launch of Federal Reserve facilities Decreases in the Federal Open Market Committee’s (FOMC) target range for the federal funds rate in March transmitted effectively through overnight money markets, with yields on a broad set of money market instruments moving lower in response to the FOMC’s policy actions. Over the first half of the year, the effective federal funds rate (EFFR) remained within the target range (figure 33). After printing at the top of the target range for a few days following the March 15 rate cut, the EFFR softened considerably to trade near the bottom of the range amid substantial increases in reserves. Though upward pressures on interest rates in overnight money markets were generally well contained during March, short-term funding markets experienced a liquidity squeeze. Certain other short-term interest rates, including those pertaining to commercial paper and negotiable certificates of deposit, moved up markedly. However, since the announcement and launch of the Federal Reserve liquidity facilities directed toward these markets, short-term funding rates have declined significantly. Bank credit continued to expand, while bank profitability declined Aggregate credit provided by commercial banks trended up through the first half of 2020, driven largely by soaring C&I credit- line drawdowns since early March and by loans originated under the PPP since April (figure 34). While commercial real estate loan growth remained strong, growth in residential real estate loans on banks’ balance sheets has slowed since the beginning of the year, and outstanding consumer loans contracted in April. First-quarter earnings reports of larger banks indicate that bank profitability declined considerably in the first quarter of 2020 because of narrower net interest margins and notable increases in loan loss provisions.20 Economic activity abroad plunged in the first half of the year The spread of COVID-19 throughout the world and the measures taken to contain it have produced devastating effects on the global economy. Many countries closed nonessential businesses and restricted people’s movement during the first months of the year, leading to a sharp global economic contraction. Foreign GDP declined at about a 13 percent annualized rate in the first quarter, and recent indicators point to an even larger contraction in the second quarter (figure 35). Available data suggest that the decline in foreign activity in the first half of the year has been greater than during the Global Financial Crisis. The collapse in economic activity across countries followed the progression of the virus. In China, where regions underwent strict lockdowns as early as January, GDP in the first quarter dropped at a stunning 36 percent annualized rate (figure 36). As the virus spread to Europe, many countries in the region imposed strict social-distancing restrictions; euro-area GDP contracted nearly 14 percent in the first quarter of 2020. The substantial decline in commodity prices also depressed activity of commodity exporters such as Canada and several Latin American countries. Recent data indicate that Chinese production began to revive in the spring, as infection rates fell and restrictions were 20. Official measures of first-quarter profitability for the entire banking sector have been delayed to give banks more time to file their regulatory reports in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. 35. Foreign real gross domestic product and composite output purchasing managers index NOTE: For the foreign composite output purchasing managers index (PMI), values greater than (less than) 50 indicate better (worse) business conditions, on average, for the participants surveyed relative to conditions at the time of the previous survey. The data for PMI are monthly and extend through May 2020. The data for foreign GDP are quarterly and extend through 2020:Q1. 36. Real gross domestic product in selected foreign economies NOTE: The data are for 2020:Q1. SOURCE: For the euro area, Eurostat; for Canada, Statistics Canada; for China, National Bureau of Statistics of China; for Mexico, Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Geografía; all via Haver Analytics. 37. Manufacturing output purchasing managers index in selected foreign economies NOTE: For the foreign manufacturing output purchasing managers index (PMI), values greater than (less than) 50 indicate better (worse) business conditions, on average, for the participants surveyed relative to conditions at the time of the previous survey. 38. Unemployment rate in selected advanced economies NOTE: The data for the United Kingdom extend through February 2020 and are centered three-month averages of monthly data. The data for the euro area and Japan extend through April 2020. gradually lifted (figure 37). Indicators of Chinese consumption, however, remain weak. A number of advanced foreign economies (AFEs) began to relax social-distancing restraints in recent weeks. Labor market conditions deteriorated and inflation fell . . . Amid widespread business closures and collapsing demand, labor market conditions abroad have deteriorated sharply in recent months, albeit with differences across countries. Several European and Asian countries have thus far experienced sizable declines in hours worked but relatively small increases in unemployment given the size of the drop in economic activity, partly reflecting direct wage subsidies provided by the governments to keep workers on firms’ payrolls (figure 38). In other countries, unemployment rates increased markedly. Although the shutdowns across the world have reduced the global supply of goods and services, the depressive effects on demand of lower income, social distancing, and increased uncertainty have predominated, driving down inflation in the foreign economies. In several AFEs, recent inflation readings have been well below central bank targets, reflecting large declines in energy prices as well as subdued core inflation (figure 39). . . . prompting swift and substantial policy responses Foreign fiscal authorities have aimed to fill income gaps resulting from businesses closing and workers staying home. Many national governments acted decisively to support firms’ balance sheets through tax deferrals, loans, and loan guarantees; to encourage firms to retain workers through wage subsidies; and to support household spending through enhanced unemployment benefits and cash transfers. In addition, many foreign central banks reduced their policy rates, initiated or enhanced credit facilities, and relaxed capital requirements for financial institutions. Several AFE central banks also ramped up asset purchase programs to alleviate liquidity strains in their domestic capital markets. Some emerging market economy (EME) central banks followed suit. See the box “Policy Response to COVID-19 in Foreign Economies” for a more detailed discussion of fiscal and monetary policies implemented abroad. Downside risks remain high Despite aggressive fiscal and monetary policy actions, risks abroad are skewed to the downside. The future progression of the pandemic remains highly uncertain, with resurgence of the outbreak a substantial risk. In addition, the economic damage of the recession may be quite persistent. The collapse in demand may ultimately bankrupt many businesses, thereby reducing business dynamism and innovation. Unlike past recessions, services activity has dropped more sharply than manufacturing—with restrictions on movement severely curtailing expenditures on travel, tourism, restaurants, and recreation—and social-distancing requirements and attitudes may further weigh on the recovery in these sectors. Disruptions to global trade may also result in a costly reconfiguration of global supply chains. Persistently weak consumer and firm demand may push medium- and longer-term inflation expectations well below central bank targets, particularly in regions with already low inflation at the onset of the recession. Finally, additional expansionary fiscal policies— possibly in response to future large-scale outbreaks of COVID-19—could significantly increase government debt and add to sovereign risk, especially for countries with already limited fiscal space. Financial conditions abroad tightened, especially in some emerging market economies The precipitous spread of COVID-19 in the first months of the year weighed heavily on 39. Consumer price inflation in selected advanced foreign economies NOTE: The data go through April 2020, except for the euro area, which incorporates the flash estimate for May 2020. Authorities in foreign economies have announced a wide array of fi scal, monetary, and regulatory measures to mit igate disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. Many foreign governments have enacted sizable fi scal packages to address the sudden loss of income by fi rms and households, with a special focus on the most vulnerable groups, such as low-income individuals, the unemployed, and small and medium-sized enterprises. The size of the support is, on average, considerably larger in advanced foreign economies (AFEs) than in emerging market economies (EMEs), as many EME governments have more limited fi scal space. The measures targeted at fi rms aim to keep them afl oat in the near term, with the hope of preserving businesses until demand returns. Such measures include loans at favorable terms and loan guarantees; deferrals of taxes and social security contributions; tax breaks and cash transfers, especially for small and medium-sized enterprises; and targeted sectoral support. For households, the measures aim to provide income to those in need and alleviate payment diffi culties. These policies include increased unemployment and pension payments, mortgage deferrals, accelerated transfer payments, and direct cash payments. In addition, several AFEs and some Asian emerging economies have adopted large direct wage subsidies to keep workers on fi rms’ payrolls. Such measures may help limit dislocations in the labor markets of these countries by subsidizing a signifi cant reduction in hours worked. The hope of these programs is that workers’ continued attachment to their fi rms will preserve human capital and make it readily available to the fi rms during the recovery that follows the crisis. Many central banks have reduced their policy rates (fi gure A)—often to or near their effective lower bounds—and have taken substantial actions to start or expand asset purchases and to support the fl ow of credit. Although central banks acted quickly to lower interest rates, some policymakers in the EMEs expressed concerns about intensifying capital outfl ows, while a NOTE: Advanced foreign economies are in dark red; emerging market economies are in blue. From left to right, economies are the United States (US), Canada (CA), the United Kingdom (UK), Australia (AU), Mexico (MX), Brazil (BR), Colombia (CO), Hong Kong (HK), Chile (CL), India (IN), South Korea (KR), Thailand (TH), and China (CN). The data extend through June 9, 2020. few AFE central banks worried about the potential harm to banks’ fi nancial health. Several AFE central banks have purchased government debt in response to the crisis. These purchases have been primarily aimed at restoring market functioning and providing liquidity, but the purchases have also eased fi nancial conditions by lowering long-term yields. The Bank of England (BOE) restarted its purchases of gilts, and the Swedish Riksbank increased the pace of its existing program. The European Central Bank (ECB) and the Reserve Bank of New Zealand introduced and expanded asset purchase programs. The Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA) began bond purchases to target the three-year (continued) Authorities in foreign economies have announced a government bond yield at 0.25 percent, the same as its overnight rate. Some central banks, such as the Bank of Canada (BOC) and the RBA, have started purchases of provincial and state bonds to support liquidity in those markets. To ensure the smooth transmission of its monetary actions, the ECB has used its fl exibility to weight its purchases more heavily toward bonds of euro-area member states that face higher yields. B. Central bank assets for selected advanced economies to mit igate disruptions caused by the COVID-19 Many foreign governments have enacted sizable fi scal packages to address the sudden loss of income by Monetary authorities have also adopted policies to sustain the provision of credit to businesses and households during the pandemic. Central banks have purchased a variety of private assets, thus directly addressing distress in funding markets and helping ease fi nancial conditions for fi rms. These assets include corporate bonds purchased by the BOE, ECB, and Bank of Japan (BOJ); commercial paper bought by the BOC, BOE, BOJ, and Riksbank; and exchange-traded funds and real estate investment trusts purchased by the BOJ. These actions have signifi cantly expanded the balance sheets of major foreign central banks (fi gure B). Some central banks in EMEs have also begun purchasing private assets, with the central banks of Chile and Colombia buying bank bonds. The size of the support is, on average, considerably emerging market economies (EMEs), as many EME governments have more limited fi scal space. The measures targeted at fi rms aim to keep them afl oat in the near term, with the hope of preserving NOTE: Advanced foreign economies are in dark red; emerging market economies are in blue. From left to right, economies are the United NOTE: Assets are calculated as a percentage of 2019 nominal gross domestic product (GDP). U.K. assets are calculated as the sum of sterling-denominated corporate bond and U.K. government bond holdings, foreign currency reserve assets, and term funding schemes. The data are monthly. The data extend through June 9, 2020. and medium-sized enterprises; and targeted sectoral support. For households, the measures aim to provide income to those in need and alleviate payment diffi culties. These policies include increased Several central banks have also activated funding- for-lending facilities to provide relatively inexpensive funding to banks as long as they maintain defi ned lending benchmarks, in some cases with extra incentives to lend to small and medium-sized enterprises. The BOE, BOJ, ECB, RBA, Riksbank, and Bank of Korea currently have such programs. deferrals, accelerated transfer payments, and direct Asian emerging economies have adopted large direct few AFE central banks worried about the potential harm wage subsidies to keep workers on fi rms’ payrolls. to banks’ fi nancial health. Such measures may help limit dislocations in the labor Several AFE central banks have purchased (for example, in France, Germany, and the United Kingdom); and giving banks and their supervisors more fl exibility in dealing with nonperforming loans (for example, the ECB). In addition, some regulators have temporarily excluded central bank reserves and certain safe assets from the calculation of leverage exposures. Some foreign regulators are considering the reduction or even elimination of risk weights on new loans guaranteed by the government. Regulators also emphasize that banks should continue to apply sound underwriting standards and conduct solid capital and liquidity planning and robust risk management. markets of these countries by subsidizing a signifi cant reduction in hours worked. The hope of these programs purchases have been primarily aimed at restoring Regulators in a number of foreign economies have introduced various measures that provide relief for banks to help sustain their capacity to absorb pandemic-related losses while continuing to lend to the economy. These measures include temporarily easing capital requirements, such as the reduction— and, in some cases, elimination—of conservation and countercyclical capital buffers; deferring the implementation of new, stricter Basel capital requirements; temporarily easing liquidity requirements is that workers’ continued attachment to their fi rms will market functioning and providing liquidity, but the preserve human capital and make it readily available to purchases have also eased fi nancial conditions by the fi rms during the recovery that follows the crisis. lowering long-term yields. The Bank of England Many central banks have reduced their policy (BOE) restarted its purchases of gilts, and the Swedish rates (fi gure A)—often to or near their effective lower Riksbank increased the pace of its existing program. bounds—and have taken substantial actions to start or expand asset purchases and to support the fl ow of Bank of New Zealand introduced and expanded asset credit. Although central banks acted quickly to lower interest rates, some policymakers in the EMEs expressed (RBA) began bond purchases to target the three-year concerns about intensifying capital outfl ows, while a (continued) 40. Equity indexes for selected advanced economies NOTE: The data are weekly averages of daily data. The weekly data begin on Thursdays and extend through June 3, 2020. 41. Nominal 10-year government bond yields in selected advanced economies NOTE: The data are weekly averages of daily benchmark yields. The weekly data begin on Thursdays and extend through June 3, 2020. 42. Nominal 10-year government bond yields in selected euro-area economies global risk sentiment, and many financial markets suffered from severe illiquidity. Aggressive fiscal and monetary policy responses in the United States and abroad, however, helped boost sentiment and improve market functioning, contributing to a partial retracement. On net, financial conditions abroad remain tighter than at the beginning of the year, especially in some EMEs. Financial conditions in the AFEs largely tracked financial market developments in the United States. Major AFE equity indexes dropped substantially as news about the spread of COVID-19 and the associated measures to contain it were reported, but those indexes rebounded following the announcement of extraordinary monetary and fiscal policy actions and, more recently, tentative signs of economic stabilization (figure 40). Notwithstanding temporary increases due to poor market functioning, long-term sovereign yields in major advanced economies fell, on net, as flight-to-safety demand surged, policy rates reached their effective lower bounds in several countries, and expectations of future policy rates declined markedly (figure 41). Sovereign interest rates for economies in the euro-area periphery were sensitive to news about the size and form of European-wide fiscal support for the recovery and, on net, remain a bit higher than at the beginning of the year (figure 42). In recent months, Fitch and DBRS Morningstar downgraded Italy’s long-term debt ratings. Financial conditions in some EMEs tightened, especially in Latin American countries. Equity indexes suffered widespread losses early in the year, and rebounds since then have been uneven across countries. While equity indexes in emerging Asia partially recovered, Mexican and Brazilian equity indexes underperformed other EME equities (figure 43). In March, borrowing rates for corporations increased to levels not seen since the Global Financial Crisis, although they have subsequently declined somewhat. In the first half of the year, funds dedicated to investing in EMEs 43. Equity indexes for selected emerging market NOTE: The data are weekly averages of daily data. The weekly data begin on Thursdays and extend through June 3, 2020. experienced outflows, and sovereign borrowing spreads increased sharply before moving down more recently (figure 44). The tightening in some EME financial conditions appears to reflect investors’ preference for safe and liquid assets; a reduced confidence in the ability of some governments to contain the health crisis; and heightened uncertainty about the prospects for EME public finances, commodity prices, and global trade. The dollar appreciated The foreign exchange value of the dollar increased nearly 5 percent since the start of the year, as the boost from safe-haven demand outweighed the effects of lower U.S. interest rates (figure 45). On a trade-weighted basis, the dollar increased about 1.5 percent against AFE currencies and 7 percent against EME currencies. The Mexican peso and Brazilian real depreciated about 16 percent and 30 percent, respectively, partly in response to lower commodity prices. The Chinese renminbi fluctuated largely in response to news about the outbreak and policy actions of Chinese authorities and, on net, depreciated slightly since the beginning of the year. 44. Emerging market mutual fund flows and spreads Equity fund flows (right scale) Bond fund flows (right scale) EMBI+ (left scale) NOTE: The bond and equity fund flows data are semiannual sums of weekly data from December 28, 2006, to May 27, 2020. Weekly data span Thursday through Wednesday, and the 2020:H1 values are sums over weekly data for weeks ending in January 2020 through May 2020. The fund flows data exclude funds located in China. The J.P. Morgan Emerging Markets Bond Index Plus (EMBI+) data are weekly averages of daily data. The weekly data begin on Thursdays and extend through June 3, 2020. The EMBI+ data exclude Venezuela. SOURCE: For bond and equity fund flows, EPFR Global; for EMBI+, 45. U.S. dollar exchange rate indexes NOTE: The data, which are in foreign currency units per dollar, are weekly averages of daily data. The weekly data begin on Thursdays and extend through June 3, 2020. As indicated by the leftmost arrow, increases in the data represent U.S. dollar appreciation and decreases represent U.S. dollar depreciation. The Federal Open Market Committee quickly reduced the federal funds rate to the effective lower bound . . . In light of the effects of COVID-19 on the economy and on risks to the outlook, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) lowered the target range for the federal funds rate by a total of 1½ percentage points—from a range of 1½ to 1¾ percent to one of 0 to ¼ percent—over two meetings in early and mid-March (figure 46).21 Specifically, in early March, the Committee lowered the target range for the federal funds rate ½ percentage point, to 1 to 1¼ percent. In mid-March, the Committee further lowered the target range 1 percentage point, to 0 to ¼ percent. The Committee expects to maintain this target range until it is confident that the economy 21. See the FOMC statements issued after the March meetings, which are available (along with other postmeeting statements) on the Monetary Policy portion of the Board’s website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/ monetarypolicy.htm. has weathered recent events and is on track to achieve its maximum-employment and price- stability goals. In connection with the changes in the target range, the Federal Reserve reduced the interest paid on reserve balances and decreased the interest rate offered on overnight reverse repurchase agreements at the two March meetings. . . . and the FOMC increased the holdings of Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities in the System Open Market Account At its mid-March meeting, along with its decision to lower the target range for the federal funds rate, the FOMC emphasized that it is prepared to use its full range of tools to support the flow of credit to households and businesses, thereby promoting its maximum-employment and price-stability goals. To support the smooth functioning of markets for Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS)—markets central to the flow of credit to households 46. Selected interest rates NOTE: The 2-year and 10-year Treasury rates are the constant-maturity yields based on the most actively traded securities. SOURCE: Department of the Treasury; Federal Reserve Board. 47. Federal Reserve open market operations NOTE: The data are at a business-day frequency, excluding the holidays on January 20, February 17, and May 25. The data begin January 2, 2020. Repo is repurchase agreement. MBS is mortgage-backed security. and businesses—the Committee announced that it would increase its holdings of Treasury securities by at least $500 billion and its holdings of agency MBS by at least $200 billion over coming months (figure 47). (See the box “Federal Reserve Actions to Ensure Smooth Functioning of Treasury and MBS Markets.”) Later in March, the Committee announced that it would continue to purchase Treasury securities and agency MBS in the amounts needed to support smooth market functioning and the effective transmission of monetary policy to broader financial conditions (figure 48). The Committee also included agency commercial MBS in its purchases for the first time. In June, the Committee announced that, over coming months, the Federal Reserve will increase its holdings of Treasury securities and agency residential and commercial MBS at least at the current pace to sustain smooth market functioning, thereby fostering effective transmission of monetary policy to broader financial conditions. The Federal Reserve has continued rolling over at auction all principal payments from its holdings of Treasury securities. Before 48. Federal Reserve assets and liabilities Treasury securities held outright NOTE: “Agency debt and mortgage-backed securities holdings” includes agency residential mortgage-backed securities and agency commercial mortgage-backed securities. “Credit and liquidity facilities” consists of primary, secondary, and seasonal credit; term auction credit; central bank liquidity swaps; support for Maiden Lane, Bear Stearns Companies, Inc., and AIG; and other credit and liquidity facilities, including the Primary Dealer Credit Facility, the Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility, the Commercial Paper Funding Facility, the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility, the Primary and Secondary Market Corporate Credit Facilities, the Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility, the Municipal Liquidity Facility, and the Main Street Lending Program. “Other assets” includes repurchase agreements, FIMA repurchase agreements, and unamortized premiums and discounts on securities held outright. “Capital and other liabilities” includes reverse repurchase agreements, the U.S. Treasury General Account, and the U.S. Treasury Supplementary Financing Account. The data extend through June 3, 2020. Between late February and early March, functioning in U.S. Treasury securities and agency mortgage- backed securities (MBS) markets became increasingly strained. Amid growing concerns about the economic implications of COVID-19, investors sought to sell large volumes of long-maturity Treasury securities and MBS and reallocate their portfolios into shorter-term, more liquid assets. While the yields on long-maturity Treasury securities initially dropped sharply, in mid-March they started to increase in the face of these strong selling pressures (fi gure A). Around the same time as the increase in long-maturity Treasury yields, the spreads between yields on MBS and Treasury securities of comparable duration widened sharply. Indications of severe dislocations in both markets were also present. For example, bid-ask spreads for Treasury securities and agency MBS widened signifi cantly (fi gure B shows indicative Treasury bid-ask spreads). securities, including off-the-run Treasury securities and agency MBS, onto their balance sheets. At the same time, mortgage refi nancing picked up, prompting substantial turnover in the MBS market. By early March, some dealers had reportedly run into balance sheet constraints that hampered their ability to purchase additional securities, leading to a deterioration in the functioning of a number of dealer- intermediated markets. conditions were particularly poor for more seasoned, or “off the run,” securities. However, the most liquid parts of the market, where newly issued, or “on the run,” securities are traded electronically, saw unprecedented strains: The volume of posted quotes, or “market depth,” dropped sharply, while intraday bid-ask spreads were exceptionally volatile, particularly for the longest- maturity securities. These strains in the most liquid part of the market suggest that principal trading fi rms— market participants who specialize in high-frequency and automated intermediation—were signifi cantly less active than usual. One factor that may explain these market dislocations is the effect of widespread selling of Treasury securities and MBS to primary dealers, who intermediate a large proportion of trading in these markets. As a wide range of domestic and foreign investors (including foreign offi cial investors) rushed to raise cash or rebalance their portfolios by selling assets, dealers took large amounts of less liquid The disruptions to the functioning of the Treasury and MBS markets were notable in view of the status (continued on next page) On-the-run (left scale) NOTE: Yields are taken from a smoothed curve fitted to off-the-run NOTE: The data are daily. UST is U.S. Treasury. Indicative bid-ask spreads are for 10-year Treasury notes. The data for cumulative Fed UST purchases extend through June 8, 2020. of these markets as cornerstones for the operation of the U.S. and global fi nancial systems and for the transmission of monetary policy. The Federal Reserve therefore took a series of policy measures designed to ensure the smooth functioning of these markets. These measures included the expansion of repurchase operations, an increase in purchases of Treasury and agency MBS securities, the expansion of fi nancing arrangements for primary dealers, and a temporary change to the regulatory capital requirements of bank holding companies and depository institutions. Beginning March 9, 2020, following a directive from the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), the Federal Reserve Bank of New york’s Open Market Desk increased the size of overnight and term repurchase operations in order to ensure that the supply of reserves remained ample and to support the smooth functioning of the markets in which primary dealers obtain a substantial proportion of their short-term funding.1 These changes expanded the supply of short-term funding available to primary dealers to fi nance their increased holdings of Treasury securities and agency MBS at a time when funding costs from other sources were increasing. Further, on March 12, the Desk introduced new weekly recurring one- and three-month term repurchase agreement (repo) operations of up to $500 billion to address the disruption in Treasury fi nancing markets.2 Finally, on March 16, the Desk introduced a second daily overnight repo operation and increased the amount offered in each to $500 billion.3 Usage of Federal Reserve repo operations peaked on March 17, with overnight and term repo outstanding of $496 billion, and has since fallen to $167 billion as funding strains have eased. In light of more stable repo market conditions, on May 4, the Desk returned to once daily overnight repo operations.4 Further, on May 14, the Desk discontinued its three-month term repo operations.5 during the week of March 9, strains in Treasury and agency MBS markets continued to build. Beginning in mid-March, therefore, the FOMC directed the Desk to purchase Treasury securities and agency MBS in order to support smooth market functioning. On March 15, the FOMC directed the Desk to increase its holdings of Treasury securities by at least $500 billion and of agency MBS by at least $200 billion, with purchases to take place across maturities.6 To provide greater fl exibility in addressing the strains, on March 23, the FOMC authorized purchases of these securities in the amounts needed to support smooth market functioning and effective transmission of monetary policy to broader fi nancial conditions. The securities targeted for purchase were also expanded to include agency commercial MBS. Since mid-March, the Desk has purchased approximately $1.6 trillion and $719 billion of Treasury securities and agency MBS, respectively.7 The daily amounts of purchases peaked at approximately $75 billion and $41 billion for Treasury securities and agency MBS, respectively, in late March before being reduced in stages to the current average daily amounts of around $4.0 billion for Treasury securities and $4.5 billion for agency MBS (including reinvestments). These purchases helped reduce fi nancial market volatility by providing a predictable source of demand for these securities and by taking up some of the inventories from dealers’ balance sheets. On March 17, the Board, with the approval of the U.S. Treasury Secretary, established the Primary Dealer Credit Facility (PDCF) to provide primary dealers with access to term funding against a broad range of collateral.8 The PDCF helped alleviate funding pressures faced by primary dealers by allowing them to source fi nancing more easily for their increased securities holdings. The amount of PDCF loans outstanding peaked at around $35 billion in mid-April but has since declined to around $6 billion. 1. See Federal Reserve Bank of New york (2020), “Statement (continued) 2. See Federal Reserve Bank of New york (2020), “Statement 3. See Federal Reserve Bank of New york (2020), “Statement 6. See the FOMC statement issued after the March 15 meeting, which is available (along with other postmeeting statements) on the Monetary Policy portion of the Board’s website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy.htm. 7. The MBS purchase amount includes purchases that have yet to settle. 4. See Federal Reserve Bank of New york (2020), “Statement 8. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 5. See Federal Reserve Bank of New york (2020), “Statement International Monetary Authorities) Repo Facility to allow FIMA account holders, which consist of central banks and other international monetary authorities with accounts at the Federal Reserve Bank of New york, to exchange their Treasury securities for U.S. dollars.9 This facility allows foreign offi cial institutions to raise U.S. dollars, if needed, without having to sell Treasury securities in the open market during periods of heightened volatility or impaired market functioning. Since its inception, take-up of the facility has been modest, as stresses in the U.S. Treasury market have declined. On April 1, the Federal Reserve released an interim fi nal rule indicating that holdings of U.S. Treasury securities and deposits at Federal Reserve Banks by bank holding companies would be excluded from the calculation of the supplementary leverage ratio (SLR) until March 31, 2021.10 Further, on May 15, 2020, the federal bank regulatory agencies (the Board of Governors, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Offi ce of the Comptroller of the Currency) released an interim fi nal rule allowing depository institutions that are subject to the SLR the option to similarly exclude U.S. Treasury securities and deposits at Federal Reserve Banks from their SLR calculations through March 31, 2021.11 These temporary exemptions are expected to ease liquidity pressures for primary dealers and depository institutions subject to these leverage ratios by providing them with greater fl exibility to intermediate trades with clients in the presence of temporarily larger inventories of Treasury securities. 9. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 10. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2020), “Federal Reserve Board Announces Temporary Change to Its Supplementary Leverage Ratio Rule to Ease Strains in the Treasury Market Resulting from the Coronavirus and Increase Banking Organizations’ Ability to Provide Credit to Households and Businesses,” press release, April 1, https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/ bcreg20200401a.htm. 11. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Since the announcement of these policy actions, trading conditions in the markets for Treasury securities and MBS have improved steadily. The purchases of Treasury securities and agency MBS contributed to the subsequent decline in primary dealers’ inventories (fi gure C). Bid-ask spreads have narrowed, particularly in the case of on-the-run Treasury securities, while MBS spreads have also come down from their peaks in mid- March. In addition to the Federal Reserve’s actions, the passage of the CARES Act (Coronavirus Aid, Re lief, and Economic Security Act), together with an improvement in sentiment among investors regarding the economic implications of COVID-19, likely contributed to the improvement in market functioning. In late May, these inventories temporarily increased to levels previously seen in March, largely because of increased dealer holdings of Treasury bills. However, Treasury markets did not exhibit a recurrence of the notable strains in trading conditions witnessed earlier this year. Although trading conditions have improved substantially since mid-March, bid-ask spreads for longer-maturity and off-the-run Treasury securities remain wider than in mid-February. Market depth for on-the-run securities remains low, particularly for longer-maturity securities. MBS market functioning and liquidity have largely returned to pre-February norms, though strains remain in some less liquid parts of the market. (left scale) On-the-run(left scale) NOTE: The data are daily and extend through June 5, 2020, for the Treasury inventory and June 9, 2020, for the on-the-run and off-the-run spreads. Indicative bid-ask spreads are for 10-year Treasury notes. The volume of dealers’ non-rehypothecated Treasury repurchase agreements serves as a proxy for the total dealer securities inventory. mid-March, to allow for a gradual runoff of agency securities, the Federal Reserve reinvested principal payments from agency debt and agency MBS of up to $20 billion per month in Treasury securities; agency MBS principal payments in excess of $20 billion each month were reinvested in agency MBS. Beginning in mid-March, the Committee announced it would reinvest all principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency MBS back into agency MBS. (The box “Developments on the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet” discusses changes in the size and composition of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet over the past year.) The Federal Reserve eased lending terms for primary credit borrowing . . . Primary credit is the Federal Reserve lending program available to depository institutions in generally sound financial condition. Amid increasing stress in funding markets in mid- March, the Federal Reserve announced several changes to the primary credit program. Importantly, the primary credit rate was set at the top of the target range for the federal funds rate rather than 50 basis points above the top of the range. The term of primary credit loans, which had previously been mainly overnight advances, was extended to allow depository institutions to borrow for up to 90 days. Federal Reserve communication encouraged the use of the discount window to help meet the demand for credit from households and businesses. Discount window borrowing under the primary credit program increased significantly following these developments. Primary credit outstanding reached a peak of around $50 billion in late March 2020—its highest level since the financial crisis and well above the typical level of around $10 million that prevailed in 2019. Use of primary credit was fairly widespread, with discount window loans being extended to institutions across a range of size categories. Overall, the outstanding amount of primary credit loans declined to about $10 billion by early June. . . . and undertook actions with other central banks to support U.S. dollar funding markets The Federal Reserve announced coordinated actions with other central banks to enhance the provision of liquidity via the standing U.S. dollar liquidity swap line arrangements and the establishment of temporary U.S. dollar liquidity arrangements (swap lines) with nine additional central banks. (See the box “Developments Related to Financial Stability” in Part 1 for a more detailed discussion of the swap lines.) The size of the swap lines increased from close to zero in mid-March to almost $450 billion by the end of April. The Federal Reserve also established a temporary repo facility for foreign and international monetary authorities. The FOMC is committed to using its tools to promote maximum employment and price stability The ongoing public health crisis will weigh heavily on economic activity, employment, and inflation in the near term and pose considerable risks to the economic outlook over the medium term. The FOMC is committed to using its full range of tools to support the U.S. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum- employment and price-stability goals. The Committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook, including information related to public health, as well as global developments and muted inflation pressures, and it will use its tools and act as appropriate to support the economy. The Federal Reserve has continued to review its strategic framework for monetary policy In 2019, the Federal Reserve began a broad review of the monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices it uses to pursue its statutory dual-mandate goals of maximum employment and price stability. A key component of the review was a series of public Fed Listens events. The Federal Reserve held 14 events around the country in 2019 to consult with a range of organizations on the effects that labor market conditions, inflation, and interest rates have on them and their communities. In light of the rapidly changing public health and economic environments due to COVID-19, the Federal Reserve convened another event in May 2020 to get an update. The Federal Reserve has released a report on its Fed Listens initiative.22 The lessons learned 22. The report is available on the Board’s website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/files/ fedlistens-report-20200612.pdf. from the Fed Listens initiative were never more important than they are today as Americans navigate through these challenging times. The Federal Reserve expects to complete the review of its monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices later this year. The Federal Reserve remains focused on the attainment of its goals of maximum employment and price stability, including laying the foundation for the return to a strong labor market. disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, the Federal Reserve has eased the stance of monetary policy and has deployed various tools to promote smooth functioning of fi nancial markets and the fl ow of credit to households and businesses. This discussion reviews the implications of these actions for the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. Net unamortized premiums 44 To support the smooth functioning of those credit markets that are critical for the economy, the Federal Reserve purchased Treasury securities and agency residential and commercial mortgage-backed securities (MBS), expanded repurchase agreement (repo) operations, and introduced several credit and liquidity facilities. As a result of these actions, the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet increased from $4.2 trillion at the beginning of 2020, approximately 19 percent of U.S. nominal gross domestic product (GDP), to $7.2 trillion in June 2020, approximately 33 percent of U.S. nominal GDP.1 The $3 trillion increase in the size of the balance sheet was driven by asset purchases and other extraordinary actions (fi gure A).2 Reserves held by depository institutions Includes only settled holdings in par values; the purchases of agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) not yet settled was approximately $130 billion on June 3, 2020. Source: Federal Reserve Board, Statistical Release H.4.1, “Factors Affecting Reserve Balances.” 1. Data based on the “second” estimate of fi rst-quarter 2020 current-dollar GDP of $21.5 trillion released by the Bureau of Economic Analysis; see Bureau of Economic Analysis (2020), “Gross Domestic Product, 1st Quarter 2020 (Second Estimate); Corporate Profi ts, 1st Quarter 2020 (Preliminary Estimate),” press release, May 28, https://www. bea.gov/news/2020/gross-domestic-product-1st-quarter-2020- second-estimate-corporate-profits-1st-quarter. MBS increased by $1,805 billion and $427 billion, respectively.3 The markets for both Treasury securities and agency MBS play a critical role in the U.S. economy, and the Federal Reserve’s purchases have fostered a substantial improvement in the functioning of these markets and the conditions prevailing in them.4 (continued) 3. The increase in MBS holdings on the balance sheet is less 2. In September 2019, the Federal Reserve started purchasing Treasury bills and conducting term and overnight repo operations to ensure the supply of reserves would remain ample and help forestall the possibility of money market pressures that could adversely affect policy implementation. In January and February 2020, the Open Market Desk primarily purchased Treasury bills to provide liquidity and supply of reserves. Beginning in mid-March, the Desk started purchasing Treasury securities across a range of maturities and agency MBS in order to support smooth market functioning. For more information, see the box “Federal Reserve Actions to Ensure Smooth Functioning of Treasury and MBS Markets.” than the total MBS purchase amounts because the purchases include reinvestments of principal received and some of the purchases have not settled yet. 4. The daily purchase amounts peaked at approximately $75 billion and $41 billion for Treasury securities and agency MBS, respectively, in late March. Subsequently, given the improvements in market functioning and liquidity conditions, the pace of purchases was signifi cantly reduced to the average daily amounts of $4.0 billion for Treasury securities and $4.5 billion for agency MBS in June. For more information, see the box “Federal Reserve Actions to Ensure Smooth Functioning of Treasury and MBS Markets.” Furthermore, to address strains in short-term U.S. dollar funding markets, the Federal Reserve Bank of New york’s Open Market Desk expanded its offerings of overnight and term repo operations. The amount of repos outstanding reached a peak of $442 billion in mid-March. Subsequently, given the improvement in funding market conditions, the Desk announced several reductions in the frequency of repo operations. As of June 3, all repos outstanding had declined to $212 billion, lower than the amount outstanding early in the year, amid substantial increases in reserves and improved funding market conditions. On March 15, the Federal Reserve announced changes to the discount window and encouraged depository institutions to use the discount window to meet unexpected funding needs and support the fl ow of credit to households and businesses.5 The changes include lowering the primary credit rate by 150 basis points to 0.25 percent and extending borrowing terms for up to 90 days. The total outstanding discount window primary credit borrowing peaked at around $51 billion in late March and has since declined to $11 billion in June. Furthermore, the Federal Reserve maintains standing dollar liquidity swap line agreements with the central banks of several countries and instituted temporary agreements with the central banks of additional countries. After initially ramping up to $439 billion in March and April, the total agreements outstanding stayed mostly fl at in May to reach $447 billion as of June 3 (fi gure B). initiatives described earlier, the Federal Reserve further expanded measures to enhance liquidity and the fl ow of credit to U.S. households and businesses. Under the authority of section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act, with the approval of the Secretary of the Treasury, the Federal Reserve Board implemented various measures in response to intensifi ed stresses in several markets.6 5. A list of regulatory and supervisory actions by the Federal Reserve related to COVID-19 is available on the Board’s website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/supervisory- regulatory-action-response-covid-19.htm. 6. For more information, see the box “Developments Other assets Loans Central bank liquidity swaps Repurchase agreements Agency debt and mortgage-backed securities holdings (including CMBS) Treasury securities held outright NOTE: “Other assets” include unamortized premiums and discounts on securities held outright, the Commercial Paper Funding Facility, the Secondary Market Corporate Credit Facility, and the Municipal Liquidity Facility. “Loans” consist of primary, secondary, and seasonal credit as well as other credit and liquidity facilities, including the Primary Dealer Credit Facility, the Money Market Liquidity Facility, and the Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility. Key identifies areas in order from top to bottom. CMBS is commercial mortgage-backed security. The data extend through June 3, 2020. The combined size of the Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility and the Primary Dealer Credit Facility increased to $86 billion in April, but the size of the facilities declined to $36 billion by June 3. The combined size of other facilities, such as the Paycheck Protection Program Lending Facility, the Commercial Paper Funding Facility, the Secondary Market Corporate Credit Facility, and the Municipal Liquidity Facility, has been steadily rising and reached $65 billion as of June 3 (fi gure C).7 (continued on next page) 7. Figures exclude the 85 percent of the Treasury’s equity contributions invested in nonmarketable Treasury securities for the net portfolio holdings of Commercial Paper Funding Facility II LLC, Corporate Credit Facilities LLC , and Municipal Liquidity Facility LLC. Secretary of the Treasury and are subject to high standards for transparency, including CARES Act (Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act) reporting for some facilities. For more information, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2020), Financial Stability Report (Washington: Board of Governors, May), pp. 9–18, https:// www.federalreserve.gov/publications/files/financial-stability- report-20200515.pdf. Newly issued corporate debt Combined $750 billion Combined $600 billion include reverse repurchase agreements and Treasury contributions. Key identifies areas in order from top to bottom. The data extend through June 3, 2020. liabilities” actions resulted in reserve balances of $3.3 trillion, an increase of $1.7 trillion from the beginning of the year. Additionally, several nonreserve liabilities increased. In March and April, Federal Reserve notes grew faster than normal, partially in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, and reached $1.9 trillion, an increase of $144 billion from the beginning of the year. Note: CP is commercial paper, MMF is money market fund, ABS is asset-backed securities, and PPP is Paycheck Protection Program. * Excludes assets purchased pursuant to terms of the credit facility and amounts related to Treasury contributions to the facility. Source: Federal Reserve Board, Statistical Release H.4.1, “Factors Affecting Reserve Balances.” Furthermore, the U.S. Treasury’s General Account (TGA) at the Federal Reserve, which the Treasury uses to receive taxes and proceeds of Treasury auctions and to process the government’s outlays, increased substantially. At the beginning of 2020, the TGA balance was approximately $400 billion. In preparation for the fi scal spending related to the CARES Act (Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act) and other stimulus measures, the TGA balance reached a high of $1.4 trillion on June 3 (fi gure D).8 The increase in the Federal Reserve’s assets led to a commensurate increase in the size of liabilities on the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. The expansion of total assets from the outright purchases and other 8. By statute, the Federal Reserve serves a special role as In conjunction with the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting held on June 9–10, 2020, meeting participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real gross domestic product (GDP) growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for each year from 2020 through 2022 and over the longer run. Each participant’s projections were based on information available at the time of the meeting, together with his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy and assumptions about other factors likely to affect economic outcomes. The longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the value to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy.23 “Appropriate monetary policy” is defined as the future path of policy that each participant deems most likely to foster outcomes for economic activity and inflation that best satisfy his or her individual interpretation of the Federal Reserve’s congressionally mandated goals of promoting maximum employment and price stability. All participants judged that the uncertainty attending their projections was higher than the average of the past 20 years. The median of participants’ projections for real GDP growth was negative 6.5 percent for 2020, with individual projections ranging from negative 10.0 to negative 4.2 percent (table 1 and figure 1). The median of projections for real GDP growth was 5.0 percent for 2021 and 3.5 percent for 2022. The median assessment of real GDP growth in the longer run was 1.8 percent, down 0.1 percentage point since the December 2019 projections included in the February 2020 Monetary Policy Report. 23. One participant did not submit longer-run The median of projections for the unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of 2020 was 9.3 percent, with individual projections ranging from 7.0 to 14.0 percent. The median of projections for the unemployment rate was 6.5 percent and 5.5 percent in the fourth quarter of 2021 and 2022, respectively. These values are above the median assessment of the longer-run normal unemployment rate, 4.1 percent, which was unchanged from December. The median of projections for inflation, as measured by changes in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), was 0.8 percent for 2020, 1.6 percent for 2021, and 1.7 percent for 2022. Almost all participants expected inflation to run below the Committee’s longer-run objective of 2 percent through 2022. The medians of projections for core PCE inflation were 1.0 percent for this year, 1.5 percent for 2021, and 1.7 percent for 2022. With regard to participants’ projections of appropriate monetary policy, almost all participants expected to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent through at least the end of 2022 (figure 2). These projections represent participants’ individual assessments of appropriate policy consistent with their projections of economic growth, employment, inflation, and other factors. However, the economic outlook is inherently uncertain; thus, each participant’s assessment of appropriate policy is also necessarily uncertain and will change in response to changes to the economic outlook and associated risks. The median estimate of the longer-run level for the federal funds rate, 2.5 percent, was unchanged from December. A more complete description of the Summary of Economic Projections will be released with the minutes of the June 9–10, 2020, FOMC meeting on July 1. Table 1. Economic projections of Federal Reserve Board members and Federal Reserve Bank presidents, under their individual assumptions of projected appropriate monetary policy, June 2020 Percent Longer run Longer run 6.5 2.0 9.3 3.5 7.6– -5.5 2.0–2.2 9.0–10.0 3.5–3.7 10.0– -4.2 -1.0–7.0 1.7–2.2 4.5–12.0 3.3–4.0 December projection . . Memo: Projected appropriate policy path Federal funds rate . . . . . . December projection . . Note: Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP) and projections for both measures of inflation are percent changes from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. PCE inflation and core PCE inflation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index for personal consump- tion expenditures (PCE) and the price index for PCE excluding food and energy. Projections for the unemployment rate are for the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. Each participant’s projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy. Longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the econ- omy. The projections for the federal funds rate are the value of the midpoint of the projected appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the projected appropriate target level for the federal funds rate at the end of the specified calendar year or over the longer run. The December projections were made in conjunction with the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on December 10–11, 2019. One participant did not submit longer-run projections for the change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, or the federal funds rate in conjunction with the December 10–11, 2019, meeting, and one participant did not submit such projections in conjunction with the June 9–10, 2020, meeting. No projections were submitted in conjunction with the March 2020 FOMC meeting. 1. For each period, the median is the middle projection when the projections are arranged from lowest to highest. When the number of projections is even, the median is the 2. The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each year. 3. The range for a variable in a given year includes all participants’ projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year. 4. Longer-run projections for core PCE inflation are not collected. Longer run Figure 1. Medians, central tendencies, and ranges of economic projections, 2020–22 and over the longer run Longer run Longer run Longer run Note: Definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. The data for the actual values of the variables are annual. Longer run Note: Each shaded circle indicates the value (rounded to the nearest 1/8 percentage point) of an individual participant’s judgment of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the appropriate target level for the federal funds rate at the end of the specified calendar year or over the longer run. One participant did not submit longer-run projections for the federal funds rate. emerging market economy implied volatility for the S&P 500 index On August 30, 2012, the data in figures 51, 58, 59, and 61 were corrected to extend through July 13, 2012, as originally noted. In addition, in figure 61, the historical values of some series are slightly different than previously shown, reflecting changes in the set of banks included in the calculations. The Board of Governors is pleased to submit its Monetary Policy Report to the Congress pursuant to section 2B of the Federal Reserve Act. The pace of economic recovery appears to have slowed during the first half of this year, with real gross domes- tic product (GDP) likely having risen at only a modest pace. In the labor market, the rate of job gains has diminished recently, and, following a period of improvement, the unemployment rate has been little changed at an elevated level since January. Meanwhile, consumer price inflation over the first five months of 2012 was lower, on net, than in 2011, and longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable. A number of factors will likely restrain economic growth in the period ahead, including weak economic growth abroad and a fiscal environment that looks set to become less accommodative. Uncertainty about these factors may also restrain household and business spending. In addition, credit conditions are likely to improve only gradually, as are still-elevated inventories of vacant and foreclosed homes. Moreover, the possibility of a fur- ther material deterioration of conditions in Europe, or of a particularly severe change in U.S. fiscal conditions, poses significant downside risks to the outlook. Against this backdrop, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) took steps to provide additional monetary policy accommodation during the first half of 2012. In particular, the Committee changed its for- ward guidance regarding the period over which it anticipates the federal funds rate to remain at excep- tionally low levels and announced a continuation of its maturity extension program (MEP) through the end of the year. These policies put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates and made broad financial conditions more accommodative than they would oth- erwise be, thereby supporting the economic recovery. mounting losses at Spanish banks renewed questions about the sustainability of Spain’s sovereign debt and the resiliency of the euro-area banking system. As yields on the government debt of Spain and other vul- nerable European countries rose toward new highs, euro-area leaders responded with additional policy measures in late June, including increasing the flexibil- ity of the region’s financial backstops and making progress toward greater cooperation in the supervision and, as necessary, recapitalization of Europe’s banks. Many critical details, however, remain to be worked out against a backdrop of continued economic weak- ness and political strain. Financial markets were somewhat volatile over the first half of 2012 mostly due to fluctuating views regarding the crisis in the euro area and the likely pace of economic growth at home and abroad. As investors’ concerns about the situation in Europe eased early in the year and with data releases generally coming in to the upside of market expectations, broad equity price indexes rose and risk spreads in several markets nar- rowed. Subsequently, however, market participants pulled back from riskier assets amid renewed concerns about the euro area and evidence of slowing global economic growth. Reflecting these developments but also owing to the lengthening of the forward rate guid- ance, continuation of the MEP, and increased expecta- tions by market participants of additional balance sheet actions by the Federal Reserve, yields on longer- term Treasury securities and corporate debt as well as rates on residential mortgages declined, on net, and reached historically low levels at times during the first half of the year. On balance since the beginning of the year, broad equity prices rose as corporate earnings remained fairly resilient through the first quarter. The European fiscal and banking crisis has remained a major source of strain on global financial markets. Early in the year, financial stresses within the euro area moderated somewhat in light of a number of policy actions: The European Central Bank (ECB) provided ample liquidity to the region’s banks, euro-area leaders agreed to increase the lending capacity of their rescue facilities, and a new assistance package for Greece was approved following a restructuring of Greek sovereign debt. However, tensions within the euro area increased again in the spring as political uncertainties rekindled fears of a disorderly Greek exit from the euro area and After rising at an annual rate of 2½ percent in the second half of 2011, real GDP increased at a 2 percent pace in the first quarter of 2012, and available indica- tors point to a still smaller gain in the second quarter. Private spending continues to be weighed down by a range of factors, including uncertainty about develop- ments in Europe and the path for U.S. fiscal policy, concerns about the strength and sustainability of the recovery, the still-anemic state of the housing market, and the difficulties that many would-be borrowers con- tinue to have in obtaining credit. Such considerations have made some businesses more cautious about increasing investment or materially expanding their payrolls and have led households to remain quite pessi- mistic about their income and employment prospects. Smoothing through the effects of unseasonably warm weather this past winter, activity in the housing sector appears to have been a little stronger so far this year. However, the level of housing activity remains low and continues to be held down by tight mortgage credit. Meanwhile, the drag on real GDP growth from govern- ment purchases is likely to persist, as budgets for state and local governments remain strained and federal fiscal policy is likely to become more restrictive in 2013. ment averaged 225,000 jobs per month in the first quarter, up from 165,000 jobs per month in the second half of last year, but fell back in the second quarter to just 90,000 jobs per month. Although the slowing in the pace of net job creation may have been exaggerated by issues related to swings in the weather and to sea- sonal adjustment difficulties associated with the timing of the sharpest job losses during the recession, those factors do not appear to fully account for the slow- down. The unemployment rate declined from about 9 percent last summer to a still-elevated 8¼ percent in January, and it has remained close to that level since then. Likewise, long-term joblessness has shown little net improvement this year, with the share of those unemployed persons who have been jobless for six months or longer remaining around 40 percent. Further meaningful reductions in unemployment are likely to require some pickup in the pace of economic activity. Consumer price inflation moved down, on net, dur- ing the first half of the year. The price index for overall personal consumption expenditures (PCE) rose rapidly in the first three months of the year, reflecting large increases in oil prices, but inflation turned down in the spring when oil prices more than reversed their earlier run-ups. In all, the PCE price index increased at an annual rate of about 1½ percent over the first five months of the year, compared with a rise of 2½ percent during 2011. Excluding food and energy, consumer prices rose at about a 2 percent rate over the first five months of the year, close to the pace recorded over 2011. In addition to the net decline in crude oil prices over the first half of the year, factors contribut- ing to low consumer price inflation this year include the deceleration of non-oil import prices in the latter part of 2011, subdued labor costs associated with the weak labor market, and stable inflation expectations. In the household sector, credit conditions have gen- erally remained tight for all but highly rated borrowers; among other factors, this tightness reflects the uncer- tain economic outlook and the high unemployment rate. Total mortgage debt decreased further as the pace of mortgage applications to purchase a new home was sluggish. Refinancing activity increased over the course of the second quarter but remained below levels reached in previous refinancing booms despite histori- cally low mortgage interest rates. The increase in refi- nancing was partially attributable to recent enhance- ments made to the Home Affordable Refinance Program that appeared to boost refinancing activity somewhat for borrowers with underwater mortgages— that is, for those who owed more on their mortgages than their homes were worth. Consumer credit expanded moderately mainly because of growth in fed- eral student loans. Firms in the nonfinancial corporate sector continued to raise funds at a generally moderate pace in the first half of the year. Those with access to capital markets took advantage of low interest rates to refinance exist- ing debt. As a result, corporate debt issuance was solid over the first part of the year, although issuance of speculative-grade corporate bonds weakened notably in June as investors pulled back from riskier assets. Commercial and industrial loans on the books of banks expanded briskly, but borrowing conditions for small businesses have improved more slowly than have those for larger firms. Financing conditions for com- mercial real estate stayed relatively restrictive, and fun- damentals in that sector showed few signs of improvement. ated in the first half of 2012. In March, the release of the results from the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review, which investors interpreted as indicating continued improvements in the health of domestic banks, provided a significant boost to the equity prices of U.S. financial institutions. Those gains partially reversed when market sentiment worsened in May, driven in large part by concerns about Europe and potential spillovers to the United States and its finan- cial institutions. On balance, however, equity prices of banks rose significantly from relatively low levels at the start of the year. An index of credit default swap spreads for the large bank holding companies declined about 60 basis points, but those spreads remained at a high level. Despite the swings in market sentiment about global banking organizations, conditions in unsecured short-term dollar funding markets were fairly stable in the first half of 2012. European finan- cial institutions have reduced their demand for dollar funding over recent quarters, and general funding pres- sures apparently were alleviated by the ECB’s longer- term refinancing operations. With the Committee anticipating only slow progress in bringing unemployment down toward levels that it judges to be consistent with its dual mandate and strains in global financial markets continuing to pose significant downside risks to the economic outlook, the FOMC took additional steps to augment the already highly accommodative stance for monetary policy dur- ing the first half of 2012. In January, the Committee modified its forward rate guidance, noting that eco- nomic conditions were likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through late 2014. And in June, the FOMC decided to continue the MEP until the end of the year rather than completing the program at the end of June as previously scheduled. The June Summary of Economic Projections is pre- sented in Part 4 of this report. At the time of the Com- mittee’s June meeting, FOMC participants (the 7 members of the Board of Governors and the presi- dents of the 12 Federal Reserve Banks) saw the economy expanding at a moderate pace over coming quarters and then picking up gradually under the assumption of appropriate monetary policy. Most par- ticipants marked down their projections for economic growth in 2012 and 2013 relative to what they antici- pated in January and April largely as a result of the adverse developments in Europe and the associated effects on financial markets. Moreover, headwinds from the fiscal and financial situation in Europe, from the still-depressed housing market, and from tight credit for some borrowers were cited as likely to hold back the pace of economic expansion over the forecast period. FOMC participants also projected slower progress in reducing unemployment than they had anticipated in January and April. Committee participants’ projec- tions for the unemployment rate had a central ten- dency of 8.0 to 8.2 percent in the fourth quarter of this year and then declined to 7.0 to 7.7 percent at the end of 2014; those levels are still generally well above par- ticipants’ estimates of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment. Meanwhile, participants’ projections for inflation had a central tendency of 1.2 to 1.7 per- cent for 2012 and 1.5 to 2.0 percent for both 2013 and 2014; these projections are lower, particularly in 2012, than participants reported in January and April, in part reflecting the effects of the recent drop in crude oil prices. With the unemployment rate expected to remain elevated over the projection period and inflation gener- ally expected to be at or under the Committee’s 2 per- cent objective, most participants expected that, under their individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy, the federal funds rate would remain extraordi- narily low for some time. In particular, 11 of the 19 participants placed the target federal funds rate at 0.75 percent or lower at the end of 2014; only 4 of them saw the appropriate rate at 2 percent or higher. All participants reported levels for the appropriate tar- get federal funds rate at the end of 2014 that were well below their estimates of the level expected to prevail in the longer run. In addition to projecting only slow progress in bringing down unemployment, most par- ticipants saw the risks to the outlook as weighted mainly toward slower growth and higher unemploy- ment. In particular, participants noted that strains in global financial markets, the prospect of reduced fiscal accommodation in the United States, and a general slowdown in global economic growth posed significant risks to the recovery and to a further improvement in labor market conditions. Economic activity appears to have expanded at a somewhat slower pace over the first half of 2012 than in the second half of 2011. After rising at an annual rate of 2½ percent in the second half of 2011, real gross domestic product (GDP) increased at a 2 percent pace in the first quarter of 2012, and available indica- tors point to a still smaller gain in the second quarter (figure 1). An important factor influencing economic and financial developments this year is the unfolding fiscal and banking crisis in Europe. Indeed, the eco- nomic outlook for the second half of 2012 depends crucially on the extent to which current and potential disruptions in Europe directly reduce U.S. net exports and indirectly curtail private domestic spending through adverse spillover effects on U.S. financial mar- kets and institutions and on household and business confidence. At the same time, the economy continues to face other headwinds, including restricted access to some types of household and small business credit, a still sizable inventory of vacant homes, and less- accommodative fiscal policy. The labor market remains weak. Private payroll employment stepped up early in the year but then slowed in the second quarter (though those moves may have been exaggerated by issues related to swings in the weather and to seasonal adjustment), and the unem- ployment rate hovered around 8¼ percent after a sig- nificant decrease over the latter months of 2011 and in January. Meanwhile, consumer price inflation, in part buffeted by sharp swings in the price of gasoline, stepped up early in the year but subsequently turned down, and longer-term inflation expectations remained stable (figure 2). Financial markets were somewhat volatile over the first half of 2012 mostly due to fluctuating views regarding the crisis in the euro area and the likely pace of economic growth at home and abroad. Yields on longer-term Treasury securities have declined signifi- cantly, reflecting greater monetary policy accommoda- tion, the weaker outlook, and safe-haven flows. Broad indexes of U.S. equity prices rose, on net, risk spreads on corporate bonds were generally unchanged or slightly lower, and unsecured short-term dollar funding markets were fairly stable. Debt issuance by U.S. cor- porations was solid, and bank lending to larger firms was brisk. In the household sector, consumer credit expanded and mortgage refinancing activity increased modestly, reflecting the decline in mortgage rates to historically low levels as well as recent changes to the Home Affordable Refinance Program (HARP). 1. Change in real gross domestic product, 2006–12 2. Change in the chain-type price index for personal consumption expenditures, 2006–12 Excluding food and energy NOTE: Here and in subsequent figures, except as noted, change for a given period is measured to its final quarter from the final quarter of the preceding period. NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through May 2012; changes are After rising at an annual rate of about 2 percent in the second half of 2011, real personal consumption expen- ditures (PCE) increased 2½ percent in the first quarter, but available information suggests that real PCE decel- erated some in the second quarter (figure 3). The first- quarter increase in spending occurred across a broad array of goods and services with the notable exception of outlays for energy services, which were held down by reduced demand for heating because of the unsea- sonably warm winter. Spending on energy services appears to have rebounded in the second quarter as the temperate winter gave way to a relatively more typical spring. In contrast, the pace of motor vehicle sales edged down in the second quarter, and reports on retail sales suggest that consumer outlays on a wide range of items rose less rapidly than they did in the first quarter. The moderate rise in consumer spending over the first half of the year occurred against the backdrop of the considerable economic challenges still facing many households, including high unemploy- ment, sluggish gains in employment, tepid growth in income, still-stressed balanced sheets, tight access to some types of credit, and lingering pessimism about job and income prospects. With increases in spending outpacing growth in income so far this year, the per- sonal saving rate continued to decline, on net, though it remained well above levels that prevailed before the recession (figure 4). 3. Change in real personal consumption expenditures, 2006–12 NOTE: The data are quarterly and extend through 2012:Q1. SOURCE: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis. 4. Personal saving rate, 1992–2012 NOTE: The data are quarterly and extend through 2012:Q2; the reading for 2012:Q2 is the average for April and May. personal income less personal taxes, adjusted for changes in prices—rose more rapidly over the first five months of the year than it did in 2011, in part because of declining energy prices (figure 5). The wage and sal- ary component of real DPI, which reflects both the number of hours worked and average hourly wages adjusted for inflation, rose at an annual rate of nearly 1¼ percent through May of this year after having increased at a similar pace in 2011. The increase in real wage and salary income so far in 2012 is largely attrib- utable to the modest improvement in employment and 5. Change in real disposable personal income and in real wage and salary disbursements, 2006–12 NOTE: Through 2011, change is from December to December; for 2012, change is from December to May. The real wage and salary disbursements series is nominal wage and salary disbursements deflated by the personal consumption expenditures deflator. hours worked; real average hourly earnings are little changed thus far this year. The ratio of household net worth to income, in the aggregate, moved up slightly further in the first quarter, reflecting increases in both house prices and equity prices (figure 6). Taking a longer view, this ratio has been on a slow upward trend since 2009, and while it remains far below levels seen in the years leading up to the recession, it is about equal to its average over the past 20 years. Household-level data through 2010 indi- cate that wealth losses were proportionately larger for the middle portion of the wealth distribution—not a surprising result, given the relative importance of housing among the assets of those households. Mean- while, indicators of consumer sentiment are above their lows from last summer but have yet to return to pre-recession levels (figure 7). Household debt—the sum of mortgage and con- sumer debt—edged down again in the first quarter of 2012 as the continued contraction in mortgage debt was almost offset by solid expansion in consumer credit. With the reduction in household debt, low level of most interest rates, and modest growth of income, the debt-service ratio—the aggregate required principal and interest payments on existing household debt rela- tive to income—decreased further, and, at the end of the first quarter, it stood at a level last seen in 1994 (figure 8). Consumer credit expanded at an annual rate of about 6¼ percent in the first five months of 2012, driven by an increase in nonrevolving credit. This com- ponent accounts for about two-thirds of total con- sumer credit and primarily consists of auto and stu- 6. Wealth-to-income ratio, 1992–2012 NOTE: The data are quarterly and extend through 2012:Q1. The wealth- to-income ratio is the ratio of household net worth to disposable personal income. 7. Consumer sentiment indexes, 2002–12 NOTE: The Conference Board data are monthly and extend through June 2012; the series is indexed to equal 100 in 1985. The Thomson Reuters/University of Michigan data are monthly and extend through a preliminary estimate for July 2012; the series is indexed to equal 100 in 1966. SOURCE: The Conference Board and Thomson Reuters/University of dent loans. The rise in nonrevolving credit so far this year was primarily due to the strength in student loans, which were almost entirely originated and funded by the federal government. Meanwhile, auto loans main- tained a steady pace of increase. Revolving consumer credit (primarily credit card lending) remained much more subdued in the first five months of the year in part because nonprime borrowers continued to face tight underwriting standards. Overall, the increase in consumer credit is consistent with recent responses to the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS) indicating that demand 8. Household debt service, 1984–2012 NOTE: The data are quarterly and extend through 2012:Q1. Debt service payments consist of estimated required payments on outstanding mortgage and consumer debt. had strengthened and standards had eased, on net, for all consumer loan categories.1 Interest rates on consumer loans generally edged down in the first half of 2012, and spreads on these loans relative to Treasury securities of comparable maturity held fairly steady. In particular, interest rates on new auto loans continued to be quite low. However, the spread of rates on credit card loans relative to the two-year Treasury yield has remained wide since the end of 2008 in part because of pricing adjustments made in response to provisions included in the Credit Card Accountability Responsibility and Disclosure Act of 2009.2 Aggregate indicators of consumer credit quality improved further in the first quarter of 2012. The delinquency rate on credit card loans registered its low- est level since the series began in 1991. The recent improvement importantly reflects an ongoing composi- tional shift in total credit card balances toward borrow- ers with higher credit scores, due in part to tighter lending standards. Charge-offs on credit card loans also declined, reaching levels last seen at the end of 2007. Delinquencies and charge-offs on nonrevolving consumer loans at commercial banks also edged lower, to levels slightly below their historical averages. In addition, the delinquency rate on auto loans at finance companies decreased slightly to a level that is near the middle of its historical range. Issuance of consumer asset-backed securities (ABS) in the first half of 2012 exceeded issuance for the same period in 2011 but was still below pre-crisis levels (fig- ure 9). Issuances of securities backed by auto loans dominated the market for most of the first half, while student loan ABS issuance was about the same as in the past two years. In contrast, issuance of credit card ABS remained weak for most of the first half of 2012 as growth of credit card loans continued to be some- what subdued and most major banks have chosen to fund such loans on their balance sheets. Yields on ABS and their spreads over comparable-maturity swap rates were little changed, on net, over the first half of 2012 and held steady in the low ranges that have prevailed since early 2010. Activity in the housing sector appears to be on a gradual uptrend, albeit from a very depressed level. 1. The SLOOS is available on the Federal Reserve Board’s website 2. The act includes some provisions that place restrictions on issu- ers’ ability to impose certain fees and to engage in risk-based pricing. 9. Gross consumer asset-backed security issuance, 2007–12 Sales of new and existing homes have risen so far this year, likely supported by the low level of house prices and by low interest rates for conventional mortgages. Nonetheless, the factors that have restrained demand for owner-occupied housing in recent years have yet to dissipate. Many potential buyers are reluctant to pur- chase homes because of ongoing concerns about future income, employment, and the direction of house prices. In addition, tight mortgage finance conditions preclude many borrowers from obtaining mortgage credit. Much of the home purchase demand that does exist has been channeled to the abundant stock of vacant houses, thereby limiting the response of new construction activity to such expansion of demand as has occurred. Given the large numbers of properties still in, or at risk of being in, foreclosure, this overhang seems likely to continue to weigh on new construction activity for some time. Despite these factors, housing starts have risen gradually so far this year (figure 10). From January to May, single-family houses were started at an annual rate of about 495,000 units, up from 450,000 in the second half of 2011 but less than half of the average pace of the past 50 years. Although the unseasonably warm winter may have contributed to the increase, the underlying pace of activity likely rose some as well. Indeed, data on single-family permit issuance, which is less likely to be affected by weather, also moved up a little from its level late last year. In the multifamily sec- tor, demand has remained robust, as many individuals and families that are unable or unwilling to purchase homes have sought out rental units. As a result, the vacancy rate for rental housing has fallen to its lowest level since 2002, putting upward pressure on rents and spurring new construction. Over the first five months 10. Private housing starts, 2002–12 NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through May 2012. SOURCE: Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. of the year, new multifamily projects were started at an average annual rate of about 225,000 units, up from about 200,000 in the second half of 2011 but still below the 300,000-unit rate that prevailed for much of the previous decade. House prices, as measured by several national indexes, turned up in recent months after edging down further, on balance, in 2011 (figure 11). For example, the CoreLogic repeat-sales index rose 4 percent (not an annual rate) over the first five months of the year. This recent improvement notwithstanding, this measure of house prices remains 30 percent below its peak in 2006. 11. Prices of existing single-family houses, 2001–12 NOTE: The S&P/Case-Shiller and FHFA data are monthly and extend through April 2012. The CoreLogic data are monthly and extend through May 2012. Each index has been normalized so that its peak is 100. Both the CoreLogic price index and the FHFA index (formerly calculated by the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight) include purchase transactions only. The S&P/Case-Shiller index reflects all arm’s-length sales transactions in selected metropolitan areas. The same factors that are restraining single-family housing construction also continue to weigh on house prices, including the large inventory of vacant homes, tight mortgage credit conditions, and lackluster demand. Mortgage rates declined to historically low levels during the first half of 2012 (figure 12). While signifi- cant, the drop in mortgage rates generally did not keep pace with the declines in the yields on Treasury and mortgage-backed securities (MBS), probably reflecting still-elevated risk aversion and some capacity con- straints among mortgage originators. Despite the drop in mortgage rates, many potentially creditworthy bor- rowers have had difficulty obtaining mortgages or refi- nancing because of tight standards and terms (see the box “The Supply of Mortgage Credit”). Another fac- tor impeding the ability of many borrowers to refi- nance, or to sell their home and purchase a new one, has been the prevalence of underwater mortgages. Overall, refinancing activity increased in the second quarter but was still less than might be expected, given the level of interest rates, and the pace of mortgage applications for home purchases remained sluggish. However, refinancing activity attributed to recent changes to the HARP—one of which eliminated caps on loan-to-value ratios for those who were refinancing mortgages already owned by government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs)—has picked up over the first half of the year. Indicators of credit quality in the residential mort- gage sector continued to reflect strains on homeowners confronting depressed home values and high unem- ployment. The fraction of current prime mortgages becoming delinquent remained at a high level but 12. Mortgage interest rates, 1995–2012 Fixed rate NOTE: The data, which are weekly and extend through July 11, 2012, are Access to mortgage credit is among the important factors that affect the demand for housing and thus the recovery in the housing sector. Lending stan- dards appear to be considerably tighter than they were even before the housing boom, likely pre- venting many households from purchasing homes. According to the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS), from mid-2007 into 2009, many lenders tightened their standards for residential mortgages originated to borrowers with prime credit scores, and very few have eased standards since then (ﬁgure A). More- over, the market for nontraditional mortgages con- tinues to be impaired, while the market for sub- prime mortgages remains effectively closed. Similarly, the range of credit scores on newly origi- nated prime mortgages has remained elevated since lenders shifted toward higher-rated borrow- ers in 2008 (ﬁgure B). The upward shift in credit scores is also evident for prime borrowers who reﬁ- nanced their mortgages and for Federal Housing Administration mortgages. A. Net percentage of domestic respondents tightening standards for residential mortgage loans, 1990–2012 NOTE: For data starting in 2007:Q1, changes in standards for prime and nontraditional mortgage loans are reported separately. Data are quarterly; the last observation is from the April 2012 survey, which covers 2012:Q1. inched lower, on net, over the first five months of the year, likely reflecting in part stricter underwriting of more-recent originations. Additionally, measures of late-stage mortgage delinquency, such as the inventory of properties in foreclosure, continued to linger near the peak in the first quarter of 2012 (figure 13). Gross issuance of MBS guaranteed by GSEs remained moderate in the first half of 2012, consistent with the slow pace of mortgage originations. In con- trast, the securitization market for mortgage loans not guaranteed by a housing-related GSE or the Federal Housing Administration—an important source of funding before the crisis for prime-grade mortgages that exceeded the conforming loan size limit—contin- ued to be essentially closed. Real business spending for equipment and software (E&S) rose at an annual rate of 3½ percent in the first quarter of 2012 after having risen at a double-digit pace, on average, in the second half of 2011 (figure 14). The slowdown in E&S investment growth in the first quarter was fairly widespread across categories of equipment and software. This deceleration in E&S spending along with the recent softening in indicators of investment demand, such as surveys of business sentiment and capital spending plans, may signal some Mortgage credit standards were clearly too lax in the middle of the previous decade, and some tight- ening of lending policies was warranted. Nonethe- less, industry data indicate that only about one-half of lenders currently even so much as offer a mort- gage to borrowers with credit scores and loan-to- value ratios toward the lower ends of the ranges allowed by the government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs) Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. That fraction has improved only slightly from 2010. Respondents to the April SLOOS were asked to identify reasons for their lack of willingness to origi- nate some GSE-eligible mortgages. The factor most frequently cited as “most important” or “very important” was the elevated risk of “putbacks” of delinquent mortgages by the GSEs—that is, the pos- sibility that the GSEs might require originators to repurchase loans with any underwriting irregulari- ties—suggesting that the incomplete transfer of credit risk to the GSEs is an important consider- ation. Two other factors were cited as most impor- tant or very important by almost one-half of respondents: (1) issues related to private mortgage insurance, including the greater difficulty that bor- rowers faced in obtaining coverage or the higher premiums that they paid for it, and (2) the outlook for house prices. Greater concern about their bank’s existing exposure to residential real estate loans and increased concerns about effects of leg- islative changes, supervisory actions, or changes in accounting standards were also cited relatively fre- quently as very important factors. An additional constraint hindering households’ access to mortgage credit is negative equity that has resulted from the decline in house prices in rowers is underwater on his or her mortgage— borrowers are restricted in their ability to reﬁnance into a lower mortgage rate; they may also ﬁnd their mobility limited by the difficulty of selling their cur- Access to mortgage credit is among the important have eased standards since then (ﬁgure A). More- over, the market for nontraditional mortgages con- tinues to be impaired, while the market for sub- prime mortgages remains effectively closed. Similarly, the range of credit scores on newly origi- nated prime mortgages has remained elevated since lenders shifted toward higher-rated borrow- ers in 2008 (ﬁgure B). The upward shift in credit scores is also evident for prime borrowers who reﬁ- nanced their mortgages and for Federal Housing Administration mortgages. Mortgage credit standards were clearly too lax in the middle of the previous decade, and some tight- ening of lending policies was warranted. Nonethe- less, industry data indicate that only about one-half of lenders currently even so much as offer a mort- gage to borrowers with credit scores and loan-to- value ratios toward the lower ends of the ranges allowed by the government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs) Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. That fraction has improved only slightly from 2010. factors that affect the demand for housing and thus the recovery in the housing sector. Lending stan- dards appear to be considerably tighter than they were even before the housing boom, likely pre- venting many households from purchasing homes. mid-2007 into 2009, many lenders tightened their standards for residential mortgages originated to Respondents to the April SLOOS were asked to identify reasons for their lack of willingness to origi- nate some GSE-eligible mortgages. The factor most frequently cited as “most important” or “very important” was the elevated risk of “putbacks” of delinquent mortgages by the GSEs—that is, the pos- sibility that the GSEs might require originators to repurchase loans with any underwriting irregulari- ties—suggesting that the incomplete transfer of credit risk to the GSEs is an important consider- ation. Two other factors were cited as most impor- tant or very important by almost one-half of respondents: (1) issues related to private mortgage insurance, including the greater difficulty that bor- rowers faced in obtaining coverage or the higher premiums that they paid for it, and (2) the outlook for house prices. Greater concern about their bank’s existing exposure to residential real estate loans and increased concerns about effects of leg- islative changes, supervisory actions, or changes in accounting standards were also cited relatively fre- quently as very important factors. NOTE: Includes purchase mortgages only. The data are monthly and extend through May 2012. An additional constraint hindering households’ access to mortgage credit is negative equity that has resulted from the decline in house prices in recent years. Roughly one in four mortgage bor- rowers is underwater on his or her mortgage— nearly 13 million households in all. Underwater borrowers are restricted in their ability to reﬁnance into a lower mortgage rate; they may also ﬁnd their mobility limited by the difficulty of selling their cur- rent home. renewed caution on the part of businesses, perhaps related to the situation in Europe. Firms accumulated inventories in the first quarter at about the same pace as in the fourth quarter of last year (figure 15). Motor vehicle inventories surged in the first quarter, as automakers rebuilt dealers’ invento- ries to comfortable levels after natural disasters dis- rupted global supply chains in 2011. Stockbuilding outside of motor vehicles moderated somewhat from the fourth-quarter pace of accumulation. Inventory-to- sales ratios for most industries covered by the Census Bureau’s book-value data, as well as surveys of private inventory satisfaction and plans, generally suggest that stocks are fairly well aligned with the pace of sales. After posting robust gains throughout much of 2011, investment in nonresidential structures edged up in the first quarter of this year. A drop in outlays for drilling and mining structures was probably related to the low level of natural gas prices. Outside of the drill- ing and mining segments, investment increased at an annual rate of 7 percent in the first quarter, broadly similar to its gain in the fourth quarter of 2011. Although financing conditions for existing properties have eased some, they remain tight; moreover, high vacancy rates, low commercial real estate prices, and difficult financing conditions for new construction will likely weigh on building activity for the foreseeable future. 13. Current prime mortgages becoming delinquent NOTE: The data for prime mortgages are monthly and extend through May 2012. The data for foreclosure inventory are quarterly and extend through 2012:Q1. Percentage of mortgages that transition from being current to being at least 30 days delinquent each month. The shaded bars indicate periods of business recession as defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research. SOURCE: For prime mortgages, LPS Applied Analytics; for foreclosure inventory, Federal Reserve Board staff calculations based on data from Mortgage Bankers Association. 14. Change in real business fixed investment, 2006–12 Structures excluding mining and drilling Mining and drilling 15. Change in real business inventories, 2006–12 Billions of chained (2005) dollars, annual rate Aggregate operating earnings per share for S&P 500 firms rose about 7 percent at a seasonally adjusted quarterly rate in the first quarter of 2012. Financial firms accounted for most of the gain, while profits for firms in the nonfinancial sector were about unchanged from the high level seen in the fourth quarter of last year. As of the end of June, private-sector analysts pro- jected moderate earnings growth through the end of the year. uct in the first quarter of 2012 hovered around its his- torical high, and cash flow remained solid. In addition, the ratio of liquid assets to total assets continued to be near its highest level in more than 20 years, and the share of corporate cash flow needed to cover interest expenses remained low. Against this backdrop of gen- erally strong corporate earnings and balance sheets, credit rating upgrades continued to outpace down- grades for nonfinancial corporations, and the bond default rate for nonfinancial firms remained low in the first half of the year. The delinquency rate on commer- cial and industrial (C&I) loans decreased further in the first quarter and approached the lower end of its his- torical range. With corporate credit quality remaining robust, non- financial firms were able to continue to raise funds at a generally strong pace in the first half of the year (fig- ure 16). So far this year, nonfinancial commercial paper (CP) outstanding was about unchanged. Bond issuance by both investment- and speculative-grade nonfinancial firms was strong over the first four months of the year, but speculative-grade issuance weakened some in May and notably further in June. 16. Selected components of net financing for nonfinancial businesses, 2005–12 NOTE: The data for the components except bonds are seasonally adjusted. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Board, flow of funds data. The institutional segment of the syndicated leveraged loan market remained solid in the first half of the year, reportedly supported by continued demand for loans from nonbank investors, such as pension plans and insurance companies (figure 17). In addition, the vol- ume of newly established collateralized loan obliga- tions so far this year has already surpassed 2011 levels. Much of the bond and loan issuance was reportedly used to refinance, and likely also to extend the maturity of, existing debt, given the low level of long-term inter- est rates. C&I loans outstanding at commercial banking orga- nizations in the United States expanded at a brisk pace in the first half of 2012 despite declines in the holdings of such loans by U.S. branches and agencies of Euro- pean institutions. The strength is consistent with a rela- NOTE: The reading for 2012:Q2 is the average for April and May. New money loans are new syndicated loans. Refinancing loans are syndicated loans that are used to repay existing debt. tively large number of banks, on balance, that have reported stronger demand for C&I loans in the recent SLOOS (figure 18). Moreover, in the April SLOOS, banks continued to report having eased both price and nonprice terms for C&I loans, largely in response to strong competition from other banks and nonbank lenders. The extent of easing generally has been greater for large and middle-market firms. That said, accord- ing to the Survey of Terms of Business Lending (STBL), spreads on C&I loans over banks’ cost of funds, while continuing to trend down gradually in the February and May surveys, are still quite high in his- torical terms. Spreads on newly issued syndicated loans have also remained somewhat wide. Borrowing conditions for small businesses generally have improved over the past few years but have done so much more gradually than have conditions for larger firms; moreover, the demand for credit from small firms apparently remains subdued. C&I loans with original amounts of $1 million or less—a large share of which likely consists of loans to small businesses— were about unchanged in the first quarter.3 According to results from surveys conducted by the National Fed- eration of Independent Business during the first half of this year, the fraction of firms with borrowing needs stayed low (figure 19). The net percentage of respon- dents that found credit more difficult to obtain than 3. The original amount for a C&I loan is defined in the Call 18. Change in standards and demand for commercial and industrial loans, 1991–2012 NOTE: The data are drawn from a survey generally conducted four times per year; the last observation is from the April 2012 survey, which covers 2012:Q1. Each series represents the net percent of commercial and industrial loans held by surveyed banks that reported a tightening of standards or stronger demand over the past three months. The shaded bars indicate periods of business recession as defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research. 19. Net percentage of firms with borrowing needs, 1994–2012 NOTE: The data are drawn from a survey conducted monthly and are seasonally adjusted; the last observation is from the June 2012 survey. The data represent the proportion of businesses with borrowing needs over the past three months regardless of whether those needs were satisfied or not satisfied. This number is seasonally adjusted. three months earlier and that expected tighter credit conditions over the next three months have both declined, but they remained at relatively high levels in the June survey. In addition, recent readings from the STBL indicate that the spreads charged by commercial banks on newly originated C&I loans with original amounts less than $1 million remained quite high, even on loans with the strongest credit ratings. (CRE) sector have eased some but stayed relatively tight amid weak fundamentals. According to the April SLOOS, some domestic banks reported having eased standards on CRE loans and, on balance, a significant number of domestic banks reported increased demand for such loans. While banks’ holdings of CRE loans continued to contract in the first half of this year, they did so at a slower pace than in the second half of last year. The weakest segment of CRE lending has been the portion supporting construction and land develop- ment; some other segments have recently expanded modestly. Issuance of commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) has also increased recently from the low levels observed last year. Nonetheless, the delin- quency rate on loans in CMBS pools continued to set new highs in June, as some five-year loans issued in 2007 at the height of the market were unable to refi- nance at maturity because of their high loan-to-value ratios (figure 20). While delinquency rates for CRE loans at commercial banks improved slightly in the first quarter, they remained elevated, especially for con- struction and land development loans. In the corporate equity market, gross public equity issuance by nonfinancial firms was strong in the first 20. Delinquency rates on commercial real estate loans, 1991–2012 20. Delinquency rates on commercial real estate loans, 1991–2012 NOTE: The data for commercial banks and life insurance companies are quarterly and extend through 2012:Q1. The data for commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) are monthly and extend through June 2012. The delinquency rates for commercial banks and CMBS are the percent of loans 30 days or more past due or not accruing interest. The delinquency rate for life insurance companies is the percent of loans 60 days or more past due or not accruing interest. five months of 2012, boosted by a solid pace of initial public offerings (IPOs).4 Data for the first quarter of 2012 indicate that share repurchases and cash-financed mergers by nonfinancial firms remained robust, and net equity issuance remained deeply negative (fig- ure 21). However, fewer mergers and new share repur- chase programs were announced in the second quarter. The deficit in the federal unified budget remains elevated. The Congressional Budget Office projects that the deficit for fiscal year 2012 will be close to $1.2 trillion, or about 7½ percent of nominal GDP. Such a deficit would be a narrower share of GDP than those recorded over the past several years though still 4. Indeed, the second largest IPO on record began trading in mid-May. However, the price performance of those shares in the days following that offering was sharply negative on net, and IPO activity subsequently weakened significantly. 21. Components of net equity issuance, 2005–12 NOTE: Net equity issuance is the difference between equity issued by domestic companies in public or private markets and equity retired through share repurchases, domestic cash-financed mergers, or foreign takeovers of U.S. firms. Equity issuance includes funds invested by private equity partnerships and stock option proceeds. sharply higher than those recorded in the few years prior to the onset of the financial crisis and recession. The narrowing of the budget deficit expected to occur in the current fiscal year mostly reflects increases in tax revenues as the economy continues to recover, although the growth in outlays is being held back by the winding down of expansionary fiscal policies enacted in response to the recession, as well as some budgetary restraint in defense and other discretionary spending programs. Federal receipts increased 5 percent in the first nine months of fiscal 2012 compared with the same period in fiscal 2011. Receipts were bolstered thus far this fis- cal year by a robust rise in corporate tax revenues that is largely attributable to a scaling back in the favorable tax treatment of some business investment. In addi- tion, individual income and payroll tax receipts have moved higher, reflecting increases in nominal wage and salary income. Nonetheless, at only about 15½ percent, the ratio of federal receipts to national income is near the lowest reading for this ratio over the past 60 years (figure 22). Total federal outlays moved sideways in the first nine months of fiscal 2012 relative to the comparable year- earlier period. Outlays were reduced by the winding down of stimulus-related programs (including the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009), lower payments for unemployment insurance, and fall- ing defense expenditures. In addition, outlays for Med- icaid so far this fiscal year were unusually weak, appar- ently reflecting in part the implementation of cost- containment measures by many state governments to reduce spending growth for that program. In contrast, 22. Federal receipts and expenditures, 1992–2012 NOTE: Through 2011, receipts and expenditures are for fiscal years (October through September); gross domestic product (GDP) is for the four quarters ending in Q3. For 2012, receipts and expenditures are for the 12 months ending in June, and GDP is the average of 2011:Q4 and 2012:Q1. Receipts and expenditures are on a unified-budget basis. Social Security outlays rose in part because of the first cost-of-living adjustments since 2009, and outlays for financial transactions were boosted by the revaluation of the expected cost of previous Troubled Asset Relief Program transactions and an increase in net outlays for deposit insurance.5 Net interest payments increased moderately, reflecting the rising level of the federal debt. As measured in the national income and product accounts (NIPA), real federal expenditures on con- sumption and gross investment—the part of federal spending included in the calculation of GDP—fell at an annual rate of close to 6 percent in the first quarter (figure 23). Defense spending, which tends to be erratic from quarter to quarter, contracted more than 8 per- cent, and nondefense purchases edged down. Federal debt held by the public rose to about 72 per- cent of nominal GDP in the second quarter of 2012, 3½ percentage points higher than at the end of last year (figure 24). Treasury auctions generally continued to be well received by investors. Indicators of demand at Treasury auctions, such as bid-to-cover ratios and indirect bidding ratios, were within their historical ranges. 5. The subsidy costs of outstanding Troubled Asset Relief Program assistance are reestimated annually by updating cash flows for actual experience and new assumptions about the future perfor- mance of the programs; any changes in these estimated subsidy costs are recorded in the federal budget in the current fiscal year. 23. Change in real government expenditures on consumption and investment, 2006–12 State and local government budgets remain strained, but overall fiscal conditions for these governments may be slowly improving. In particular, state and local tax receipts appeared to increase moderately over the first half of this year. Census Bureau data indicate that state revenue collections rose 4 percent in the first quarter relative to a year earlier, and anecdotal evi- dence suggests that collections during April and May were well maintained. Moreover, only a few states reported budget shortfalls during fiscal 2012 (which ended on June 30 in most states). The improvement is less evident at the local level, where property tax 24. Federal government debt held by the public, 1960–2012 NOTE: The data for debt through 2011 are as of year-end, and the corresponding values for gross domestic product (GDP) are for Q4 at an annual rate. The observation for 2012:Q2 is based on an estimate for debt in that quarter and GDP in the first quarter. Excludes securities held as investments of federal government accounts. receipts—the largest source of tax revenue for these governments—were roughly flat in 2011 and early 2012, reflecting the crosscutting effects of the earlier declines in home prices and increases in property tax rates. Moreover, federal aid to both state and local gov- ernments has declined as stimulus-related grants have been almost completely phased out. One of the ways that state and local governments have addressed their tight budget situations has been through cuts in their employment and construction spending. After shedding jobs at an average pace of 19,000 per month in 2011, these governments reduced their employment over the first half of the year at a slower pace by trimming 3,000 jobs per month on aver- age. However, real construction expenditures fell sharply in the first quarter after having edged down in the latter half of 2011, and available information on nominal construction spending through May points to continued declines in recent months. The decreases in employment and construction are evident in the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) estimate for real state and local purchases, which fell at an annual rate of 2¾ percent in the first quarter, about the same pace as in 2011. Gross issuance of bonds by states and municipalities picked up in the second quarter of 2012. Credit quality in the sector continued to deteriorate over the first half of the year. For instance, credit rating downgrades by Moody’s Investors Service substantially outpaced upgrades, and credit default swap (CDS) indexes for municipal bonds rose on net. Yields on long-term gen- eral obligation municipal bonds were about unchanged over the first half of the year. Both real exports and imports grew moderately in the first quarter of 2012 (figure 25). Real exports of goods and services rose at an annual rate of 4¼ percent, sup- ported by relatively strong foreign economic growth. Exports of services, automobiles, computers, and air- craft expanded rapidly, while those of consumer goods declined. The rise in exports was particularly strong to Canada and Mexico. Data for April and May suggest that exports continued to rise at a moderate pace in the second quarter. Real imports of goods and services rose a relatively modest 2¾ percent in the first quarter, reflecting slower growth in U.S. economic activity. Imports of services, automobiles, and computers rose significantly, while 25. Change in real imports and exports of goods those of petroleum, aircraft, and consumer goods fell. The rise in imports was broadly based across major trading partners, with imports from Japan and Mexico showing particularly strong growth. April and May data suggest that import growth picked up in the sec- ond quarter. Altogether, net exports made a small positive contri- bution of one-tenth of 1 percentage point to real GDP growth in the first quarter. After increasing earlier in the year, oil prices have sub- sequently fallen back (figure 26). Over much of the first quarter, an improved outlook for the global economy and increased geopolitical tensions—most notably with Iran—helped spur a run-up in the spot price of oil, with the Brent benchmark averaging $125 per barrel in March, about $15 above its January average. Since mid-March, however, oil prices have more than retraced their earlier gains amid an intensification of the crisis in Europe and increased concerns over the strength of economic growth in China. An easing of geopolitical tensions and increased crude oil supply— production by Saudi Arabia has been running at near- record high levels—have also likely contributed to the decline in oil prices. All told, the price of Brent has plunged $25 a barrel from March to about $100 per barrel in mid-July. Prices of many nonfuel commodities followed a path similar to that shown by oil prices, albeit with less vola- tility. Early in 2012, commodity prices rallied, as global economic prospects and financial conditions improved 26. Prices of oil and nonfuel commodities, 2007–12 NOTE: The data are monthly. The oil price is the spot price of Brent crude oil, for observation July 1–13, 2012. The price of nonfuel commodities is an index of 45 primary-commodity prices and extends through June 2012. the Commodity Research Bureau; is along with a temporary abatement of stresses in Europe. However, as with oil prices, broader commod- ity prices fell in the second quarter, reflecting growing pessimism regarding prospects for the global economy. Prices for non-oil imported goods increased less than ¼ percent in the first quarter, with the modest pace of increase likely reflecting the lagged effects of both the appreciation of the dollar and the decline in commodity prices that occurred late last year. Moving into the second quarter, import price inflation appears to have remained subdued, consistent with a further appreciation of the dollar. Largely reflecting the run-up in oil prices early in the year, the nominal trade deficit widened slightly in the first quarter (figure 27). In addition, as the net invest- ment income balance continued to decline, the current account deficit deteriorated from an annual average of $470 billion in 2011 to $550 billion in the first quarter, or 3½ percent of GDP.6 The financial flows that provide the financing of the current account deficit reflected the general trends in financial market sentiment and in reserve accumulation 6. In 1999, the BEA—while revisiting its methodology for the balance of payments accounts—redefined the current account to exclude capital transfers. In the process, the capital account was renamed the financial account, and a newly defined capital account was created to include capital transfers as well as the acquisition and disposal of nonproduced nonfinancial assets. 27. U.S. trade and current account balances, 2004–12 NOTE: The data are quarterly and extend through 2012:Q1. GDP is gross by emerging market economies (EMEs). Consistent with a temporary improvement in the tone of financial markets in the first quarter, foreign private investors slowed their net purchases of U.S. Treasury securities and resumed net purchases of U.S. equities, although they continued to sell other U.S. bonds (figure 28). However, the tentative increase in foreign risk appetite abated early in the second quarter and foreign private investors showed renewed demand for U.S. Treasury securities and less demand for other U.S. securities. U.S. investors’ demand for foreign securities was flat, 28. Net foreign purchases of U.S. securities, 2008–12 NOTE: Other U.S. securities include corporate equities and bonds, agency Inflows from foreign official institutions strength- ened in the first quarter as emerging market govern- ments bought dollars to counter upward pressure on their currencies, resulting in increased accumulation of dollar-denominated reserves, which were then invested in U.S. securities (figure 30). Partial data for the second quarter suggest that foreign official inflows remained strong despite renewed dollar appreciation against emerging market currencies. U.S. official assets regis- tered a $51 billion inflow during the first quarter as drawings on the Federal Reserve’s dollar swap lines with the European Central Bank (ECB) and the Bank of Japan (BOJ) were partially repaid. Total U.S. net national saving—that is, the saving of U.S. households, businesses, and governments, net of depreciation charges—remains extremely low by his- torical standards (figure 31). Net national saving fell from 4 percent of nominal GDP in 2006 to negative 2 percent in 2009, as the federal budget deficit widened. The national saving rate subsequently increased to near zero, where it remained as of the first quarter of 2012 (the latest quarter for which data are available). The relative flatness of the saving rate over the past couple of years reflects the offsetting effects of a narrowing in the federal budget deficit as a share of nominal GDP 29. Net U.S. purchases of foreign securities, 2008–12 NOTE: Negative numbers indicate a balance of payments outflow, generated when U.S. residents, on net, purchase foreign securities. Positive numbers indicate a balance of payment inflow, generated when U.S. residents, on net, sell foreign securities. 30. U.S. net financial inflows, 2008–12 Private (including banking) U.S. official Foreign official NOTE: U.S. official flows include the foreign currency acquired when foreign central banks draw on their swap lines with the Federal Reserve. SOURCE: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis. and a downward movement in the private saving rate. National saving will likely remain low this year in light of the continuing large federal budget deficit. A por- tion of the decline in federal savings relative to pre- crisis levels is cyclical and would be expected to reverse as the economy recovers. However, if low levels of national saving persist over the longer run, they will likely be associated with both low rates of capital for- mation and heavy borrowing from abroad, limiting the rise in the standard of living for U.S. residents over time. 31. Net saving, 1992–2012 NOTE: The data are quarterly and extend through 2012:Q1. Nonfederal saving is the sum of personal and net business saving and the net saving of state and local governments. GDP is gross domestic product. Labor market conditions remain weak. After averaging 165,000 jobs per month in the second half of 2011, private payroll employment gains increased to 225,000 jobs per month over the first three months of the year and then fell back to 90,000 jobs per month over the past three months (figure 32). The apparent slowing in the pace of net job creation may have been exaggerated by issues related to swings in the weather and to sea- sonal adjustment difficulties associated with the timing of the sharpest job losses during the recession. More- over, employment gains during the second half of last year and into the early part of this year may have reflected some catch-up in hiring on the part of employers that aggressively pared their workforces dur- ing and just after the recession. The recent deceleration in employment may suggest that much of this catch-up has now taken place and that, consequently, more- rapid gains in economic activity will be required to achieve significant further increases in employment and declines in the unemployment rate. 9 percent last summer, has held about flat at 8¼ per- cent since early this year and remains elevated relative to levels observed prior to the recent recession (fig- ure 33). Moreover, long-term unemployment also remains elevated. In June, around 40 percent of those unemployed had been out of work for more than six months (figure 34). Meanwhile, the labor force partici- pation rate has fluctuated around a low level so far this year after having moved down 2 percentage points since 2007. 32. Net change in private payroll employment, 2006–12 NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through June 2012. SOURCE: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. 33. Civilian unemployment rate, 1982–2012 NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through June 2012. SOURCE: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. Other labor market indicators were consistent with little change in overall labor market conditions during the first half of the year. Initial claims for unemploy- ment insurance were not much changed, on net, although their average level over the first half of the year was lower than in the second half of 2011. Meas- ures of job vacancies edged up, on balance, and house- holds’ labor market expectations largely reversed the steep deterioration from last summer. However, indica- tors of hiring activity remained subdued. Gains in labor productivity have continued to slow recently following an outsized increase in 2009 and a 34. Long-term unemployed, 2006–12 NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through June 2012. The series shown is the percentage of total unemployed persons who have been unemployed for 27 weeks or more. solid gain in 2010. According to the latest published data, output per hour in the nonfarm business sector rose just ½ percent in 2011 and declined in the first quarter of 2012 (figure 35). Although these data can be volatile from quarter to quarter, the moderation in pro- ductivity growth over the past two years suggests that firms have been adding workers not only to meet rising production needs but also to relieve pressures on their existing workforces, which were cut back sharply dur- ing the recession. Increases in hourly compensation continue to be restrained by the very weak condition of the labor market. The 12-month change in the employment cost index for private industry workers, which measures both wages and the cost to employers of providing benefits, has been about 2 percent or less since the start of 2009 after several years of increases in the neighbor- hood of 3 percent (figure 36). Nominal compensation per hour in the nonfarm business sector—a measure derived from the labor compensation data in the NIPA—also decelerated significantly over the past few years; this measure rose just 1¼ percent over the year ending in the first quarter of 2012, well below the aver- age increase of about 4 percent in the years before the recession. Similarly, average hourly earnings for all employees—the timeliest measure of wage develop- ments—rose about 2 percent in nominal terms over the 12 months ending in June. According to each of these measures, gains in hourly compensation failed to keep up with increases in consumer prices in 2011 and again in the first quarter of this year. The change in unit labor costs faced by firms— which measures the extent to which nominal hourly 35. Change in output per hour, 1948–2012 NOTE: Nonfarm business sector. Change for each multiyear period is measured to the fourth quarter of the final year of the period from the fourth quarter of the year immediately preceding the period. 36. Measures of change in hourly compensation, NOTE: The data are quarterly and extend through 2012:Q1. For nonfarm business compensation, change is over four quarters; for the employment cost index (ECI), change is over the 12 months ending in the last month of each quarter. The nonfarm business sector excludes farms, government, nonprofit institutions, and households. The sector covered by the ECI used here is the nonfarm business sector plus nonprofit institutions. compensation rises in excess of labor productivity— remained subdued. Unit labor costs in the nonfarm business sector rose 1 percent over the year ending in the first quarter of 2012. Over the preceding year, unit labor costs increased 1½ percent. Consumer price inflation moved down, on net, during the first part of 2012. Overall PCE prices rose rapidly in the first three months of the year, reflecting large increases in oil prices, but inflation turned down in the spring as oil prices more than reversed their earlier run-ups. The overall chain-type PCE price index increased at an annual rate of about 1½ percent between December 2011 and May 2012, compared with a rise of 2½ percent over 2011 (figure 37). Exclud- ing food and energy, consumer prices rose at a rate of about 2 percent over the first five months of the year, essentially the same pace as in 2011. In addition to the net decline in crude oil prices over the first half of the year, factors contributing to low consumer price infla- tion this year include the deceleration of non-oil import prices in the latter part of 2011, subdued labor costs associated with the weak labor market, and stable inflation expectations. Consumer energy prices surged at an annual rate of over 20 percent in the first three months of 2012, as higher costs for crude oil were passed through to gaso- line prices. In April, the national-average price for 37. Change in the chain-type price index for personal consumption expenditures, 2006–12 37. Change in the chain-type price index for personal consumption expenditures, 2006–12 NOTE: Through 2011, change is from December to December; for 2012, change is from December to May. gasoline at the pump approached $4 per gallon. Since then, crude oil prices have tumbled, and gasoline prices have declined roughly in line with crude costs, more than reversing the earlier run-up. Consumer prices for natural gas plunged over the first five months of the year after falling late last year; this drop is attributable, at least in part, to the unseasonably warm winter, which reduced demand for natural gas. More recently, spot prices for natural gas have turned up as produc- tion has been cut back, but they still remain substan- tially lower than they were last summer. Consumer food price inflation has slowed noticeably so far this year, as the effect on retail food prices from last year’s jump in farm commodity prices appears to have largely dissipated. Indeed, PCE prices for food and beverages only edged up slightly, rising at an annual rate of about ½ percent from December to May after increasing more than 5 percent in 2011. Although farm commodity prices were tempered earlier this year by expectations of a substantial increase in crop output this growing season, grain prices rose rapidly in late June and early July as a wide swath of the Midwest experienced a bout of hot, dry weather that farm ana- lysts believe cut yield prospects considerably. tations have changed little, on net, so far this year. Median year-ahead inflation expectations, as reported in the Thomson Reuters/University of Michigan Sur- veys of Consumers (Michigan survey), rose in March when gasoline prices were high but then fell back as those prices reversed course (figure 38). Longer-term expectations remained more stable. In the Michigan survey, median expected inflation over the next 5 to 38. Median inflation expectations, 2001–12 NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through a preliminary estimate for 10 years was 2.8 percent in early July, within the nar- row range of the past 10 years. In the Survey of Pro- fessional Forecasters, conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, expectations for the increase in the price index for PCE over the next 10 years remained at 2¼ percent, in the middle of its recent range. Measures of medium- and longer-term inflation compensation derived from nominal and inflation- protected Treasury securities—which not only reflect inflation expectations, but also can be affected by changes in investor risk aversion and by the different liquidity properties of the two types of securities— were little changed, on net, so far this year (figure 39). These measures increased early in the period amid ris- ing prices for oil and other commodities, but they sub- sequently declined as commodity prices fell back and as worries about domestic and global economic growth increased. Financial markets were somewhat volatile over the first half of 2012. Early in the year, broad equity price indexes rose and risk spreads in several markets nar- rowed as investor sentiment regarding short-term European prospects and the economic outlook improved. Those gains partially reversed when market participants became more pessimistic about the Euro- pean situation and global growth prospects in May and June. Yields on longer-term Treasury securities declined, on balance, over the first half of the year. Conditions in unsecured short-term dollar funding 5-year (carry adjusted) NOTE: The data are weekly averages of daily data and extend through July 13, 2012. Inflation compensation is the difference between yields on nominal Treasury securities and Treasury inflation-protected securities (TIPS) of comparable maturities, based on yield curves fitted by Federal Reserve staff to off-the-run nominal Treasury securities and on- and off-the-run TIPS. The 5-year measure is adjusted for the effect of indexation lags. markets generally remained stable as European finan- cial institutions reduced their demand for dollar fund- ing and general funding pressures were alleviated by the longer-term refinancing operations of the ECB. In the domestic banking sector, the release of the results from the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) in March provided a significant boost to the equity prices of U.S. financial institutions (see the box “The Capital and Liquidity Position of Large U.S. Banks”). In response to the steps taken by the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) to provide additional monetary policy accommodation, and amid growing anxiety about the European crisis and a worsening of the economic outlook, investors pushed out further the date when they expect the federal funds rate to first rise above its current target range of 0 to ¼ percent. In addition, they apparently scaled back the pace at which they expect the federal funds rate subsequently to be increased. Market participants currently anticipate that the effective federal funds rate will be about 50 basis points by the middle of 2015, roughly 55 basis points lower than they expected at the beginning of 2012. Yields on longer-term nominal Treasury securities declined, on balance, over the first half of 2012 (fig- ure 40). Early in the year, longer-term Treasury yields rose, reflecting generally positive U.S. economic data, improved market sentiment regarding the crisis in Europe, and higher energy prices. More recently, how- ever, longer-term yields have more than reversed their earlier increases. Investors sought the relative safety and liquidity of Treasury securities as the crisis in Europe intensified again and as weaker-than-expected economic data releases raised concerns about the pace of economic recovery both in the United States and abroad. In addition, those developments fostered expectations that the Federal Reserve would provide additional accommodation. And the Treasury yield curve flattened further following the FOMC’s decision at its June meeting to continue the maturity extension program (MEP) through the end of 2012. On balance, yields on 5-, 10-, and 30-year nominal Treasury securi- ties declined roughly 20, 40, and 35 basis points, respectively, from their levels at the start of this year. The Open Market Desk’s outright purchases and sales of Treasury securities under the MEP did not appear to have any material adverse effect on Treasury market functioning. Despite the reemergence of strains in Europe, condi- tions in unsecured short-term dollar funding markets have remained fairly stable in the first half of 2012. Measures of stress in short-term funding markets have eased somewhat, on balance, since the beginning of the Interest rates on Treasury securities at selected maturities, 2004–12 NOTE: The data are daily and extend through July 13, 2012. SOURCE: Department of the Treasury. year. A few factors seem to have contributed to the relative stability of those markets. European institu- tions apparently reduced their demand for funds in recent quarters by selling dollar-denominated assets and exiting from business lines requiring heavy dollar funding. In addition, European banks reportedly switched to secured funding supported by various types of collateral. Further, the availability of funds from the ECB through its longer-term refinancing operations likely helped reduce funding strains and the need to access interbank markets more generally. Reflecting these developments, the amount of dollar swaps outstanding between the Federal Reserve and the ECB has declined substantially from its peak ear- lier this year. Conditions in the CP market were also fairly stable. On net, 30-day spreads of rates on unsecured A2/P2 CP over comparable-maturity AA-rated nonfinancial CP declined a bit. The volume outstanding of unse- cured financial CP issued in the United States by insti- tutions with European parents decreased slightly in the first half of the year. The average maturity of unse- cured financial CP issued by institutions with both U.S. and European parents is about 50 days, a level that is near the middle of its historical range (figure 41). Signs of stress were also largely absent in secured short-term dollar funding markets. In the market for repurchase agreements, bid–asked spreads for most collateral types were little changed. However, short- term interest rates continued to edge up from the level observed around the turn of the year, likely reflecting in part the financing of the increase in dealers’ invento- ries of shorter-term Treasury securities that resulted 41. Average maturity for unsecured financial commercial paper outstanding in the United States, 2010–12 NOTE: The data are weekly and extend through July 11, 2012. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Board staff calculations based on data from the In mid-March, the Federal Reserve announced the results of the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) 2012. This program evaluated the capital planning processes and capital adequacy of 19 of the largest banks, a subset of those that will be required to undergo annual stress-testing exer- cises by the Board of Governors under the Dodd– Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 (Dodd–Frank Act).1 These 19 bank hold- ing companies (BHCs) also participated in the 2009 Supervisory Capital Assessment Program and the CCAR in 2011. The supervisory stress tests under CCAR 2012 evaluated whether the banks’ proposed capital distribution plans would allow them to maintain sufficient capital to support lending to households and businesses even in the event of an extended period of highly adverse economic and 1. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2012), Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review 2012: Methodology and Results for Stress Scenario Projections (Washington: Board of Governors, March 13), www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents /press/bcreg/bcreg20120313a1.pdf. The Dodd–Frank Act requires the Board, in coordination with the appropriate pri- mary ﬁnancial regulatory agencies and the Federal Insurance Office, to conduct annual analyses of nonbank ﬁnancial com- panies supervised by the Board and bank holding companies with total consolidated assets equal to or greater than $50 bil- lion to determine whether such companies have the capital necessary to absorb losses that might result from a period of adverse economic conditions. All other ﬁnancial companies that have total consolidated assets of more than $10 billion and are regulated by a primary federal ﬁnancial regulatory agency are required to conduct annual internal stress tests. Smaller community banks are not required to undertake stress tests, but any bank’s primary regulator may subject the bank to a stress test if conditions warrant. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation (2012), “Supervisory Guidance on Stress Test- ing for Banking Organizations with More Than $10 Billion in Total Consolidated Assets,” Supervision and Regulation Letter SR 12–7 (May 14), www.federalreserve.gov/bankinforeg/ srletters/sr1207.htm. ﬁnancial conditions. The stress scenario incorpo- rated a peak unemployment rate of 13 percent, a drop in equity prices of more than 50 percent, and a decline in house prices of 21 percent. The results indicated that 15 of the 19 BHCs would continue to meet supervisory expectations for several measures of capital adequacy through the end of 2013 despite large projected losses under this extremely adverse hypothetical scenario, given the ﬁrms’ pro- posed capital distribution plans.2 These results reﬂect the signiﬁcant steps these BHCs have taken to improve their capital positions over the past three years. In particular, the aggre- gate Tier 1 common ratio for these 19 ﬁrms has doubled from about 5½ percent in the ﬁrst quarter of 2009 to close to 11 percent in the ﬁrst quarter of 2012 (ﬁgure A). Much of the improvement over the intervening period can be attributed to increased retained earnings and issuance of common stock during a period of limited growth in risk-weighted assets. The 19 BHCs subject to the CCAR have also reduced their vulnerabilities to disruptions in fund- ing markets. For instance, they have signiﬁcantly reduced their reliance on short-term wholesale liabilities relative to total assets since the height of 2. The development of sound models is crucial to the cred- ibility of any type of stress-testing exercise. As a result, the Fed- eral Reserve has developed formal procedures by which teams of staff members from around the Federal Reserve System validate the supervisory models used by the Federal Reserve during the CCAR process. Furthermore, in April 2012, the Board announced the formation of the Model Validation Council, composed of outside experts, which will provide the Federal Reserve with independent advice on the processes used for model assessment. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2012), “Federal Reserve Board Announces the Formation of the Model Validation Council,” press release, April 20, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/ press/bcreg/20120420a.htm. from the ongoing MEP and higher-than-expected bill issuance by the Treasury Department earlier in the year. In asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP) mar- kets, volumes outstanding declined for programs with European sponsors, and spreads on ABCP with Euro- pean bank sponsors remained a bit above those on ABCP with U.S. bank sponsors. tively stable since the beginning of the year.7 In addi- tion, dealers reported that the use of financial leverage among hedge funds had decreased somewhat since the beginning of 2012. Moreover, respondents to the June SCOOS noted an increase in the amount of resources and attention devoted to the management of concen- trated exposures to dealers and other financial interme- Respondents to the Senior Credit Officer Opinion Survey on Dealer Financing Terms (SCOOS) in both March and June indicated that credit terms applicable to important classes of counterparties have been rela- 7. The SCOOS is available on the Federal Reserve Board’s website the ﬁnancial crisis (ﬁgure B). In addition, these BHCs have experienced signiﬁcant inﬂows of rela- tively stable core deposits, owing in part to the availability of unlimited deposit insurance on noninterest-bearing transaction accounts from the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation until the end of 2012, as well as the generally high demand for safe and liquid assets in the current environment. Overall, major U.S. ﬁnancial institutions are much better positioned to weather an economic downturn while meeting the credit needs of potential borrowers than they were a few years ago, having substantially increased their capital buffers and improved their liquidity positions over the past several years. That said, a signiﬁcant dis- occur if the European situation were to worsen markedly, would still pose considerable challenges In mid-March, the Federal Reserve announced the ﬁnancial conditions. The stress scenario incorpo- rated a peak unemployment rate of 13 percent, a drop in equity prices of more than 50 percent, and a decline in house prices of 21 percent. The results indicated that 15 of the 19 BHCs would continue to meet supervisory expectations for several measures of capital adequacy through the end of 2013 despite large projected losses under this extremely adverse hypothetical scenario, given the ﬁrms’ pro- posed capital distribution plans.2 Review (CCAR) 2012. This program evaluated the be required to undergo annual stress-testing exer- ing companies (BHCs) also participated in the These results reﬂect the signiﬁcant steps these BHCs have taken to improve their capital positions over the past three years. In particular, the aggre- gate Tier 1 common ratio for these 19 ﬁrms has doubled from about 5½ percent in the ﬁrst quarter of 2009 to close to 11 percent in the ﬁrst quarter of 2012 (ﬁgure A). Much of the improvement over the intervening period can be attributed to increased retained earnings and issuance of common stock during a period of limited growth in risk-weighted the CCAR in 2011. The supervisory stress tests under CCAR 2012 evaluated whether the banks’ proposed capital distribution plans would allow them to maintain sufficient capital to support lending to 1. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2012), NOTE: The data are quarterly and extend through 2012:Q1. For the definition of Tier 1 common capital and the list of the 19 Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) institutions, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2012), “Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review 2012: Methodology for Stress Scenario Projections,” paper, March 12, www. federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/bcreg/bcreg20120312a1.pdf. SCAP is the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program. NOTE: The data are quarterly and extend through 2012:Q1. Reliance on wholesale funding is measured as short-term wholesale liabilities to total assets. CCAR is Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review. Short-term wholesale liabilities is defined as the sum of large time deposits with maturity less than one year, federal funds purchased and securities sold under agreements to repurchase, deposits in foreign offices, trading liabilities (excluding revaluation losses on derivatives), and other borrowed money with maturity less than one year. The 19 BHCs subject to the CCAR have also reduced their vulnerabilities to disruptions in fund- ing markets. For instance, they have signiﬁcantly reduced their reliance on short-term wholesale liabilities relative to total assets since the height of requires the Board, in coordination with the appropriate pri- Office, to conduct annual analyses of nonbank ﬁnancial com- panies supervised by the Board and bank holding companies lion to determine whether such companies have the capital 2. The development of sound models is crucial to the cred- ibility of any type of stress-testing exercise. As a result, the Fed- eral Reserve has developed formal procedures by which teams of staff members from around the Federal Reserve System validate the supervisory models used by the Federal Reserve during the CCAR process. Furthermore, in April 2012, the Board announced the formation of the Model Validation Council, composed of outside experts, which will provide the Federal Reserve with independent advice on the processes used for model assessment. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2012), “Federal Reserve Board Announces the Formation of the Model Validation Council,” press release, April 20, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/ press/bcreg/20120420a.htm. necessary to absorb losses that might result from a period of the ﬁnancial crisis (ﬁgure B). In addition, these BHCs have experienced signiﬁcant inﬂows of rela- tively stable core deposits, owing in part to the availability of unlimited deposit insurance on noninterest-bearing transaction accounts from the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation until the end of 2012, as well as the generally high demand for safe and liquid assets in the current environment. adverse economic conditions. All other ﬁnancial companies that have total consolidated assets of more than $10 billion downturn while meeting the credit needs of potential borrowers than they were a few years ago, having substantially increased their capital buffers and improved their liquidity positions over the past several years. That said, a signiﬁcant dis- ruption in global ﬁnancial markets, such as might occur if the European situation were to worsen markedly, would still pose considerable challenges to the U.S. banking and ﬁnancial systems. and are regulated by a primary federal ﬁnancial regulatory agency are required to conduct annual internal stress tests. Smaller community banks are not required to undertake stress tests, but any bank’s primary regulator may subject the bank to a stress test if conditions warrant. See Board of Governors of Overall, major U.S. ﬁnancial institutions are much better positioned to weather an economic actions of the European authorities to ease the euro- area crisis and the release of the results from the CCAR, equity prices for bank holding companies (BHCs) increased and their CDS spreads declined. In late spring—as investors reacted to concerns about Europe—equity prices reversed some of those gains, and CDS spreads rose for large BHCs, especially those with substantial investment-banking operations. More recently, Moody’s downgraded the long- and short- term credit ratings of five of the six largest U.S. banks, but none of the banks lost their investment-grade stat- us on long-term debt. The short-term debt ratings of diaries as well as central counterparties and other financial utilities (figure 42). In response to a special question in the June SCOOS, dealers reported that despite the persistently low level of interest rates, only moderate fractions of their unlevered institutional cli- ents had shown an increased appetite for credit risk or duration risk over the past year. Market sentiment toward the banking industry fluctu- ated in the first half of 2012. Early in the year, after the 42. Net percentage of dealers reporting increased attention to management of exposures, 2010–12 NOTE: The data are drawn from a survey conducted four times per year; the last observation is from the June 2012 survey, which covers 2012:Q2. Net percentage equals the percentage of institutions that reported increasing attention (“increased considerably” or “increased somewhat”) minus the percentage of institutions that reported decreasing attention (“decreased considerably” or “decreased somewhat”). some banks were downgraded to Prime-2, which may affect the ability of some to place significant amounts of CP with money market funds, but the market effect appears to have been muted so far, as those banks cur- rently have limited demand for such funding. On bal- ance, equity prices of banks rose significantly from relatively low levels at the start of the year (figure 43); an index of CDS spreads for large BHCs declined about 60 basis points but remained at a high level (figure 44). 43. Equity price index for banks, 2009–12 NOTE: The data are daily and extend through July 13, 2012. SOURCE: Standard & Poor’s. 44. Spreads on credit default swaps for selected U.S. banking organizations, 2007–12 Large bank holding companies NOTE: The data are daily and extend through July 13, 2012. Median spreads for six large bank holding companies and nine other banks. The profitability of BHCs decreased slightly in the first quarter of 2012 and remained well below the levels that prevailed before the financial crisis (figure 45). Litigation provisions taken by some large banks in connection with the mortgage settlement reached ear- lier this year accounted for some of the downward pressure on bank profitability. The variability in earn- ings due to accounting gains and losses related to changes in the market value of banks’ own debt ampli- fied recent swings of bank profits.8 Smoothing through 8. Under fair value accounting rules, changes in the creditworthi- ness of a BHC generate changes in the value of some of its liabilities. Those changes are then reflected as gains or losses on the income statement. 45. Profitability of bank holding companies, 1997–2012 NOTE: The data are quarterly and extend through 2012:Q1. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Board, FR Y-9C, Consolidated Financial these special factors, profitability has been about flat in recent quarters. Net income continued to be supported by the release of loan loss reserves, albeit to a lesser extent than in the previous year, as charge-off rates decreased a bit further across most major asset classes. Still-subdued dividend payouts and share repurchases as well as reductions in risk-weighted assets pushed regulatory capital ratios higher in the first quarter of 2012 (see the box “Implementing the New Financial Regulatory Regime”). Credit provided by commercial banking organiza- tions in the United States increased in the first half of 2012 at about the same moderate pace as in the second half of 2011. Core loans—the sum of C&I loans, real estate loans, and consumer loans—expanded modestly; as noted earlier, the upturn in lending was particularly noticeable for C&I loans (figure 46). The expansion in C&I lending has been broad based outside of U.S. branches and agencies of European banks and has been particularly evident at large domestic banks. This pattern is consistent with SLOOS results suggesting that a portion of the increase in C&I lending observed at large domestic banks reflected decreased competi- tion from European banks and their affiliates and sub- sidiaries for either foreign or domestic customers. Banks’ holdings of securities rose moderately, with purchases concentrated in Treasury securities and agency-guaranteed MBS. Given the still-depressed housing market, banks continued to be attracted by 46. Change in commercial and industrial loans and core loans, 1990–2012 NOTE: The data, which are seasonally adjusted, are quarterly and extend through 2012:Q2. Core loans consist of commercial and industrial loans, real estate loans, and consumer loans. Data have been adjusted for banks’ implementation of certain accounting rule changes (including the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s Statements of Financial Accounting Standards Nos. 166 and 167) and for the effects of large nonbank institutions converting to commercial banks or merging with a commercial bank. the government guarantee on agency securities, and some large banks may also have been accumulating government-backed securities to improve their liquid- ity positions. Yields on investment-grade bonds reached record lows in June, partly reflecting the search by investors for relatively safe assets in light of rising concerns about Europe as well as the weakness in the domestic and global economic data releases. However, yields on speculative-grade corporate debt, which had reached record-low levels in February, rose somewhat in the second quarter reflecting those same concerns. The spread on investment-grade corporate bonds was about unchanged, on net, relative to the start of the year. Despite the backup in yields over the second quarter, spreads on speculative-grade corporate bonds decreased some, on balance, over the same period (fig- ure 47). Prices in the secondary market for syndicated leveraged loans have changed little, on balance, since the beginning of the year; demand from institutional investors for these mostly floating-rate loans has remained strong despite the reemergence of anxiety about developments in Europe (figure 48). Broad equity price indexes were boosted early in the year by improved sentiment stemming in part from relatively strong job gains as well as actions taken by major central banks to mitigate the financial strains 47. Spreads of corporate bond yields over comparable off-the-run Treasury yields, by securities rating, 1997–2012 NOTE: The data are daily and extend through July 13, 2012. The spreads shown are the yields on 10-year bonds less the 10-year Treasury yield. SOURCE: Derived from smoothed corporate yield curves using Merrill The Board of Governors is involved in approxi- mately 250 initiatives—including rulemakings, asso- ciated guidance, studies of various ﬁnancial issues, and design of internal processes—related to the Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 (Dodd–Frank Act). The Board is the lead agency responsible for imple- menting a signiﬁcant number of rulemakings required under the act and is also, on many of these initiatives, working in conjunction with other federal agencies. For example, as a member of the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC), the Board has contributed to FSOC studies mandated by the act and has assisted the FSOC with pro- posed and ﬁnal rulemakings. ber 2011.2 On June 29, 2012, the Board and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation announced the process they will use to review, during the sec- ond half of 2012, the ﬁrst set of these plans from some of the largest internationally active banking organizations.3 Also, several key notices of proposed rulemak- ings (NPRs) implementing the Dodd–Frank Act have been issued thus far in 2012. In particular, on June 7, 2012, the Board issued for comment three proposed rules that, taken together, integrate the capital provisions of section 171 of the act with those of Basel III capital standards in order to enhance ﬁnancial stability while minimizing the burden on affected institutions.4 A number of the rulemakings are directed at enhancing bank supervision and prudential stan- dards. In one recent action, the Board and the other federal bank regulatory agencies issued a ﬁnal rule on June 7, 2012, that implements changes to the market risk capital rule. These changes bring it into conformance with international standards and replace agency credit ratings with alternative standards of creditworthiness in accordance with the requirements of section 939A of the Dodd– Frank Act.1 In addition, “living wills” were prepared by bank holding companies with assets of $50 bil- lion or more based on a ﬁnal rule issued in Octo- 2. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2011), “Federal Reserve Board Approves Final Rule Implementing the Resolution Plan Requirement of the Dodd–Frank Act,” press release, October 17, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/ press/bcreg/20111017a.htm. 3. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and 1. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2012), 4. With the encouragement and support of the U.S. bank regulatory agencies, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervi- sion has strengthened global capital requirements: raising risk weightings for traded assets, improving the quality of loss- absorbing capital through a new minimum common equity ratio standard, creating a capital conservation buffer, and introducing an international leverage ratio requirement. See Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2010), Basel III: A Global Regulatory Framework for More Resilient Banks and Banking Systems (Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International emanating from Europe. However, equity price indexes subsequently reversed a portion of their earlier gains as concerns about the European banking and fiscal crisis intensified again and economic reports suggested slower growth, on balance, at home and abroad (fig- ure 49). The spread between the 12-month forward earnings–price ratio for the S&P 500 and a real long- run Treasury yield—a rough gauge of the equity risk premium—widened a bit more in the first half of 2012, and is now closer to the very high levels it reached in 2008 and again last fall (figure 50). Implied volatility for the S&P 500 index, as calculated from option prices, spiked at times this year but is currently toward the bottom end of the range that this indicator has occupied since the onset of the financial crisis (fig- ure 51). In the current environment of very low interest rates, mutual funds that invest in higher-yielding debt instru- ments (including speculative-grade corporate bonds and leveraged loans) continued to have significant inflows for most of the first half of 2012, while money market funds experienced outflows (figure 52). Equity mutual funds also recorded modest outflows early in the year and, as market sentiment deteriorated, both equity and high-yield mutual funds registered outflows in May. The ﬁrst NPR would increase the quantity and quality of capital by, in part, requiring a new mini- mum common equity Tier 1 ratio of 4.5 percent, instituting a common equity Tier 1 capital conserva- tion buffer of 2.5 percent, and raising the minimum for the broader Tier 1 capital ratio from 4 percent to 6 percent.5 The NPR does not address speciﬁc Basel III liquidity standards, which have not been ﬁnalized by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision.6 The second NPR revises certain aspects of the risk-based capital requirements in order to enhance risk sensitivity and address weaknesses in the calculation of risk-weighted assets that have been identiﬁed over the past several years. The third NPR requires internationally active banks to improve the risk sensitivity of parts of their current advanced approaches to risk-based capital pro- cesses to better address counterparty credit risk and interconnectedness among ﬁnancial institutions. Several other actions taken with regard to the Dodd–Frank Act provided additional clarity to pro- Settlements, December; rev. June 2011), www.bis.org/publ/ bcbs189.htm. 5. The Tier 1 capital ratio is the ratio of Tier 1 capital to risk- weighted assets. Tier 1 capital consists primarily of common equity (excluding intangible assets such as goodwill and excluding net unrealized gains on investment account securi- ties classiﬁed as available for sale) and certain perpetual pre- ferred stock. 6. Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2010), Basel III: the Board published an amendment to a proposed rulemaking clarifying the activities that are deemed to be ﬁnancial for purposes of title I of the Dodd– Frank Act. This rulemaking is designed to provide clarity regarding ﬁrms that may be designated for enhanced supervision by the FSOC.7 In addition, the Board, along with other regulatory agencies, is reviewing about 19,000 comment letters on the proposal to implement section 619 of the act, com- monly known as the Volcker rule. The rule gener- ally prohibits banking entities from engaging in proprietary trading or acquiring an ownership inter- est in, sponsoring, or having certain other relation- April 19, the Board issued a clariﬁcation regarding the Volcker rule conformance period, stating that a banking entity has the full two-year period pro- vided by statute (that is, until July 21, 2014), unless extended by the Board, to fully conform its activi- 7. Under title I of the Dodd–Frank Act, a company generally can be designated for Board supervision by the FSOC only if 85 percent or more of the company’s revenues or assets are related to activities that are ﬁnancial in nature under the Bank 8. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Com- ber 2011.2 On June 29, 2012, the Board and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation announced the process they will use to review, during the sec- ond half of 2012, the ﬁrst set of these plans from some of the largest internationally active banking The Board of Governors is involved in approxi- The ﬁrst NPR would increase the quantity and quality of capital by, in part, requiring a new mini- mum common equity Tier 1 ratio of 4.5 percent, instituting a common equity Tier 1 capital conserva- tion buffer of 2.5 percent, and raising the minimum for the broader Tier 1 capital ratio from 4 percent to 6 percent.5 The NPR does not address speciﬁc Basel III liquidity standards, which have not been ﬁnalized by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision.6 posed rulemakings. For example, on April 2, 2012, the Board published an amendment to a proposed rulemaking clarifying the activities that are deemed to be ﬁnancial for purposes of title I of the Dodd– Frank Act. This rulemaking is designed to provide clarity regarding ﬁrms that may be designated for enhanced supervision by the FSOC.7 In addition, the Board, along with other regulatory agencies, is reviewing about 19,000 comment letters on the proposal to implement section 619 of the act, com- monly known as the Volcker rule. The rule gener- ally prohibits banking entities from engaging in proprietary trading or acquiring an ownership inter- est in, sponsoring, or having certain other relation- ships with a hedge fund or private equity fund. On April 19, the Board issued a clariﬁcation regarding the Volcker rule conformance period, stating that a banking entity has the full two-year period pro- vided by statute (that is, until July 21, 2014), unless extended by the Board, to fully conform its activi- ties and investments to the requirements of the Volcker rule.8 ciated guidance, studies of various ﬁnancial issues, and design of internal processes—related to the Board is the lead agency responsible for imple- Also, several key notices of proposed rulemak- menting a signiﬁcant number of rulemakings ings (NPRs) implementing the Dodd–Frank Act have been issued thus far in 2012. In particular, on June 7, 2012, the Board issued for comment three proposed rules that, taken together, integrate the capital provisions of section 171 of the act with those of Basel III capital standards in order to enhance ﬁnancial stability while minimizing the burden on affected institutions.4 required under the act and is also, on many of these initiatives, working in conjunction with other The second NPR revises certain aspects of the risk-based capital requirements in order to enhance risk sensitivity and address weaknesses in the calculation of risk-weighted assets that have been identiﬁed over the past several years. The third NPR requires internationally active banks to improve the risk sensitivity of parts of their current advanced approaches to risk-based capital pro- cesses to better address counterparty credit risk and interconnectedness among ﬁnancial institutions. Board has contributed to FSOC studies mandated by the act and has assisted the FSOC with pro- posed and ﬁnal rulemakings. A number of the rulemakings are directed at enhancing bank supervision and prudential stan- 2. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2011), “Federal Reserve Board Approves Final Rule Implementing the Resolution Plan Requirement of the Dodd–Frank Act,” press release, October 17, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/ press/bcreg/20111017a.htm. other federal bank regulatory agencies issued a ﬁnal rule on June 7, 2012, that implements changes to the market risk capital rule. These changes bring Several other actions taken with regard to the Dodd–Frank Act provided additional clarity to pro- 3. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and and replace agency credit ratings with alternative Settlements, December; rev. June 2011), www.bis.org/publ/ bcbs189.htm. Frank Act.1 In addition, “living wills” were prepared 7. Under title I of the Dodd–Frank Act, a company generally by bank holding companies with assets of $50 bil- 5. The Tier 1 capital ratio is the ratio of Tier 1 capital to risk- weighted assets. Tier 1 capital consists primarily of common equity (excluding intangible assets such as goodwill and excluding net unrealized gains on investment account securi- ties classiﬁed as available for sale) and certain perpetual pre- ferred stock. can be designated for Board supervision by the FSOC only if 85 percent or more of the company’s revenues or assets are related to activities that are ﬁnancial in nature under the Bank Holding Company Act. lion or more based on a ﬁnal rule issued in Octo- 4. With the encouragement and support of the U.S. bank regulatory agencies, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervi- sion has strengthened global capital requirements: raising risk weightings for traded assets, improving the quality of loss- absorbing capital through a new minimum common equity ratio standard, creating a capital conservation buffer, and introducing an international leverage ratio requirement. See Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2010), Basel III: A Global Regulatory Framework for More Resilient Banks and Banking Systems (Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International 8. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Com- 6. Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2010), Basel III: 1. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2012), ever, the levels of M2 and its largest component, liquid deposits, remain elevated relative to what would have been expected based on historical relationships with nominal income and interest rates, likely reflecting investors’ continued preference to hold safe and liquid assets. Currency in circulation increased robustly, reflecting solid demand both at home and abroad. Retail money market funds and small time deposits continued to contract. At the same time as currency in circulation was increasing, reserve balances held at the Federal Reserve were decreasing; as a result, the mon- etary base—which is equal to the sum of these two The growth rate of M2 slowed in the first half of 2012 to an annual rate of about 7 percent (figure 53).9 How- 9. M2 consists of (1) currency outside the U.S. Treasury, Federal Reserve Banks, and the vaults of depository institutions; (2) traveler’s checks of nonbank issuers; (3) demand deposits at commercial banks (excluding those amounts held by depository institutions, the U.S. government, and foreign banks and official institutions) less cash items in the process of collection and Federal Reserve float; (4) other checkable deposits (negotiable order of withdrawal, or NOW, accounts and automatic transfer service accounts at depository insti- tutions; credit union share draft accounts; and demand deposits at thrift institutions); (5) savings deposits (including money market deposit accounts); (6) small-denomination time deposits (time depos- its issued in amounts of less than $100,000) less individual retirement 48. Secondary-market bid prices for syndicated loans, NOTE: The data are daily and extend through July 13, 2012. SOURCE: LSTA/Thomson Reuters Mark-to-Market Pricing. Total assets of the Federal Reserve decreased to $2,868 billion as of July 11, 2012, about $60 billion less than at the end of 2011 (table 1). The small decrease since December largely reflects lower usage of foreign central bank liquidity swaps and declines in the net portfolio holdings of the Maiden Lane LLCs. The composition of Treasury security holdings changed over the course of the first half of this year as a result of the implementation of the MEP. As of July 13, 2012, the Open Market Desk at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (FRBNY) had purchased $283 bil- lion in Treasury securities with remaining maturities of 49. Stock price index, 1995–2012 NOTE: The data are daily and extend through July 13, 2012. SOURCE: Dow Jones Indexes. 50. Real long-run Treasury yield and 12-month forward earnings–price ratio for the S&P 500, 1995–2012 50. Real long-run Treasury yield and 12-month forward earnings–price ratio for the S&P 500, 1995–2012 Expected real yield on 10-year Treasury NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through June 2012. The expected real yield on 10-year Treasury is defined as the off-the-run 10-year Treasury yield less the Philadelphia Fed 10-year expected inflation. SOURCE: Standard & Poor’s; Federal Reserve Board. 6 to 30 years and sold or redeemed $293 billion in Treasury securities with maturities of 3 years or less under the MEP.10 Total Federal Reserve holdings of agency MBS increased about $18 billion as the policy of reinvesting principal payments from agency debt and agency MBS into agency MBS continued. In the first half of 2012, the Federal Reserve contin- ued to reduce its exposure to facilities established dur- 10. Between the MEP’s announcement in September 2011 and the end of that year, the Desk had purchased $133 billion in longer-term Treasury securities and had sold $134 billion in shorter-term Treas- ury securities. NOTE: The data are weekly and extend through the week ending July 13, 2012. The series shown—the VIX—is the implied 30-day volatility of the S&P 500 stock price index as calculated from a weighted average of options prices. 1. Selected components of the Federal Reserve balance sheet, 2010–12 Selected assets Support of critical institutions Net portfolio holdings of Maiden Lane LLC, Maiden Lane II LLC, and Maiden Lane III LLC1 ...... Credit extended to American International Group, Inc. .............................................. Preferred interests in AIA Aurora LLC and ALICO Holdings LLC .................................. Selected liabilities NOTE: LLC is a limited liability company. 1. The Federal Reserve has extended credit to several LLCs in conjunction with efforts to support critical institutions. Maiden Lane LLC was formed to acquire certain assets of The Bear Stearns Companies, Inc. Maiden Lane II LLC was formed to purchase residential mortgage-backed securities from the U.S. securities lending reinvest- ment portfolio of subsidiaries of American International Group, Inc. (AIG). Maiden Lane III LLC was formed to purchase multisector collateralized debt obligations on which the Financial Products group of AIG has written credit default swap contracts. 2. Includes only MBS purchases that have already settled. . . . Not applicable. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Board, Statistical Release H.4.1, “Factors Affecting Reserve Balances of Depository Institutions and Condition Statement of Federal Reserve ing the financial crisis to support specific institutions. The portfolio holdings of Maiden Lane LLC, Maiden Lane II LLC, and Maiden Lane III LLC—entities that were created during the crisis to acquire certain assets from The Bear Stearns Companies, Inc., and American International Group, Inc. (AIG), to avoid the disor- derly failures of those institutions—declined, on net, primarily as a result of asset sales and principal pay- ments. Of note, proceeds from the sales of all of the remaining assets in the Maiden Lane II LLC portfolio 52. Net flows into mutual funds, 2006–12 53. M2 growth rate, 2005–12 NOTE: The reading for 2012:Q2 is the average for April and May. The data exclude reinvested dividends and are not seasonally adjusted. NOTE: For definition of M2, see text note 9. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Board, Statistical Release H.6, “Money Stock in January and February enabled the repayment of the entire remaining outstanding balance of the senior loan from the FRBNY to Maiden Lane II LLC in March, with interest and a $2.8 billion net gain. In addition, proceeds from the sales of assets from Maiden Lane LLC and Maiden Lane III LLC in April and May enabled the repayment, with interest, of the entire remaining outstanding balances of the senior loans from the FRBNY to Maiden Lane LLC and Maiden Lane III LLC in June. Proceeds from further asset sales from Maiden Lane III in June enabled repayment of the equity position of AIG in July. A net gain on the sale of the remaining assets in Maiden Lane III LLC is likely during the next few months. Sales of most of the remaining assets in Maiden Lane LLC should be completed by the end of the year, but a few legacy assets may take longer to dispose of. Loans outstanding under the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) were slightly lower, reflecting, in part, the first maturity of a TALF loan with a three- year initial term. On the liability side of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet, deposits held by depository institutions declined about $42 billion in the first half of 2012, while Federal Reserve notes in circulation increased roughly $39 bil- lion. As part of its ongoing program to ensure the readiness of tools to drain reserves when doing so becomes appropriate, the Federal Reserve conducted a series of small-scale reverse repurchase transactions involving all eligible collateral types with its expanded list of counterparties. In the same vein, the Federal Reserve also continued to offer small-value term depos- its through the Term Deposit Facility. On March 20, the Federal Reserve System released its 2011 combined annual comparative audited finan- cial statements. The Federal Reserve reported net income of about $77 billion for the year ending December 31, 2011, derived primarily from interest income on securities acquired through open market operations (Treasury securities, federal agency and GSE MBS, and GSE debt securities). The Reserve Banks transferred about $75 billion of the $77 billion in comprehensive income to the U.S. Treasury in 2011; though down slightly from 2011, the transfer to the U.S. Treasury remained historically very large. The European fiscal and banking crisis continued to affect international financial markets and foreign eco- nomic activity during the first half of 2012. Early in the year, aggressive action by the ECB and some prog- ress in addressing the crisis by the region’s leaders con- tributed to a temporary easing of financial stresses. (See the box “An Update on the European Fiscal and Banking Crisis.”) However, amid ongoing political uncertainty in Greece and increased concerns about the health of Spanish banks, financial conditions dete- riorated again in the spring. Foreign economic growth picked up in the first quarter, but this acceleration largely reflected temporary factors, and recent data point to widespread slowing in the second quarter. Foreign financial markets have been volatile. Initially in the first quarter, encouraging macroeconomic data and some easing of tensions within the euro area led to an improvement in global financial conditions. This improvement was reversed in the spring as the boost from previous policy measures, including the ECB’s longer-term refinancing operations, faded and political and banking stresses in vulnerable European countries resurfaced. Euro-area leaders responded to the worsen- ing of the crisis by announcing additional measures at a summit on June 28–29. The market reaction was positive but short-lived. Increased uncertainty and greater volatility have pushed up the foreign exchange value of the dollar about 4¼ percent on a trade-weighted basis against a broad set of currencies since its low in early February, with most of the appreciation occurring in May (fig- ure 54). Typical of periods of flight to safety, the dollar has appreciated against most currencies but depreci- ated against the Japanese yen for most of the period (figure 55). The Swiss franc has moved very closely with the euro as the Swiss National Bank has inter- vened to maintain a ceiling for the franc relative to the euro. During the second quarter of this year, flight-to- safety flows and the deteriorating global economic out- look helped push government bond yields for Canada, Germany, and the United Kingdom to record lows (figure 56). Likewise, Japanese yields on 10-year bonds fell well below 1 percent. By contrast, Spanish sover- eign spreads over German bunds rose more than 250 basis points between February and June due to escalating concerns over Spain’s public finances (fig- ure 57). Italian sovereign spreads moved up as well over this period. Equity prices abroad declined significantly in the second quarter, more so than in the United States. Indexes tumbled in the nations at the center of the euro-area fiscal and banking crisis, and the fall in value 54. U.S. dollar nominal exchange rate, broad index, NOTE: The data, which are in foreign currency units per dollar, are daily. The last observation for the series is July 13, 2012. The broad index is a weighted average of the foreign exchange values of the U.S. dollar against the currencies of a large group of the most important U.S. trading partners. The index weights, which change over time, are derived from U.S. export shares and from U.S. and foreign import shares. from their March peaks was more than 10 percent across the advanced foreign economies (AFEs) (fig- ure 58). This fall was attenuated toward the end of the second quarter by the positive market reaction to the June summit. Equity markets in the EMEs were also markedly down in the second quarter (figure 59). European banks faced renewed stresses in recent months. In Greece, after inconclusive elections in early May, deposit outflows from banks accelerated, generat- 55. U.S. dollar exchange rate against selected major currencies, 2010–12 NOTE: The data, which are in foreign currency units per dollar, are daily. The last observation for each series is July 13, 2012. 56. Yields on benchmark government bonds in selected advanced foreign economies, 2009–12 56. Yields on benchmark government bonds in selected advanced foreign economies, 2009–12 July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July NOTE: The data, which are for 10-year bonds, are daily. The last observation for each series is July 13, 2012. ing concerns that deposit flight could spread to bank- ing systems in the rest of the euro area. News that Spain had partly nationalized the troubled lender Bankia and would need to inject an additional €19 bil- lion into the bank and its holding company added to unease about the region, eventually leading to plans for an official aid package of up to €100 billion to recapi- talize Spanish banks. Apprehension about bank health was widespread, with major institutions in Italy, Ger- many, and several other European countries receiving credit ratings downgrades. As a result, European bank stock prices have tumbled since mid-March (figure 60). At the same time, reflecting market views of increased 57. Government debt spreads for peripheral European economies, 2009–12 NOTE: The data are weekly. The last observation for each series is July 13, 2012. The spreads shown are the yields on 10-year bonds less the 10-year German bond yield. SOURCE: Bloomberg. Over the past several months, the crisis in Europe has waxed and waned as stresses related to ﬁnanc- ing sovereigns and the condition of banking sectors have forced signiﬁcant, but not deﬁnitive, policy responses. Late last year, the ongoing difficulties in the region, combined with deteriorating economic conditions, led to acute funding pressures for Euro- pean ﬁnancial institutions and a number of sover- eigns. In response, the European Central Bank took actions in early December to ease credit condi- tions, including the provision of three-year reﬁ- nancing to banks, and euro-area leaders agreed to strengthen ﬁscal rules and expand their rescue facilities. Those actions, along with the re-pricing and duration extension of the dollar liquidity swap lines with the Federal Reserve, reduced funding costs in euros and dollars for European banks and contributed to a marked improvement in ﬁnancial conditions in the ﬁrst few months of this year. Early in 2012, euro-area authorities followed through on their commitment to put Greek ﬁnances on a more sustainable footing and to review the adequacy of the ﬁnancial backstops for other vulnerable European countries. The Greek government concluded a restructuring of its pri- vately held bonds, which reduced the face value of that debt by slightly more than half, and negotiated a second program with the European Union (EU) and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) worth about €170 billion. Around the same time, euro- area authorities lifted the ceiling on the combined lending of the region’s rescue facilities, the Euro- pean Financial Stability Facility and its successor, the European Stability Mechanism (ESM), from €500 billion to €700 billion, and they accelerated the schedule for capitalizing the ESM. In addition, leaders of the Group of Twenty countries and other IMF shareholders pledged about $450 billion in new ﬁnancing to the IMF, which should enable the IMF to substantially increase its lending capacity. Notwithstanding these initiatives, events in Greece and Spain during the spring again height- ened ﬁnancial stresses throughout the region. Political uncertainty in Greece increased consider- ably, and market concerns grew over the possibility of a Greek exit from the euro area, after the coun- try’s inconclusive parliamentary elections in early May. Amid increasing political fragmentation and strong electoral support for parties calling for a major renegotiation of the second EU–IMF pro- gram, elected representatives were unable to form a majority government and another round of elec- tions was held on June 17. In the weeks leading up to the second election, withdrawals of deposits from Greek banks reportedly increased, adding to pressures on the domestic ﬁnancial system. Ulti- mately, the two major parties that had negotiated the second EU–IMF program obtained sufficient votes to form the core of a coalition government. Uncertainty remains, however, over possible renegotiation of the terms of the EU–IMF program for Greece. Regardless of the outcome of those discussions, the Greek government must still implement difficult austerity measures to continue receiving official ﬁnancing under the program. Financial stresses also increased sharply in Spain as concerns about its public ﬁnances and the cost of stabilizing the banking system mounted. With economic activity declining, unemployment on the rise, and the budgets of regional governments under considerable strains, the Spanish govern- ment missed its 2011 budget deﬁcit target by a wide margin and raised the country’s deﬁcit target for 2012 after contentious negotiations with euro-area authorities. Meanwhile, the ongoing bust in the Spanish real estate sector and the depressed eco- nomic conditions more generally continued to weigh on the proﬁtability of regional and local banks, prompting market speculation that the public debt could be signiﬁcantly boosted by further bank bailouts. As market pressures increased, in June the Spanish government requested European ﬁnancial assistance of up to €100 billion for its banking system. Markets remained concerned, however, in part because the assistance would have the effect of increasing Spain’s sovereign debt. As pressures on Spain mounted and spilled over to Italy, there were renewed calls for euro-area 58. Equity indexes in selected advanced foreign economies, 59. Aggregate equity indexes for emerging market economies, 2009–12 59. Aggregate equity indexes for emerging market economies, 2009–12 NOTE: The data are daily. The last observation for each series is NOTE: The data are daily. The last observation for each series is July 13, 2012. The Latin American economies are Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, and Peru; the emerging Asian economies are China, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Pakistan, the Philippines, South Korea, Taiwan, and Thailand. countries to move toward greater ﬁscal and ﬁnan- announced additional measures toward that goal. Leaders pledged to further integrate the supervi- sion of European banks, to allow the euro-area ﬁnancial backstop facilities to directly recapitalize banks (as opposed to requiring sovereigns to bor- row to support their banks), and to provide greater however, have yet to be resolved. All told, European economies still face signiﬁcant makers must restore conﬁdence in the region’s ﬁnances. Policy measures, including the steps to improve the availability of dollar and euro funds late last year, are supporting access to funding for tic ﬁnancial systems remain. The region must also ﬁnd ways to stimulate economic growth and improve competitiveness in the most vulnerable countries even as they undertake major ﬁscal con- makers need to establish an effective institutional framework to foster economic, ﬁnancial, and ﬁscal integration and, ultimately, to increase the resil- area authorities lifted the ceiling on the combined lending of the region’s rescue facilities, the Euro- pean Financial Stability Facility and its successor, the European Stability Mechanism (ESM), from €500 billion to €700 billion, and they accelerated the schedule for capitalizing the ESM. In addition, leaders of the Group of Twenty countries and other IMF shareholders pledged about $450 billion in new ﬁnancing to the IMF, which should enable the IMF to substantially increase its lending capacity. Notwithstanding these initiatives, events in Greece and Spain during the spring again height- ened ﬁnancial stresses throughout the region. Political uncertainty in Greece increased consider- ably, and market concerns grew over the possibility of a Greek exit from the euro area, after the coun- try’s inconclusive parliamentary elections in early May. Amid increasing political fragmentation and strong electoral support for parties calling for a major renegotiation of the second EU–IMF pro- gram, elected representatives were unable to form a majority government and another round of elec- tions was held on June 17. In the weeks leading up to the second election, withdrawals of deposits from Greek banks reportedly increased, adding to pressures on the domestic ﬁnancial system. Ulti- mately, the two major parties that had negotiated the second EU–IMF program obtained sufficient votes to form the core of a coalition government. Uncertainty remains, however, over possible renegotiation of the terms of the EU–IMF program for Greece. Regardless of the outcome of those discussions, the Greek government must still implement difficult austerity measures to continue receiving official ﬁnancing under the program. countries to move toward greater ﬁscal and ﬁnan- cial union. At their June 28–29 summit, EU officials announced additional measures toward that goal. Leaders pledged to further integrate the supervi- sion of European banks, to allow the euro-area ﬁnancial backstop facilities to directly recapitalize banks (as opposed to requiring sovereigns to bor- row to support their banks), and to provide greater lending through the European Investment Bank in support of growth and employment. Essential details about implementation of such initiatives, however, have yet to be resolved. has waxed and waned as stresses related to ﬁnanc- ing sovereigns and the condition of banking sectors have forced signiﬁcant, but not deﬁnitive, policy the region, combined with deteriorating economic Financial stresses also increased sharply in Spain as concerns about its public ﬁnances and the cost of stabilizing the banking system mounted. With economic activity declining, unemployment on the rise, and the budgets of regional governments under considerable strains, the Spanish govern- ment missed its 2011 budget deﬁcit target by a wide margin and raised the country’s deﬁcit target for 2012 after contentious negotiations with euro-area authorities. Meanwhile, the ongoing bust in the Spanish real estate sector and the depressed eco- nomic conditions more generally continued to weigh on the proﬁtability of regional and local banks, prompting market speculation that the public debt could be signiﬁcantly boosted by further bank bailouts. As market pressures increased, in June the Spanish government requested European ﬁnancial assistance of up to €100 billion for its banking system. Markets remained concerned, however, in part because the assistance would have the effect of increasing Spain’s sovereign debt. conditions, led to acute funding pressures for Euro- eigns. In response, the European Central Bank took actions in early December to ease credit condi- tions, including the provision of three-year reﬁ- nancing to banks, and euro-area leaders agreed to strengthen ﬁscal rules and expand their rescue All told, European economies still face signiﬁcant challenges. In the near term, euro-area policy- makers must restore conﬁdence in the region’s banks and in the sustainability of sovereign ﬁnances. Policy measures, including the steps to improve the availability of dollar and euro funds late last year, are supporting access to funding for European banks, but risks to the stability of domes- tic ﬁnancial systems remain. The region must also ﬁnd ways to stimulate economic growth and improve competitiveness in the most vulnerable countries even as they undertake major ﬁscal con- solidations. Over the longer term, euro-area policy- makers need to establish an effective institutional framework to foster economic, ﬁnancial, and ﬁscal integration and, ultimately, to increase the resil- ience of the monetary union. lines with the Federal Reserve, reduced funding contributed to a marked improvement in ﬁnancial Early in 2012, euro-area authorities followed through on their commitment to put Greek review the adequacy of the ﬁnancial backstops for government concluded a restructuring of its pri- vately held bonds, which reduced the face value of that debt by slightly more than half, and negotiated As pressures on Spain mounted and spilled over to Italy, there were renewed calls for euro-area about €170 billion. Around the same time, euro- risk of default, the CDS premiums on the debt of many large banks in Europe have risen substantially (figure 61), while issuance of unsecured bank debt, which had previously recovered, has fallen. Notwith- standing these developments, funding market stresses have remained relatively muted, as many banks accessed funds from the Eurosystem—the system formed by the ECB and the national central banks of the euro-area member states—rather than interbank markets. A standard measure of the cost of this inter- bank funding, the implied basis spread from euro– dollar swaps, was little changed at shorter maturities. 60. Bank stock price indexes for selected European countries, 2011–12 The European fiscal and banking crisis was at the cen- ter of economic developments in the AFEs. Euro-area real GDP was flat in the first quarter of 2012 following a contraction in late 2011. Within the euro area, out- NOTE: The data are daily. The last observation for each series is 61. Credit default swap premiums for banks in selected European countries, 2011–12 NOTE: The data are daily. The last observation for each series is July 13, 2012. Credit default swaps are on bank senior debt and weighted by bank total assets. put fell sharply in more vulnerable countries, including Italy and Spain, whereas other countries, especially Germany, performed better. Mounting financial ten- sions and fiscal austerity measures appear to have fur- ther restrained the euro-area economy in the second quarter, as evidenced by declining business confidence and a further drift of purchasing managers indexes into contractionary territory. Economic performance in the other AFEs has been uneven. In the United Kingdom, real GDP continued to fall early in the year, and indicators point to further weakness fueled by tight fiscal policy and negative spill- over effects from the euro area. In Japan, output rose at a robust pace in the first quarter, reflecting fiscal stimulus measures as well as a recovery from the short- age of parts supplies caused by the floods in Thailand last year, but recent data suggest that activity deceler- ated in the second quarter. The Canadian economy continued to expand moderately in the first three months of the year, supported by solid domestic demand and a resilient labor market. In most AFEs, headline inflation rates—measured on a 12-month change basis—continued to decline in the first half of the year as the effects of the large run-up in commodity prices in early 2011 waned. The smaller run-up in energy prices that took place early this year exerted a less marked effect on consumer prices, though it helped keep 12-month inflation rates above 2 percent in the euro area and in the United Kingdom (figure 62). Japan appears to be emerging from several years of deflation, but Japanese inflation 62. Change in consumer prices for major foreign economies, 2008–12 NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through May 2012, except for the euro area for which the data extend through June 2012; the percent change is from one year earlier. remains below the 1 percent inflation goal introduced by the BOJ in February. Several central banks eased further their monetary policy stances. The BOJ increased the size of its asset purchases from ¥30 trillion to ¥40 trillion in April, and then to ¥45 trillion in July. The ECB, after having con- ducted the second of its three-year longer-term refi- nancing operations in late February, cut its policy interest rates to record lows in early July (figure 63). In late June, the Bank of England (BOE) activated its 63. Official or targeted interest rates in selected advanced foreign economies, 2008–12 NOTE: The data are daily and extend through July 13, 2012. The data shown are, for Canada, the target for the overnight rate; for the euro area, the minimum bid rate on main refinancing operations; for Japan, the target for the call rate; and, for the United Kingdom, the official Bank Rate. SOURCE: The central bank of each area or country shown. Extended Collateral Term Repo facility, offering six- month funds against a wide set of collateral. In addi- tion, in July, the BOE increased the size of its asset purchase program from £325 billion to £375 billion, and, together with the U.K. Treasury, introduced a new Funding for Lending Scheme designed to boost lending to households and firms. Following a disappointing performance at the end of last year, real GDP growth rebounded in the first quar- ter in most EMEs. Economic activity expanded espe- cially briskly in emerging Asia, largely reflecting the reconnection of supply chains damaged by the floods in Thailand. Economic growth, however, continued to slow in China and India. Moreover, recent indicators suggest that the pace of economic activity decelerated in most EMEs going into the second quarter amid headwinds associated with the European crisis and relatively subdued growth in China. In China, real GDP increased at about a 7 percent pace in the first half of the year, down from an 8½ per- cent pace in the second half of last year. The slowdown reflected weaker demand for Chinese exports as well as domestic factors, including moderating consumer spending and the restraining effects on investment of previous government measures to cool activity in the property sector. Macroeconomic data for May and June suggest that economic activity was picking up a bit toward the end of the second quarter, with growth of investment, retail sales, and bank lending edging higher. Headline 12-month inflation fell to 2.2 percent in June, led by additional moderation in food prices. As inflationary pressures eased and concerns about growth mounted, the People’s Bank of China lowered banks’ reserve requirements by 50 basis points in both February and May and then reduced the benchmark one-year lending rate by 25 basis points in June and 31 basis points in July, the first changes in that rate since an increase in July of last year. Over the first half of the year, the renminbi was little changed, on net, against the dollar, but it appreciated about 1½ percent on a real trade-weighted basis, as the renminbi fol- lowed the dollar upward against China’s other major trading partners. In India, economic growth has also moderated as slow progress on fiscal and structural reforms and pre- vious monetary tightening stalled investment. Noting rising vulnerabilities from the country’s twin fiscal and current account deficits, some credit rating agencies warned that India’s sovereign debt risks losing its investment-grade status. In Mexico, economic activity rebounded briskly in the first quarter as the agricultural sector rebounded from the fourth-quarter drought, domestic demand gained momentum, and exports to the United States picked up. Economic indicators, however, suggest that growth moderated somewhat in the second quarter. On July 1, Enrique Peña Nieto of the Institutional Revolu- tionary Party, or PRI, won the Mexican presidential election, promising to pursue market-oriented reforms to bolster economic growth. In Brazil, real GDP—restrained by flagging invest- ment and weather-related problems in the agricultural sector—increased slightly in the first quarter, making it the fourth consecutive quarter of below-trend growth. Industrial production, which has been on a downward trend since early 2011, continued to fall through May, suggesting that economic activity in Brazil remained weak in the second quarter. Headline inflation generally moderated in the EMEs reflecting lower food price pressures and weaker eco- nomic growth. In addition to China, several other cen- tral banks in the EMEs also loosened monetary policy, including those in Brazil, Chile, India, Indonesia, the Philippines, South Korea, and Thailand. To promote the Federal Open Market Committee’s (FOMC) objectives of maximum employment and price stability, the Committee maintained a target range for the federal funds rate of 0 to ¼ percent throughout the first half of 2012 (figure 64).11 With the incoming data suggesting a somewhat slower pace of economic recovery than the Committee had antici- pated, and with inflation seen as settling at levels at or below those consistent, over the long run, with its statutory mandate, the Committee took steps during the first half of 2012 to provide additional monetary accommodation in order to support a stronger eco- nomic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, runs at levels consistent with its mandate. These steps included lengthening the horizon of the forward rate guidance regarding the Committee’s expectations 11. Members of the FOMC in 2012 consist of the members of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System plus the presi- dents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Cleveland, New York, Richmond, and San Francisco. As of the June FOMC meet- ing, Governors Jerome H. Powell and Jeremy C. Stein joined the Board of Governors increasing the number of FOMC members to 12. for the period over which economic conditions will warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate, continuing the Committee’s maturity extension program (MEP) through the end of this year rather than completing the program in June as previously scheduled, retaining its existing policies regarding the reinvestment of principal payments on agency securi- ties in agency-guaranteed mortgage-backed securities (MBS), and continuing to reinvest the proceeds of maturing Treasury securities. The information reviewed at the January 24–25 meeting indicated that U.S. economic activity had expanded moderately, while global growth appeared to be slowing. Labor market indicators pointed to some further improvement in labor market conditions, but progress was gradual and the unemployment rate remained elevated. Household spending had continued to advance at a moderate pace despite diminished growth in real disposable income, but growth in busi- ness fixed investment had slowed. The housing sector remained depressed. Inflation had been subdued in recent months, and longer-term inflation expectations had remained stable. Meeting participants observed that financial conditions had improved and financial market stresses had eased somewhat during the inter- meeting period, in part because of the European Cen- tral Bank’s (ECB) three-year refinancing operation. 64. Selected interest rates, 2008–12 NOTE: The data are daily and extend through July 13, 2012. The 10-year Treasury rate is the constant-maturity yield based on the most actively traded securities. The dates on the horizontal axis are those of regularly scheduled Federal Open Market Committee meetings. Nonetheless, participants expected that global financial markets would remain focused on the evolving situa- tion in Europe, and they anticipated that further policy efforts would be required to fully address the fiscal and financial problems there. With the economy facing continuing headwinds and growth slowing in several U.S. export markets, mem- bers generally expected a modest pace of economic growth over coming quarters, with the unemployment rate declining only gradually. At the same time, mem- bers thought that inflation would run at levels at or below those consistent with the Committee’s dual mandate. Against this backdrop, members agreed to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent, to continue the program of extending the average maturity of the Federal Reserve’s holdings of securities as announced in September, and to retain the existing policies regarding the reinvestment of princi- pal payments from Federal Reserve holdings of securi- ties. In light of the economic outlook, most members also agreed to indicate that the Committee anticipates that economic conditions are likely to warrant excep- tionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through late 2014, longer than had been indicated in recent FOMC statements. The Committee also stated that it is prepared to adjust the size and composition of its securities holdings as appropriate to promote a stronger economic recovery in a context of price stability. The data in hand at the March 13 FOMC meeting indicated that U.S. economic activity had continued to expand moderately. Although the unemployment rate remained elevated, it had declined notably in recent months and payroll employment had increased. Household spending and business fixed investment had advanced. Signs of improvement or stabilization emerged in some local housing markets, but overall housing activity continued to be restrained by the sub- stantial inventory of foreclosed and distressed proper- ties, tight credit conditions for mortgage loans, and uncertainty about the economic outlook and future home prices. Inflation continued to be subdued, although prices of crude oil and gasoline had increased substantially. Longer-term inflation expectations had remained stable. Many participants believed that policy actions in the euro area, notably the Greek debt swap and the ECB’s longer-term refinancing operations, had helped ease strains in financial markets and reduced the downside risks to the U.S. and global economic outlook. Against that backdrop, equity prices had risen and conditions in credit markets improved, leading many meeting par- ticipants to see financial conditions as more supportive Members viewed the information on U.S. economic activity as suggesting that the economy would continue to expand moderately. However, despite the easing of strains in global financial markets, members continued to perceive significant downside risks to economic activity. Members generally anticipated that the recent increase in oil and gasoline prices would push up infla- tion temporarily, but that inflation subsequently would run at or below the rate that the Committee judges most consistent with its mandate. As a result, the Committee decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent, to reiterate its anticipation that economic conditions were likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through late 2014, to continue the program of extending the average maturity of the Federal Reserve’s holdings of securities that it had adopted in September, and to maintain the existing policies regarding the reinvestment of principal payments from Federal Reserve holdings of securities. The Committee again stated that it is prepared to adjust the size and composition of its securities holdings as appropriate to promote a stronger economic recovery in a context of price stability. data again indicated that economic activity was expanding moderately. Payroll employment had con- tinued to move up, and the unemployment rate, while still elevated, had declined a little further. Household spending and business fixed investment had continued to expand. The housing sector showed signs of improvement but from a very low level of activity. Mainly reflecting the increase in the prices of crude oil and gasoline earlier this year, inflation had picked up somewhat; however, measures of long-run inflation expectations remained stable. Meeting participants judged that, in general, conditions in domestic credit markets had improved further, but noted that inves- tors’ concerns about the sovereign debt and banking situation in the euro area intensified during the inter- meeting period. Many U.S. financial institutions had been taking steps to bolster their resilience, including expanding their capital levels and liquidity buffers and reducing their European exposures. Members expected growth to be moderate over com- ing quarters and then to pick up over time. Strains in global financial markets stemming from the sovereign debt and banking situation in Europe as well as uncer- tainty about U.S. fiscal policy continued to pose sig- nificant downside risks to economic activity both here and abroad. Most members anticipated that the increase in inflation would prove temporary and that subsequently inflation would run at or below the rate that the Committee judges to be most consistent with its mandate. Against this backdrop, the Committee members reached the collective judgment that it would be appropriate to maintain the existing highly accom- modative stance of monetary policy. In particular, the Committee agreed to keep the target range for the fed- eral funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent, to continue the pro- gram of extending the average maturity of the Federal Reserve’s holdings of securities as announced last Sep- tember, and to retain the existing policies regarding the reinvestment of principal payments from Federal Reserve holdings of securities. The Committee left the forward guidance for the target federal funds rate unchanged at this meeting. Members emphasized that their forward guidance was conditional on expected economic developments, but they preferred adjusting the forward guidance only once they were more confi- dent that the medium-term economic outlook or the risks to that outlook had changed significantly. Data received over the period leading up to the June 19–20 FOMC meeting indicated that economic activity was expanding at a somewhat more modest pace than earlier in the year. Improvements in labor market con- ditions had slowed in recent months, and the unem- ployment rate seemed to have flattened out. Household spending appeared to be rising at a somewhat slower rate, and business investment had continued to advance. Despite some ongoing signs of improvement, the housing sector remained depressed. Consumer price inflation had declined, mainly reflecting lower prices of crude oil and gasoline, and longer-term infla- tion expectations remained well anchored. Meeting participants observed that financial markets were vola- tile over the intermeeting period and that investor sen- timent was strongly influenced by the developments in Europe and evidence of slowing economic growth at home and abroad. agreed that the outlook had deteriorated somewhat relative to the time of the April meeting, and that sig- nificant downside risks were present, importantly including the financial stresses in the euro area and uncertainty about the degree of fiscal restraint in the United States, and its effects on economic activity over the medium term. As a result, the Committee decided that providing additional monetary policy accommo- dation would be appropriate to support a stronger eco- nomic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, was at a level consistent with the Committee’s dual mandate. Specifically, the Committee agreed to continue the MEP through the end of the year, instead of ending the program in June as had been planned. In doing so, the Federal Reserve will purchase Treasury securities with remaining maturities of 6 years to 30 years and sell or redeem an equal par value of Treasury securities with remaining maturities of approximately 3 years or less. This continuation of the MEP will proceed at about the same pace as had been executed through the first phase of the program, increasing the Federal Reserve’s holdings of longer- term Treasury securities by about $267 billion while reducing its holdings of shorter-term Treasury securi- ties by the same amount. For the duration of this pro- gram, the Committee directed the Open Market Desk to suspend its current policy of rolling over maturing Treasury securities into new issues at auction (and instead purchase only additional longer-term securities with the proceeds of maturing securities). The Com- mittee expected the continuation of the MEP to put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates and help make broader financial conditions more accom- modative. In addition, the Committee decided to con- tinue reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency MBS in agency MBS. The Committee also decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and to reaffirm its anticipation that economic conditions were likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through late 2014. In its statement, the Committee noted that it was prepared to take further action as appropriate to promote stronger economic recovery and sustained improvement in labor market conditions in a context of price stability. Transparency is an essential principle of modern cen- tral banking because it contributes to the accountabil- ity of central banks to the government and to the pub- lic and because it can enhance the effectiveness of central banks in achieving their macroeconomic objec- tives. To this end, the Federal Reserve provides to the public a considerable amount of information concern- ing the conduct of monetary policy. Following each meeting of the FOMC, the Committee immediately releases a statement that lays out the rationale for its policy decision and issues detailed minutes of the meeting about three weeks later. Lightly edited tran- scripts of FOMC meetings are released to the public with a five-year lag.12 Moreover, beginning in April 12. FOMC statements, minutes, and transcripts, as well as other related information, are available on the Federal Reserve Board’s website at www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomc.htm. 2011, the Chairman has held press conferences on an approximately quarterly basis. At the press confer- ences, the Chairman presents the current economic projections of FOMC participants and provides addi- tional context for the Committee’s policy decisions. The Committee continued to consider further improvements in its communications approach in the first half of 2012. At the January meeting, the FOMC released a statement of its longer-run goals and policy strategy in an effort to enhance the transparency, accountability, and effectiveness of monetary policy and to facilitate well-informed decisionmaking by households and businesses.13 The statement did not represent a change in the Committee’s policy approach, but rather was intended to help enhance the transparency, accountability, and effectiveness of mon- etary policy. The statement emphasizes the Federal Reserve’s firm commitment to pursue its congressional mandate to promote maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates. To clarify its longer-term objectives, the FOMC stated that inflation at the rate of 2 percent, as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal con- sumption expenditures, is most consistent over the long- er run with the Federal Reserve’s statutory mandate. While noting that the Committee’s assessments of the maximum level of employment are necessarily uncer- tain and subject to revision, the statement indicated that the central tendency of FOMC participants’ cur- rent estimates of the longer-run normal rate of unem- ployment is between 5.2 and 6.0 percent. It stressed that the Federal Reserve’s statutory objectives are gen- erally complementary, but when they are not, the Com- mittee will follow a balanced approach in its efforts to return both inflation and employment to levels consis- tent with its mandate. In addition, in light of a decision made at the December meeting, the Committee provided, starting in the January Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), information about each participant’s assess- ment of appropriate monetary policy. Specifically, the SEP included information about participants’ esti- mates of the appropriate level of the target federal funds rate in the fourth quarter of the current year and the next few calendar years, and over the longer run; the SEP also reported participants’ current projections of the likely timing of the appropriate first increase in the target federal funds rate given their assessments of the economic outlook. The accompanying narrative 13. The FOMC statement of longer-run goals and policy strategy is available on the Federal Reserve Board’s website at www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm. described the key factors underlying those assessments and provided some qualitative information regarding participants’ expectations for the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. At the March meeting, participants discussed a range of additional steps that the Committee might take to help the public better understand the linkages between the evolving economic outlook and the Fed- eral Reserve’s monetary policy decisions, and thus the conditionality in the Committee’s forward guidance. Participants discussed ways in which the Committee might include, in its postmeeting statements and other communications, additional qualitative or quantitative information that could convey a sense of how the Committee might adjust policy in response to changes in the economic outlook. However, participants also observed that the Committee had introduced several important enhancements to its policy communications over the past year or so; these included the Chairman’s postmeeting press conference as well as changes to the FOMC statement and the SEP. Against this backdrop, some participants noted that additional experience with the changes implemented to date could be helpful in evaluating potential further enhancements. At the April meeting, the Committee discussed the relationship between the postmeeting statement, which expresses the collective view of the Committee, and the policy projections of individual participants, which are included in the SEP. The Chairman asked the subcom- mittee on communications to consider possible enhancements and refinements to the SEP that might help clarify the link between economic developments and the Committee’s view of the appropriate stance of monetary policy. Following up on this issue at the June meeting, participants discussed several possibilities for enhancing the clarity and transparency of the Com- mittee’s economic projections as well as the role they play in policy decisions and policy communications. Many participants indicated that if it were possible to construct a quantitative economic projection and asso- ciated path of appropriate policy that reflected the col- lective judgment of the Committee, such a projection could potentially be helpful in clarifying how the out- look and policy decisions are related. However, many participants noted that developing a quantitative fore- cast that reflects the Committee’s collective judgment could be challenging, given the range of their views about the economy’s structure and dynamics. Partici- pants agreed to continue to explore ways to increase clarity and transparency in the Committee’s policy communications, but many emphasized that further changes in those communications should be consid- ered carefully. The following material appeared as an addendum to the minutes of the June 19–20, 2012, meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee. In conjunction with the June 19–20, 2012, Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting, meeting participants—the 7 members of the Board of Gover- nors and the 12 presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks, all of whom participate in the deliberations of the FOMC—submitted their assessments, under each participant’s judgment of appropriate monetary policy, of real output growth, the unemployment rate, inflation, and the target federal funds rate for each year from 2012 through 2014 and over the longer run. These assessments were based on information available at the time of the meeting and participants’ individual assumptions about the factors likely to affect economic outcomes. The longer-run projections represent each participant’s judgment of the rate to which each vari- able would be expected to converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of fur- ther shocks to the economy. “Appropriate monetary policy” is defined as the future path of policy that par- ticipants deem most likely to foster outcomes for eco- nomic activity and inflation that best satisfy their indi- vidual interpretations of the Federal Reserve’s objectives of maximum employment and stable prices. Overall, the assessments that FOMC participants submitted in June indicated that, under appropriate monetary policy, the pace of economic expansion over the 2012−14 period would likely continue to be moder- ate and inflation would remain subdued (see table 1 and figure 1). Participants judged that the growth rate of real gross domestic product (GDP) would pick up gradually and that the unemployment rate would edge down very slowly. Participants projected that inflation, as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), would run close to or below the FOMC’s longer-run inflation objective of 2 percent. As shown in figure 2, most participants judged that highly accommodative monetary policy was likely to be warranted over the forecast period. In particular, 13 participants thought that it would be appropriate for the first increase in the target federal funds rate to occur during 2014 or later. A majority of participants judged that appropriate monetary policy would involve an extension of the maturity extension program (MEP) through the end of 2012. Overall, participants judged the uncertainty associ- ated with the outlook for real activity and the unem- ployment rate to be unusually high relative to historical norms, with the risks weighted mainly toward slower economic growth and a higher unemployment rate. Longer run Longer run                                                       Note: Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP) and projections for both measures of inflation are from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. PCE inflation and core PCE inflation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) and the price index for PCE excluding food and energy. Projections for the unemployment rate are for the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. Each participant’s projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy. Longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. The April projections were made in conjunction with the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on April 24−25, 2012. 1. The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each year. 2. The range for a variable in a given year includes all participants’ projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year. 3. Longer-run projections for core PCE inflation are not collected. Figure 1. Central tendencies and ranges of economic projections, 2012–14 and over the longer run Longer run Longer run Longer run Longer run Note: Deﬁnitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. The data for the actual values of the variables are Longer run Note: In the upper panel, the height of each bar denotes the number of FOMC participants who judge that, under appropriate monetary policy, the ﬁrst increase in the target federal funds rate from its current range of 0 to 1/4 percent will occur in the speciﬁed calendar year. In April 2012, the numbers of FOMC participants who judged that the ﬁrst increase in the target federal funds rate would occur in 2012, 2013, 2014, and 2015 were, respectively, 3, 3, 7, and 4. In the lower panel, each shaded circle indicates the value (rounded to the nearest 1/4 percentage point) of an individual participant’s judgment of the appropriate level of the target federal funds rate at the end of the speciﬁed calendar year or over the longer run. Many participants also viewed the uncertainty sur- rounding their projections for inflation to be greater than normal, but most saw the risks to inflation to be broadly balanced. Conditional upon their individual assumptions about appropriate monetary policy, participants judged that the economy would continue to expand at a moderate pace in 2012 and 2013 before picking up in 2014 to a pace somewhat above what participants view as the longer-run rate of output growth. The central tendency of their projections for the change in real GDP in 2012 was 1.9 to 2.4 percent, lower than in April. Many par- ticipants characterized the incoming data—especially for household spending and the labor market—as hav- ing been weaker than they had anticipated in April. In addition, most noted that the worsening situation in Europe was leading to a slowdown in global economic growth and greater volatility in financial markets. Compared with their April submissions, most partici- pants lowered their medium-run projections of eco- nomic activity somewhat. The central tendencies of participants’ projections of real economic growth in 2013 and 2014 were 2.2 to 2.8 percent and 3.0 to 3.5 percent, respectively. The central tendency for the longer-run rate of increase of real GDP was 2.3 to 2.5 percent, little changed from April. Participants cited several headwinds that were likely to hold back the pace of economic expansion over the forecast period, including the difficult fiscal and financial situa- tion in Europe, a still-depressed housing market, tight credit for some borrowers, and fiscal restraint in the United States. Consistent with the downward revisions to their pro- jections for real GDP growth in 2012 and 2013, nearly all participants marked up their assessments for the rate of unemployment. Participants projected the unemployment rate at the end of 2012 to remain at or slightly below recent levels, with a central tendency of 8.0 to 8.2 percent, somewhat higher than their April submissions. Participants anticipated gradual improve- ment in labor market conditions by 2014, but even so, they generally thought that the unemployment rate at the end of that year would still lie well above their indi- vidual estimates of its longer-run normal level. The central tendencies of participants’ forecasts for the unemployment rate were 7.5 to 8.0 percent at the end of 2013 and 7.0 to 7.7 percent at the end of 2014. The central tendency of participants’ estimates of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment that would prevail under the assumption of appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy was 5.2 to 6.0 percent, unchanged from April. Most participants projected that the gap between the current unemployment rate and their esti- mates of its longer-run normal rate would be closed in five or six years, a couple judged that less time would be needed, and one thought more time would be neces- sary because of the persistent headwinds impeding the economic expansion. Figures 3.A and 3.B provide details on the diversity of participants’ views regarding the likely outcomes for real GDP growth and the unemployment rate over the next three years and over the longer run. The disper- sion in these projections reflects differences in partici- pants’ assessments of many factors, including appro- priate monetary policy and its effects on the economy, the underlying momentum in economic activity, the spill-over effects of the fiscal and financial situation in Europe, the prospective path for U.S. fiscal policy, the extent of structural dislocations in the labor market, and the likely evolution of credit and financial market conditions. Compared with their April assessments, the range of participants’ forecasts for the change in real GDP in 2012 and 2013 shifted lower, while the disper- sion of individual forecasts for growth in 2014 was about unchanged. Consistent with the downward shift in the distribution of forecasts for economic growth, the distribution of projections for the unemployment rate shifted up in 2012 and 2013 and, to a lesser extent, in 2014. As in April, the dispersion of estimates for the longer-run rate of output growth was fairly narrow, generally in a range of 2.2 to 2.7 percent. In contrast, participants’ views about the level to which the unem- ployment rate would converge in the longer run were more diverse, reflecting, among other things, different views on the outlook for labor supply and the structure of the labor market. Participants’ views about the medium-run outlook for inflation under the assumption of appropriate mon- etary policy were little changed from April. However, nearly all of them marked down their assessment of headline inflation in the near term, pointing to recent declines in the prices of crude oil and gasoline that were sharper than previously projected. Almost all par- ticipants judged that both headline and core inflation would remain subdued over the 2012−14 period, run- ning at rates at or below the FOMC’s longer-run objective of 2 percent. Some participants noted that Figure 3.A. Distribution of participants’ projections for the change in real GDP, 2012–14 and over the longer run Longer run Note: Deﬁnitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. Figure 3.B. Distribution of participants’ projections for the unemployment rate, 2012–14 and over the longer run Longer run Note: Deﬁnitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. inflation expectations had remained stable, and several pointed to resource slack and moderate increases in labor compensation as sources of restraint on prices. Specifically, the central tendency of participants’ pro- jections for inflation, as measured by the PCE price index, moved down in 2012 to 1.2 to 1.7 percent and was little changed in 2013 and 2014 at 1.5 to 2.0 per- cent. The central tendencies of the forecasts for core inflation were broadly the same as those for the head- line measure in 2013 and 2014. Figures 3.C and 3.D provide information about the diversity of participants’ views about the outlook for inflation. Relative to the assessments compiled in April, the projections for headline inflation shifted down in 2012, reflecting the declines in energy prices. The distributions of participants’ projections for head- line and core inflation in 2013 and 2014 were slightly lower than those reported in April. As indicated in figure 2, most participants judged that exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate would remain appropriate at least until late 2014. In particu- lar, seven participants thought that it would be appro- priate to commence policy firming in 2014, while another six participants thought that the first increase in the target federal funds rate would not be warranted until 2015 (upper panel). Eleven participants indicated that the appropriate federal funds rate at the end of 2014 would be 75 basis points or lower (lower panel), and those who judged that policy liftoff would not occur until 2015 thought the federal funds rate would be 1½ percent or lower at the end of that year. As in April, six participants judged that economic conditions would warrant an increase in the target federal funds rate in either 2012 or 2013 in order to achieve the Committee’s statutory mandate. Those participants judged that the appropriate value for the federal funds rate would range from 1½ to 3 percent at the end of 2014. All participants reported levels for the appropriate target federal funds rate at the end of 2014 that were well below their estimates of the level expected to pre- vail in the longer run. Estimates of the longer-run tar- get federal funds rate ranged from 3 to 4½ percent, reflecting the Committee’s inflation objective of 2 per- cent and participants’ judgments about the longer-run equilibrium level of the real federal funds rate. Participants also provided qualitative information on their views regarding the appropriate path of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. Of the 12 participants whose assessments of appropriate monetary policy included additional balance sheet policies, 11 indicated that their assumptions incorporated an extension through the end of 2012 of the MEP, and 2 partici- pants conditioned their economic forecasts on a new program of securities purchases. Two indicated that they would consider such purchases in the event that the economy did not make satisfactory progress in improving labor market conditions or in the event of a significant deterioration in the economic outlook or a further increase in downside risks to that outlook. Almost all participants assumed that the Committee would carry out the normalization of the balance sheet according to the principles approved at the June 2011 FOMC meeting. That is, prior to the first increase in the federal funds rate, the Committee would likely cease reinvesting some or all principal payments on securities in the System Open Market Account (SOMA), and it would likely begin sales of agency securities from the SOMA sometime after the first rate increase, aiming to eliminate the SOMA’s holdings of agency securities over a period of three to five years. In general, participants linked their preferred start dates for the normalization process to their views for the appropriate timing for the first increase in the target federal funds rate. One participant who thought that the liftoff of the federal funds rate should occur rela- tively soon indicated that the reinvestment of maturing securities should continue for a time after liftoff. The key factors informing participants’ individual assessments of the appropriate setting for monetary policy included their judgments regarding the maxi- mum level of employment, the extent to which current conditions had deviated from mandate-consistent lev- els, and participants’ projections of the likely time horizon necessary to return employment and inflation to such levels. Several participants noted that their assessments of appropriate monetary policy reflected the subpar pace of the economic expansion and the persistent shortfall in aggregate demand since the 2007–09 recession, and two commented that the neu- tral level of the federal funds rate was likely somewhat below its historical norm. One participant expressed concern that a protracted period of very accommoda- tive monetary policy could lead to a buildup of risks in the financial system. Participants also noted that because the appropriate stance of monetary policy depends importantly on the evolution of real activity and inflation over time, their assessments of the appro- priate future path of the federal funds rate and the bal- ance sheet could change if economic conditions were to evolve in an unexpected manner. Figure 3.E details the distribution of participants’ judgments regarding the appropriate level of the target Figure 3.C. Distribution of participants’ projections for PCE inﬂation, 2012–14 and over the longer run Longer run Note: Deﬁnitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. Note: Deﬁnitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. Figure 3.E. Distribution of participants’ projections for the target federal funds rate, 2012–14 and over the longer run Longer run Note: The target federal funds rate is measured as the level of the target rate at the end of the calendar year or federal funds rate at the end of each calendar year from 2012 to 2014 and over the longer run. Most par- ticipants judged that economic conditions would war- rant maintaining the current low level of the federal funds rate through the end of 2013. Views on the appropriate level of the federal funds rate at the end of 2014 were more widely dispersed, with 11 participants seeing the appropriate level of the federal funds rate as ¾ percentage point or lower and 4 of them seeing the appropriate rate as 2 percent or higher. Those who judged that a longer period of very accommodative monetary policy would be appropriate generally pro- jected that the unemployment rate would remain fur- ther above its longer-run normal level at the end of 2014. In contrast, the 6 participants who judged that policy firming should begin in 2012 or 2013 indicated that the Committee would need to act soon to keep inflation near the FOMC’s longer-run objective of 2 percent and to prevent a rise in inflation expectations. Nearly all participants judged that their current level of uncertainty about GDP growth and unemployment was higher than was the norm during the previous 20 years (figure 4).14 About half of all participants judged the level of uncertainty associated with their inflation forecasts to be higher as well, while another eight participants viewed uncertainty about inflation as broadly similar to historical norms. The main factors cited as underlying the elevated uncertainty about eco- nomic outcomes were the ongoing fiscal and financial situation in Europe, the outlook for fiscal policy in the United States, and a general slowdown in global eco- nomic growth, including the possibility of a significant slowdown in China. As in April, participants noted the difficulties associated with forecasting the path of the U.S. economic recovery following a financial crisis and 14. Table 2 provides estimates of the forecast uncertainty for the change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, and total consumer price inflation over the period from 1992 to 2011. At the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty” discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty in the economic forecasts and explains the approach used to assess the uncertainty and risks attending the participants’ projections. Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges Note: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root mean squared error of projections for 1992 through 2011 that were released in the sum- mer by various private and government forecasters. As described in the box ‘‘Fore- cast Uncertainty,’’ under certain assumptions, there is about a 70 percent probabil- ity that actual outcomes for real GDP, unemployment, and consumer prices will be in ranges implied by the average size of projection errors made in the past. Fur- ther information is in David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip (2007), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook from Historical Forecasting Errors,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2007-60 (Washington: Board of Gover- nors of the Federal Reserve System, November). 1. Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure that has been most widely used in government and private economic forecasts. Projection is per- cent change, fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. recession that differed markedly from recent historical experience. Several commented that in the aftermath of the financial crisis, they were more uncertain about the level of potential output and its trend rate of growth. A majority of participants reported that they saw the risks to their forecasts of real GDP growth as weighted toward the downside and, accordingly, the risks to their projections of the unemployment rate as tilted to the upside. The most frequently identified sources of risk were the situation in Europe, which many participants thought had the potential to slow global economic activity, particularly over the near term, and the fiscal situation in the United States. Most participants continued to judge the risks to their projections for inflation as broadly balanced, with several highlighting the recent stability of inflation expectations. However, five participants saw the risks to inflation as tilted to the downside, a larger number than in April; a couple of them noted that slack in resource markets could turn out to be greater or could put more downward pressure on inflation than they were anticipating. Two participants saw the risks to inflation as weighted to the upside, in light of concerns about U.S. fiscal imbalances, the current highly accom- modative stance of monetary policy, or the Commit- tee’s ability to effectively remove policy accommoda- tion when it becomes appropriate to do so. Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Risks to core PCE inflation Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Note: For deﬁnitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” Deﬁni- tions of variables are in the general note to table 1. The economic projections provided by the mem- bers of the Board of Governors and the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks inform discussions of monetary policy among policymakers and can aid public understanding of the basis for policy actions. Considerable uncertainty attends these projections, however. The economic and statistical models and relationships used to help produce economic forecasts are necessarily imperfect descriptions of the real world, and the future path of the economy can be affected by myriad unfore- seen developments and events. Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, participants consider not only what appears to be the most likely eco- nomic outcome as embodied in their projections, but also the range of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of their occurring, and the potential costs to the economy should they occur. Table 2 summarizes the average historical accu- racy of a range of forecasts, including those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports and those prepared by the Federal Reserve Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee. The projection error ranges shown in the table illustrate the considerable uncertainty associated with economic forecasts. For example, suppose a participant projects that real gross domestic product (GDP) and total consumer prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty attend- ing those projections is similar to that experienced in the past and the risks around the projections are broadly balanced, the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a probability of about 70 percent that actual GDP would expand within a range of 2.0 to 4.0 percent in the current year, 1.4 to 4.6 percent in the second year, and 1.3 to 4.7 percent in the third year. The corresponding 70 percent conﬁ- dence intervals for overall inﬂation would be 1.2 to 2.8 percent in the current year, 1.0 to 3.0 per- cent in the second year, and 0.9 to 3.1 percent in the third year. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over history, par- ticipants provide judgments as to whether the uncertainty attached to their projections of each variable is greater than, smaller than, or broadly similar to typical levels of forecast uncertainty in the past, as shown in table 2. Participants also pro- vide judgments as to whether the risks to their pro- jections are weighted to the upside, are weighted to the downside, or are broadly balanced. That is, participants judge whether each variable is more likely to be above or below their projections of the most likely outcome. These judgments about the uncertainty and the risks attending each partici- pant’s projections are distinct from the diversity of participants’ views about the most likely outcomes. Forecast uncertainty is concerned with the risks associated with a particular projection rather than with divergences across a number of different projections. As with real activity and inﬂation, the outlook for the future path of the federal funds rate is sub- ject to considerable uncertainty. This uncertainty arises primarily because each participant’s assess- ment of the appropriate stance of monetary policy depends importantly on the evolution of real activ- ity and inﬂation over time. If economic conditions evolve in an unexpected manner, then assessments of the appropriate setting of the federal funds rate would change from that point forward. bank holding company emerging market economy notice of proposed rulemaking The Board of Governors is pleased to submit its Monetary Policy Report pursuant to section 2B of the Federal Reserve Act. Statement on Longer-run goaLS and monetary PoLicy Strategy Adopted effective January 24, 2012; as amended effective January 29, 2019 The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) is firmly committed to fulfilling its statutory mandate from the Congress of promoting maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates. The Committee seeks to explain its monetary policy decisions to the public as clearly as possible. Such clarity facilitates well-informed decisionmaking by households and businesses, reduces economic and financial uncertainty, increases the effectiveness of monetary policy, and enhances transparency and accountability, which are essential in a democratic society. Inflation, employment, and long-term interest rates fluctuate over time in response to economic and financial disturbances. Moreover, monetary policy actions tend to influence economic activity and prices with a lag. Therefore, the Committee’s policy decisions reflect its longer-run goals, its medium- term outlook, and its assessments of the balance of risks, including risks to the financial system that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. The inflation rate over the longer run is primarily determined by monetary policy, and hence the Committee has the ability to specify a longer-run goal for inflation. The Committee reaffirms its judgment that inflation at the rate of 2 percent, as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, is most consistent over the longer run with the Federal Reserve’s statutory mandate. The Committee would be concerned if inflation were running persistently above or below this objective. Communicating this symmetric inflation goal clearly to the public helps keep longer-term inflation expectations firmly anchored, thereby fostering price stability and moderate long-term interest rates and enhancing the Committee’s ability to promote maximum employment in the face of significant economic disturbances. The maximum level of employment is largely determined by nonmonetary factors that affect the structure and dynamics of the labor market. These factors may change over time and may not be directly measurable. Consequently, it would not be appropriate to specify a fixed goal for employment; rather, the Committee’s policy decisions must be informed by assessments of the maximum level of employment, recognizing that such assessments are necessarily uncertain and subject to revision. The Committee considers a wide range of indicators in making these assessments. Information about Committee participants’ estimates of the longer-run normal rates of output growth and unemployment is published four times per year in the FOMC’s Summary of Economic Projections. For example, in the most recent projections, the median of FOMC participants’ estimates of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment was 4.4 percent. In setting monetary policy, the Committee seeks to mitigate deviations of inflation from its longer-run goal and deviations of employment from the Committee’s assessments of its maximum level. These objectives are generally complementary. However, under circumstances in which the Committee judges that the objectives are not complementary, it follows a balanced approach in promoting them, taking into account the magnitude of the deviations and the potentially different time horizons over which employment and inflation are projected to return to levels judged consistent with its mandate. The Committee intends to reaffirm these principles and to make adjustments as appropriate at its annual organizational meeting each January. How Have Lower-Educated Workers Fared since the Great Recession? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 Developments Related to Financial Stability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24 The Persistent Slowdown in Global Trade and Manufacturing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30 Monetary Policy Rules and Their Interactions with the Economy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37 Framework for Monetary Policy Implementation and note: This report reflects information that was publicly available as of noon EDT on July 2, 2019. Unless otherwise stated, the time series in the figures extend through, for daily data, July 1, 2019; for monthly data, May 2019; and, for quarterly data, 2019:Q1. In bar charts, except as noted, the change for a given period is measured to its final quarter from the final quarter of the preceding period. For figures 20 and 34, note that the S&P 500 Index and the Dow Jones Bank Index are products of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates and have been licensed for use by the Board. Copyright © 2019 S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC, a division of S&P Global, and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Redistribution, reproduction, and/or photocopying in whole or in part are prohibited without written permission of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC. For more information on any of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC’s indices please visit www.spdji.com. S&P® is a registered trademark of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC, and Dow Jones® is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. Neither S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC, Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC, their affiliates nor their third party licensors make any representation or warranty, express or implied, as to the ability of any index to accurately represent the asset class or market sector that it purports to represent, and neither S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC, Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC, their affiliates nor their third party licensors shall have any liability for any errors, omissions, or interruptions of any index or the data included therein. summary Economic activity increased at a solid pace in the early part of 2019, and the labor market has continued to strengthen. However, inflation has been running below the Federal Open Market Committee’s (FOMC) longer- run objective of 2 percent. At its meeting in June, the FOMC judged that current and prospective economic conditions called for maintaining the target range for the federal funds rate at 2¼ to 2½ percent. Nonetheless, in light of increased uncertainties around the economic outlook and muted inflation pressures, the Committee indicated that it will closely monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook and will act as appropriate to sustain the expansion, with a strong labor market and inflation near the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objective. The labor market. The labor market has continued to strengthen. Over the first five months of 2019, payrolls increased an average of 165,000 per month. This rate is down from the average pace of 223,000 in 2018, but it is faster than what is needed to provide jobs for new entrants into the labor force. The unemployment rate moved down from 3.9 percent in December to 3.6 percent in May; meanwhile, wage gains have remained moderate. Inflation. Consumer price inflation, as measured by the 12-month change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, moved down from a little above the FOMC’s objective of 2 percent in the middle of last year to a rate of 1.5 percent in May. The 12-month measure of inflation that excludes food and energy items (so-called core inflation), which historically has been a better indicator than the overall figure of where inflation will be in the future, was 1.6 percent in May—down from a rate of 2 percent from a year ago. However, these year-over-year declines mainly reflect soft readings in the monthly price data earlier this year, which appear to reflect transitory influences. Survey-based measures of longer- run inflation expectations are little changed, while market-based measures of inflation compensation have declined recently to levels close to or below the low levels seen late last year. Economic growth. In the first quarter, real gross domestic product (GDP) is reported to have increased at an annual rate of 3.1 percent, bolstered by a sizable contribution from net exports and business inventories. By contrast, consumer spending in the first quarter was lackluster but appears to have picked up in recent months. Meanwhile, following robust gains last year, business fixed investment slowed in the first quarter, and indicators suggest that investment decelerated further in the spring. All told, incoming data for the second quarter suggest a moderation in GDP growth—despite a pickup in consumption— as the contributions from net exports and inventories reverse and the impetus from business investment wanes further. Financial conditions. Nominal Treasury yields moved significantly lower over the first half of 2019, largely reflecting investors’ concerns about trade tensions and the global economic outlook, as well as expectations of a more accommodative path for the federal funds rate than had been anticipated earlier. On net, since the end of 2018, spreads of yields on corporate bonds over those on comparable- maturity Treasury securities have narrowed, and stock prices have increased. Moreover, loans remained widely available for most households, and credit provided by commercial banks continued to expand at a moderate pace. Overall, domestic financial conditions for businesses and households continued to be supportive of economic growth over the first half of 2019. Financial stability. The U.S. financial system continues to be substantially more resilient than in the period leading up to the financial crisis. Asset valuations remain somewhat elevated in a number of markets, with investors continuing to exhibit high appetite for risk. Borrowing by businesses continues to outpace GDP, with the most rapid increases in debt concentrated among the riskiest firms. In contrast, household borrowing remains modest relative to income, and the debt growth is concentrated among borrowers with high credit scores. Key financial institutions, including the largest banks, continue to be well capitalized and hold large quantities of liquid assets. Funding risks in the financial system remain low relative to the period leading up to the crisis. International developments. After slowing in 2018, foreign economic growth appears to have stabilized in the first half of the year, but at a restrained pace. While aggregate activity in the advanced foreign economies (AFEs) increased slowly from the soft patch of late last year, activity in emerging Asia generally struggled to gain a solid footing, and several Latin American economies continued to underperform. Growth abroad has been held down in part by a slowdown in the manufacturing sector against the backdrop of softening global trade flows. With both inflation and activity in the AFEs remaining subdued, AFE central banks took a more accommodative policy stance. Despite trade tensions that weighed on financial markets, financial conditions abroad generally eased in the first half of the year, supported by accommodative communications by major central banks. On balance, global equity prices moved higher, sovereign yields in major foreign economies declined, and sovereign bond spreads in the emerging market economies were little changed. Market-implied paths of policy rates in AFEs generally declined. Interest rate policy. In its meetings over the first half of 2019, the FOMC judged that the stance of monetary policy was appropriate to achieve the Committee’s objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation, and it decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 2¼ to 2½ percent. These decisions reflected incoming information showing the solid fundamentals of the U.S. economy supporting continued growth and strong employment. For most of this period, the Committee indicated that, in light of global economic and financial developments and muted inflation pressures, it would be patient as it determines what future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate may be appropriate. At the June FOMC meeting, however, the Committee noted that uncertainties about the global and domestic economic outlook had increased. In light of these uncertainties and muted inflation pressures, the Committee indicated that it will act as appropriate to sustain the expansion, with a strong labor market and inflation near its symmetric 2 percent objective. In the most recent Summary of Economic Projections, which was compiled at the time of the June FOMC meeting, participants generally revised down their individual assessments of the appropriate path for monetary policy relative to their assessments at the time of the March meeting. (The participants’ most recent economic projections—released after the June FOMC meeting—are discussed in more detail in Part 3 of this report.) However, as the Committee has continued to emphasize, the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate will depend on the Committee’s assessment of realized and expected economic conditions relative to its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. Balance sheet policy. Over the first half of the year, the FOMC made two announcements regarding the longer-run policy implementa- tion framework and its plans for normalizing the balance sheet. Following its January meeting, the Committee noted that it decided to continue to implement monetary policy in a regime with ample reserves. Consistent with that decision, in March, the Committee announced plans to conclude the reduction of its aggregate securities holdings at the end of September 2019. (See the box “Framework for Monetary Policy Implementation and Normalization of the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet” in Part 2.) The Committee is prepared to adjust the details for completing balance sheet normalization in light of economic and financial developments, consistent with its policy objectives of maximum employment and price stability. Labor market conditions for lower- and higher-educated workers. The labor market has strengthened since the end of the last recession, but the pattern of recovery has varied across workers with different levels of education. Workers with a college degree or more experienced a swifter recovery in employment, while those with a high school degree or less had a much more delayed recovery in employment. This pattern is typical of business cycles, and recent research sheds light on mechanisms that may lead to differences in the timing of recovery for lower- and higher-educated workers. (See the box “How Have Lower-Educated Workers Fared since the Great Recession?” in Part 1.) Global manufacturing and trade. Growth in global trade and manufacturing has weakened significantly since 2017 even as growth in services has held up. Trade policy developments appear to have lowered trade flows to some extent, while uncertainty surrounding trade policy may be weighing on investment. The global tech cycle and a general slowdown in global demand, reflecting idiosyncratic factors specific to different economies, have also likely weighed on demand for traded goods. (See the box “The Persistent Slowdown in Global Trade and Manufacturing” in Part 1.) Monetary policy rules. Monetary policy rules are mathematical formulas that relate a policy interest rate, such as the federal funds rate, to a small number of other economic variables, typically including the deviation of inflation from its target value and a measure of resource slack in the economy. The prescriptions for the policy interest rate from these rules can provide helpful guidance for the FOMC. This discussion presents five policy rules— illustrative of the many rules that have received attention in the research literature—and provides examples of two ways to compute historical prescriptions of policy rules. (See the box “Monetary Policy Rules and Their Interactions with the Economy” in Part 2.) Monetary policy implementation and balance sheet normalization. Since the beginning of this year, the FOMC has made important decisions regarding its framework for monetary policy implementation and the process of normalizing the size of its balance sheet. The Committee decided to continue to implement monetary policy in a regime with an ample supply of reserves and announced that it intends to conclude the reduction of its aggregate securities holdings in the System Open Market Account at the end of September 2019. (See the box “Framework for Monetary Policy Implementation and Normalization of the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet” in Part 2.) The labor market strengthened further during the first half of 2019 but at a slower pace than last year . . . Labor market conditions have continued to strengthen so far this year but at a pace slower than last year. Total nonfarm payroll employment has averaged gains of about 165,000 per month over the first five months of 2019, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics. This pace is slower than the average monthly gains in 2018, but it is faster than what is needed to provide jobs for net new entrants into the labor force as the working- age population grows (figure 1).1 1. Net change in payroll employment In April and May of this year, the unemployment rate stood at 3.6 percent, ¼ percentage point lower than its level in December 2018 and its lowest level since 1969 (figure 2). In addition, the unemployment rate is ½ percentage point below the median of Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants’ estimates of its longer-run normal level.2 NOTE: The data are 3-month and 12-month moving averages. SOURCE: Bureau of Labor Statistics via Haver Analytics. In May, the labor force participation rate (LFPR) for individuals 16 and over—that is, the share of the population either working or actively seeking work—was 62.8 percent, and it has changed little, on net, since late 2013. The aging of the population is an important contributor to an underlying downward trend 1. Owing to population growth, roughly 115,000 to 145,000 jobs per month need to be created, on average, to keep the unemployment rate constant with an unchanged labor force participation rate. However, the participation rate fell over the December to May period, reducing the number of job gains that would have been needed. There is considerable uncertainty around these estimates, as the difference between monthly payroll gains and employment changes from the Current Population Survey (the source of the unemployment and participation rates) can be quite volatile over short periods. 2. See the most recent economic projections that were released after the June FOMC meeting in Part 3 of this report. 2. Measures of labor underutilization NOTE: Unemployment rate measures total unemployed as a percentage of the labor force. U-4 measures total unemployed plus discouraged workers, as a percentage of the labor force plus discouraged workers. Discouraged workers are a subset of marginally attached workers who are not currently looking for work because they believe no jobs are available for them. U-5 measures total unemployed plus all marginally attached to the labor force, as a percentage of the labor force plus persons marginally attached to the labor force. Marginally attached workers are not in the labor force, want and are available for work, and have looked for a job in the past 12 months. U-6 measures total unemployed plus all marginally attached workers plus total employed part time for economic reasons, as a percentage of the labor force plus all marginally attached workers. The shaded bar indicates a period of business recession as defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research. 3. Labor force participation rates and employment-to-population ratio NOTE: The data are monthly. The prime-age labor force participation rate is a percentage of the population aged 25 to 54. The labor force participation rate and the employment-to-population ratio are percentages of the population aged 16 and over. in the overall participation rate. In particular, members of the baby-boom cohort are increasingly moving into their retirement years, ages when labor force participation typically falls. The flat trajectory in the overall LFPR is therefore consistent with strengthening labor market conditions; indeed, the LFPR for prime-age individuals (between 25 and 54 years old), which is much less sensitive to the effects of population aging, has been rising over the past few years (figure 3). Combining both the unemployment rate and the LFPR, the employment-to-population ratio (EPOP) for individuals 16 and over—the share of that segment of the population who are working—was 60.6 percent in May and has been gradually increasing throughout the expansion. The increase has been considerably larger for those with at least some college education than for those with no more than a high school diploma. (The box “How Have Lower-Educated Workers Fared since the Great Recession?” discusses movements in the EPOP by educational level over the current expansion.) Other indicators are also consistent with strong labor market conditions. As reported in the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey (JOLTS), the average of the private-sector job openings rate over the first four months of the year was near its historical high, consistent with surveys indicating that businesses see vacancies as hard to fill. Similarly, the quits rate in the JOLTS is also near the top of its historical range, an indication that workers are being bid away from their current jobs or have become more confident that they can successfully switch jobs if they wish to. This interpretation accords well with surveys of consumers that indicate households perceive jobs as plentiful. The JOLTS layoff rate and the number of people filing initial claims for unemployment insurance benefits have both remained quite low. . . . and unemployment rates have fallen for all major demographic groups over the past several years Differences in unemployment rates across ethnic and racial groups have narrowed in recent years, as they typically do during economic expansions, after having widened during the recession (figure 4). However, unemployment rates for African Americans and Hispanics remain substantially above those for whites and Asians. The rise in LFPRs for prime-age individuals over the past few years has also been apparent in each of these racial and ethnic groups (figure 5). Increases in labor compensation have picked up but remain moderate by historical standards . . . Despite strong labor market conditions, the available indicators generally suggest that increases in hourly labor compensation have remained moderate. The employment cost index—a measure of both wages and the cost to employers of providing benefits—was The U.S. labor market has been strengthening since the end of the Great Recession. Over this period, the unemployment rate has fallen roughly 6 percentage points, and the employment-to-population ratio (EPOP) for individuals between 25 and 54 years old (prime age) has increased about 4¼ percentage points. How- ever, labor market outcomes during the expansion have been quite different for lower- and higher-educated individuals. The EPOP for prime-age college graduates declined about 2.5 percentage points during the recession, but it began a steady and sustained recovery in 2010 and was nearly at its pre-recession level by 2018 (left panel of figure A). In contrast, the EPOP for prime-age individuals with a high school degree or less fell much more sharply during the recession and lingered near its trough for several years before it began to recover in 2014.1 As of 2018, the EPOP for lower-educated workers remained well below its pre-recession level. In addition, real (or inflation- adjusted) hourly wages for lower-educated workers fell more over the 2007–13 period than real wages for college graduates (right panel of figure A). Real wages subsequently picked up for both groups, but cumulative real wage gains for lower-educated workers have only recently caught up, in percentage terms, to those for workers with college degrees.2 1. The analysis excludes those with some college education but not a four-year degree. The labor market experience of such individuals, though, is similar to that of individuals with a high school degree or less. 2. Another measure of wage growth using the same Current wage growth for lower-educated workers has been a characteristic of all business cycles since at least 1980. This pattern is likely due, at least in part, to a long-term downward trend in the demand for lower- educated workers that is unrelated to the business cycle and caused, perhaps, by changes in technology and globalization.3 To focus on the effects of business cycles distinct from these longer-term trends, we examine business cycles at the state level to estimate the (continued) of Atlanta’s Wage Growth Tracker (WGT), which calculates the median, year-over-year percent change in nominal wages of individuals employed 12 months apart. The WGT measure shows that median wage growth for workers with a high school degree was lower than median wage growth for workers with a college degree through 2015. Since then, median wage growth for both groups has been similar. 3. The EPOP for lower-educated, prime-age individuals has been trending lower for men since 1950 and for women since 2000, largely reflecting the trends in those groups’ labor force participation rates (LFPRs). For an overview of factors affecting the LFPRs of prime-age individuals, see the box “The Labor Force Participation Rate for Prime-Age Individuals” in Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2018), Monetary Policy Report (Washington: Board of Governors, July), pp. 8–10, https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/ files/20180713_mprfullreport.pdf; and Congressional Budget Office (2018), Factors Affecting the Labor Force Participation of People Ages 25 to 54 (Washington: CBO, February, https:// www.cbo.gov/system/files/115th-congress-2017-2018/ reports/53452-lfpr.pdf). The typical state-level business cycle shows a starkly different evolution of employment for lower-educated workers compared with that for workers with college degrees. Typically in a recession, the EPOP declines immediately for both groups, but the decline is deeper and longer lasting for those with a high school degree or less (figure B).4 Once that group’s EPOP begins a sustained recovery, though, it increases at a more rapid pace than the EPOP for those with a college degree. These results indicate that the EPOP for lower-educated workers may not fully recover for at least eight years, on average, following the end of a recession. The differences in labor market outcomes over the business cycle for different education groups may in part be due to employers changing their hiring standards. Some research shows that employers raise skill requirements for new hires in a recession and then gradually lower skill requirements as the labor market recovers.5 Other research suggests that when high- skilled workers lose their jobs during recessions, they take jobs that require fewer skills, making these jobs less likely to be filled by low-skilled individuals.6 This pattern could at least in part explain the differences in labor market outcomes for lower- and higher-educated workers since the most recent recession. As the unemployment rate falls and employers relax their hiring standards, more opportunities are likely to open for lower-educated workers. Aaronson and others (2019) present some evidence that disadvantaged groups, such as nonwhite individuals and those with less education, benefit more from further improvement in the labor market relative to more advantaged groups when the unemployment rate is below its natural 4. For ease of interpretation, we define a typical recession as a state experiencing a temporary 1 percent decline in state output growth in a given year, returning to normal growth in the following year. To get the estimated effect of a larger or smaller recession, simply multiply the estimates by the specified decline in output growth. 5. See Brad Hershbein and Lisa B. Kahn (2018), “Do Recessions Accelerate Routine-Biased Technological Change? Evidence from vacancy Postings,” American Economic Review, vol. 108 (July), pp. 1737–72; and Alicia Sasser Modestino, Daniel Shoag, and Joshua Ballance (2016), “Downskilling: Changes in Employer Skill Requirements over the Business Cycle,” Labour Economics, vol. 41 (August), pp. 333–47. 6. See Regis Barnichon and yanos Zylberberg (2019), “Underemployment and the Trickle-Down of Unemployment,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, vol. 11 (April), pp. 40–78. Year relative to shock Note: EPOP refers to the employment-to-population ratio. Shaded areas are 95 percent confidence bands. Data extend from 1978 through 2018. Source: Tomaz Cajner, John Coglianese, and Joshua Montes (2019), “Cyclical Dynamics of the U.S. Labor Market,” unpublished paper, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Division of Research and Statistics, March. rate.7 Indeed, real wages for lower-educated workers rose faster over the past few years as the labor market tightened, and total wage growth for those workers since 2007 is now close to wage growth for more- educated workers (as shown in the right panel of figure A). Hotchkiss and Moore (2018) find that exposure to a low-unemployment economy is particularly beneficial for individuals who entered the labor market during periods of high unemployment and would otherwise face persistently worse labor market outcomes.8 Thus, periods of low unemployment may particularly improve labor market outcomes of lower- educated workers. 7. See Stephanie R. Aaronson, Mary C. Daly, William Wascher, and David W. Wilcox (2019), “Okun Revisited: Who Benefits Most from a Strong Economy?” paper presented at the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Conference, held at the Brookings Institution, Washington, March 7–8, https:// www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/Okun- Revisited-Who-Benefits-Most-From-a-Strong-Economy.pdf. 8. See Julie L. Hotchkiss and Robert E. Moore (2018), “Some Like It Hot: Assessing Longer-Term Labor Market Benefits from a High-Pressure Economy,” Andrew young School of Policy Studies Research Paper Series 18-01 (Atlanta: Georgia State University, February), https://aysps.gsu.edu/ files/2018/03/18-01-HotchkissMoore-SomelikeitHot.pdf. 4. Unemployment rate by race and ethnicity NOTE: Unemployment rate measures total unemployed as a percentage of the labor force. Persons whose ethnicity is identified as Hispanic or Latino may be of any race. The shaded bar indicates a period of business recession as defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research. 5. Prime-age labor force participation rate by race and ethnicity NOTE: The prime-age labor force participation rate is a percentage of the population aged 25 to 54. Persons whose ethnicity is identified as Hispanic or Latino may be of any race. The data are seasonally adjusted by Board staff and are 3-month moving averages. The shaded bar indicates a period of business recession as defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research. 2¾ percent higher in March of 2019 relative to its year-earlier level (figure 6). Compensation per hour in the business sector—a broad- based but volatile measure of wages, salaries, and benefits—rose 1½ percent over the four quarters ending in 2019:Q1, less than the annual increases over the preceding couple of years. Among measures that do not account for benefits, average hourly earnings rose 3.1 percent in May relative to 12 months earlier, a slightly faster rate of increase than during the same period of a year ago. According to the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, the median 12-month wage growth of individuals reporting to the Current Population Survey increased about 3¾ percent in May, near the upper portion of its range over the past couple of years.3 3. The Atlanta Fed’s measure differs from others in that it measures the wage growth only of workers who were employed both in the current survey month and 12 months earlier. . . . and likely have been restrained by slow growth in labor productivity over much of the expansion These moderate rates of hourly compensation gains likely reflect the offsetting influences of a strengthening labor market and productivity growth that has been weak through much of the expansion. From 2008 to 2017, labor productivity increased a little more than 1 percent per year, on average, well below the average pace from 1996 to 2007 of nearly 3 percent and also below the average gain in the 1974–95 period (figure 7). Although considerable debate remains about the reasons for the slowdown in productivity growth over this period, the weakness may be partly attributable to the sharp pullback in capital investment during the most recent recession and the relatively slow recovery that followed. More recently, however, labor productivity rose 1¾ percent in 2018 and picked up further in the first quarter of 2019.4 While it is uncertain whether this faster rate of growth will persist, a sustained pickup in productivity growth, as well as additional labor market strengthening, would support stronger gains in labor compensation. Price inflation has dipped below 2 percent this year Consumer price inflation has moved down below the FOMC’s objective of 2 percent this year.5 As measured by the 12-month change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), inflation is estimated to have been 1.5 percent in May after being at or 4. In the first quarter, labor productivity surged 3½ percent at an annual rate, bringing the four-quarter change to 2½ percent, reflecting a strong pickup in business-sector output and unusual weakness in hours relative to measured gains in payroll employment. This weakness is attributable to a steep decline in a volatile component of hours that is not directly measured in the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ establishment survey. 5. The increases in tariffs on imported goods last year likely provided only a small boost to inflation in 2018 and in the first half of this year. 6. Measures of change in hourly compensation NOTE: Business-sector compensation is on a 4-quarter percent change basis. For the private-sector employment cost index, change is over the 12 months ending in the last month of each quarter; for private-sector average hourly earnings, the data are 12-month percent changes and begin in March 2007; for the Atlanta Fed’s Wage Growth Tracker, the data are shown as a 3-month moving average of the 12-month percent change. 7. Change in business-sector output per hour NOTE: Changes are measured from Q4 of the year immediately preceding the period through Q4 of the final year of the period except 2019 changes, which are calculated from 2018:Q1 to 2019:Q1. SOURCE: Bureau of Labor Statistics via Haver Analytics. 8. Change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures Trimmed mean Excluding food and energy 9. Spot and futures prices for crude oil NOTE: The data are weekly averages of daily data. The weekly data begin on Thursdays and extend through July 1, 2019. above 2 percent for much of 2018 (figure 8). Core PCE inflation—which excludes consumer food and energy prices that are often quite volatile, and which therefore typically provides a better indication than the total measure of where overall inflation will be in the future— also moved lower in recent months and is estimated to have been 1.6 percent over the 12 months ending in May. The slowing in core inflation to date reflects particularly low readings in the first three months of the year that appear due to idiosyncratic price declines in a number of specific categories such as apparel, used cars, and banking services and portfolio management services. Indeed, in April and May, core inflation accelerated, posting larger average monthly gains than in the first quarter. The trimmed mean PCE price index, produced by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, provides an alternative way to purge inflation of transitory influences, and it is less sensitive than the core index to idiosyncratic price movements such as those noted earlier.6 The 12-month change in this measure was 2 percent in May. Oil prices rebounded through the spring but have moved down recently . . . After dropping sharply late last year, the Brent price of crude oil moved up to almost $75 per barrel in mid-April, partly reflecting declines in production in Iran and Venezuela and voluntary supply cuts by other OPEC members and partner countries (figure 9). More recently, however, prices have fallen back to around $65 per barrel because of concerns about global growth. The changes in oil prices have contributed to similar movements in retail gasoline prices, which rose through early spring but have also fallen back recently. 6. The trimmed mean index excludes whichever prices showed the largest increases or decreases in a given month. Note that, since 1995, changes in the trimmed mean index have averaged about 0.3 percentage point above core PCE inflation and 0.2 percentage point above total PCE inflation. . . . and prices of imports other than energy fell Nonfuel import prices, before accounting for the effects of tariffs on the price of imported goods, have continued to decline from their mid-2018 peak, responding to dollar appreciation, lower foreign inflation, and declines in non-oil commodity prices (figure 10).7 In particular, prices of industrial metals have fallen in recent months, partly on concerns about weak global demand. Survey-based measures of inflation expectations have been stable . . . Expectations of inflation likely influence actual inflation by affecting wage- and price-setting decisions. Survey-based measures of inflation expectations at medium- and longer-term horizons have remained generally stable over the past year. In the Survey of Professional Forecasters, conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, the median expectation for the annual rate of increase in the PCE price index over the next 10 years has been very close to 2 percent for the past several years (figure 11). In the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers, the median value for inflation expectations over the next 5 to 10 years has fluctuated around 2½ percent since the end of 2016, though this level is about ¼ percentage point lower than had prevailed through 2014. In the Survey of Consumer Expectations, conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the median of respondents’ expected inflation rate three years hence has fluctuated between 2½ percent and 3 percent over the past five years. . . . while market-based measures of inflation compensation have come down since the first half of 2018 Inflation expectations can also be gauged by market-based measures of inflation 7. Published import price indexes exclude tariffs. However, tariffs add to the prices that purchasers of imports actually pay. 10. Nonfuel import prices and industrial metals indexes NOTE: The data for nonfuel import prices are monthly. The data for industrial metals are a monthly average of daily data and extend through June 28, 2019. 11. Median inflation expectations NOTE: The Michigan survey data are monthly and extend through June 2019. The SPF data for inflation expectations for personal consumption expenditures are quarterly and extend from 2007:Q1 through 2019:Q2. 12. 5-to-10-year-forward inflation compensation NOTE: The data are weekly averages of daily data and extend through June 28, 2019. TIPS is Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities. 13. Change in real gross domestic product and gross domestic income compensation. However, the inference is not straightforward, because market- based measures can be importantly affected by changes in premiums that provide compensation for bearing inflation and liquidity risks. Measures of longer-term inflation compensation—derived either from differences between yields on nominal Treasury securities and those on comparable-maturity Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS) or from inflation swaps—tend to fall when markets are volatile because of the incorporation of liquidity risks. Such declines occurred around the turn of the year and again in May and June, when market volatility picked up again. Despite the fluctuations this year, these measures of inflation compensation remain notably below levels that prevailed in the summer of 2018 (figure 12).8 The TIPS- based measure of 5-to-10-year-forward inflation compensation and the analogous measure from inflation swaps are now about 1¾ percent and 2 percent, respectively, with both measures below their respective ranges that prevailed for most of the 10 years before the start of the notable declines in mid-2014.9 Real gross domestic product growth was strong in the first quarter, but there are recent signs of slowing Real gross domestic product (GDP) rose at an annual rate of 3 percent in 2018 (figure 13). In the first quarter, real GDP again moved up at an annual rate of around 3 percent. 8. Inflation compensation implied by the TIPS breakeven inflation rate is based on the difference, at comparable maturities, between yields on nominal Treasury securities and yields on TIPS, which are indexed to the total consumer price index (CPI). Inflation swaps are contracts in which one party makes payments of certain fixed nominal amounts in exchange for cash flows that are indexed to cumulative CPI inflation over some horizon. Inflation compensation derived from inflation swaps typically exceeds TIPS-based compensation, but week-to-week movements in the two measures are highly correlated. 9. As these measures are based on the CPI inflation index, one should probably subtract about ¼ percentage point—the average differential with PCE inflation and CPI inflation over the past two decades—to infer inflation compensation on a PCE price basis. However, there are indications that growth will moderate in the second quarter.10 Net exports and business inventories provided a sizable boost to first-quarter GDP growth, but their contributions appear to have reversed in the months following. Notably, private domestic final purchases—that is, final purchases by households and businesses, which tend to provide a better indication of future GDP growth than most other components of overall spending—posted only a modest increase in the first quarter. The slowing that occurred in consumer spending appears to have been temporary, but the slowing in business fixed investment appears to be more persistent. Manufacturing output fell in the first quarter, and it moved down further in April before posting a small gain in May. Although lower production levels of motor vehicles and aircraft were important contributors to the weakness, the recent declines in manufacturing were broad based.11 Nevertheless, the economic expansion continues to be abetted by steady job gains, increases in household wealth, expansionary fiscal policy, and still-supportive domestic financial conditions, including moderate borrowing costs and easy access to credit for many households and businesses. Growth in business fixed investment has softened after strong gains in 2018 Investment spending by businesses rose rapidly in 2018 but appears to have decelerated sharply this year. In the first quarter, growth slowed to an annual rate of 4½ percent, while new orders for nondefense capital goods, excluding the volatile aircraft category, have declined modestly, on balance, in recent months (figure 14). In addition, forward- 10. It is worth noting that gross domestic income (GDI) has been notably weaker than GDP. GDI is reported to have risen only 1.7 percent in the first quarter relative to the same period of a year ago, 1½ percentage points less than measured GDP growth. GDP and GDI measure the same economic concept, and any difference between the two figures reflects measurement error. 11. Recently, a large aircraft manufacturer slowed its production and temporarily halted deliveries of an aircraft model. This production slowdown lowers manufacturing output and generates a small drag on real GDP growth in the first half of the year. 14. Change in real private nonresidential fixed investment 15. Private housing starts and permits 16. New and existing home sales Existing home sales NOTE: Data are monthly. New home sales includes only single-family sales. Existing home sales includes single-family, condo, townhome, and co-op sales. SOURCE: For new home sales, U.S. Census Bureau; for existing home 17. Mortgage rates and housing affordability NOTE: The housing affordability index data are monthly through April 2019, and the mortgage rate data are weekly through June 27, 2019. At an index value of 100, a median-income family has exactly enough income to qualify for a median-priced home mortgage. Housing affordability is seasonally adjusted by Board staff. looking indicators of business spending such as capital spending plans have deteriorated amid downbeat business sentiment and profit expectations from industry analysts, reportedly reflecting trade tensions and concerns about global growth. By contrast, activity in the housing sector had been declining but recently shows signs of stabilizing Residential investment fell in 2018 and declined further in the first quarter. More recently, the pace of construction activity appears to have stabilized as housing starts for single-family and multifamily housing units rose, on average, in April and May (figure 15). Existing home sales moved higher as well over the same period, while new home sales moved down a bit following a sizable increase in the first quarter (figure 16). Consumers’ perceptions of homebuying conditions and housing affordability have improved, which is consistent with the declines in mortgage rates this year and the slowing in growth of home prices (figure 17). Ongoing improvements in the labor market and gains in wealth continue to support household income and consumer spending . . . After increasing at a moderate pace of 2½ percent in 2018 as a whole, real consumer spending slowed considerably in the first quarter (figure 18). However, incoming data suggest that consumer spending picked up in recent months, with PCE in May up at an annual rate of 2½ percent relative to the average level in the fourth quarter. Real disposable personal income (DPI), a measure of households’ after-tax purchasing power, increased at a solid annual rate of 3 percent in 2018; however, so far this year, growth in real DPI has been more moderate despite strong gains in wage and salary income. With consumer spending rising more than disposable income so far this year, the personal saving rate moved down from an average of 6½ percent in the fourth quarter to around 6 percent in May (figure 19). Ongoing gains in household wealth have likely continued to support consumer spending. House prices, which are of particular importance for the balance sheet positions of a large portion of households, continued to increase through May, although at a more moderate pace than in recent years (figure 20). In addition, U.S. equity prices, which fell sharply at the end of 2018, have rebounded this year. Buoyed by increases in home and equity prices, aggregate household net worth moved up to 6.8 times household income in the first quarter (figure 21). . . . and consumer sentiment remains strong Consumers have remained upbeat. Although the Michigan index of consumer sentiment dipped at the turn of the year, it has since rallied, and the sentiment measure from the Conference Board survey also climbed in the second quarter from its first-quarter level (figure 22). In June, both the Michigan and the Conference Board indexes of consumer sentiment were about in the middle of their ranges over the past few years. Borrowing conditions for households remain generally favorable . . . Despite increases in interest rates for consumer loans and some reported further tightening in credit card lending standards, financing conditions for consumers largely remain supportive of growth in household spending. Consumer credit expanded at a moderate pace in the first quarter, rising faster than disposable income (figure 23). Mortgage credit has continued to be readily available for households with solid credit profiles but remains noticeably tighter than before the most recent recession for borrowers with low credit scores. Standards for automotive loans have been generally stable, and overall delinquency rates for these loans were little changed in the first quarter at a 18. Change in real personal consumption expenditures and disposable personal income Personal consumption expenditures Disposable personal income NOTE: The values for 2019:H1 are the annualized May/Q4 changes. SOURCE: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis via 19. Personal saving rate 20. Prices of existing single-family houses NOTE: The data for the S&P/Case-Shiller index extend through April SOURCE: CoreLogic Home Price Index; Zillow; S&P/Case-Shiller U.S. National Home Price Index. The S&P/Case-Shiller Index is a product of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. (For Dow Jones Indices licensing information, see the note on the Contents page.) 21. Wealth-to-income ratio NOTE: The series is the ratio of household net worth to disposable NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through June 2019. The Conference Board data are indexed to 100 in 1985; the Michigan survey data are indexed to 100 in 1966. 23. Changes in household debt moderate level. Financing conditions in the student loan market remain firm, with over 90 percent of such credit being extended by the federal government. After peaking in 2013, delinquencies on such loans have been gradually declining, reflecting in part the continued improvements in the labor market. . . . while corporate financing conditions tightened somewhat relative to last year but remained accommodative overall Aggregate flows of credit to large nonfinancial firms remained strong in the first quarter, supported in part by relatively low interest rates and accommodative financing conditions (figure 24). The gross issuance of corporate bonds, which had fallen substantially in December, rebounded in the first quarter as market volatility receded. After increasing notably in late 2018, spreads on both investment- and speculative-grade corporate bonds over comparable-maturity Treasury securities have both declined, on net, this year as investors’ risk appetite seems to have recovered. In April, respondents to the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices, or SLOOS, reported that demand for commercial and industrial loans weakened in the first quarter even as lending standards remained unchanged and terms for such loans eased.12 However, banks reported tightening lending standards on all categories of commercial real estate loans. Meanwhile, financing conditions for small businesses have remained generally accommodative, but credit growth has been subdued. Net exports supported GDP growth in the first quarter After being a small drag on U.S. real GDP growth last year, net exports, which can have sizable swings from quarter to quarter, added about 1 percentage point to the rate of growth in the first quarter. Real U.S. exports increased at an annual rate of about 5½ percent, as 12. The SLOOS is available on the Board’s website at exports of agricultural products and auto- mobiles expanded robustly. Real imports fell 2 percent following solid increases in 2018 (figure 25). Nominal goods trade data through May suggest that exports edged down in the second quarter, while imports were about flat. The available data suggest that the trade deficit and the current account in the first half of the year were little changed as a percent of GDP from 2018 (figure 26). Federal fiscal policy actions boosted economic growth in 2018 but had a smaller effect on first-quarter real GDP because of the partial government shutdown . . . Fiscal policy at the federal level boosted GDP growth in 2018 because of lower personal and business income taxes from the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 and because of an increase in federal purchases due to the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018.13 After increasing 2¾ percent in 2018, federal government purchases were flat in the first quarter of 2019, reflecting the effects of the partial federal government shutdown (figure 27). The government shutdown, which was in effect from December 22 through January 25, held down GDP growth in the first quarter, largely because of the lost work of furloughed federal government workers and affected federal contractors. That said, federal purchases are expected to rebound in the second quarter. The federal unified budget deficit widened in fiscal year 2018 to around 4 percent of nominal GDP from 3½ percent of GDP in 2017 because receipts moved lower, to 16 percent of GDP (figure 28). Expenditures are currently around 21 percent of GDP, slightly above the level that prevailed in the decade before the start of the 2007–09 recession. The ratio 13. The Joint Committee on Taxation estimated that the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act would reduce average annual tax revenue by a little more than 1 percent of GDP starting in 2018 and for several years thereafter. This revenue estimate does not account for the potential macroeconomic effects of the legislation. 24. Selected components of net debt financing for nonfinancial businesses 25. Change in real imports and exports of goods and services 26. U.S. trade and current account balances NOTE: GDP is gross domestic product. The dots refer to the current 27. Change in real government expenditures on consumption and investment NOTE: The federal value for 2019:Q1 is -0.05. SOURCE: Bureau of Economic Analysis via Haver Analytics. 28. Federal receipts and expenditures NOTE: Through 2018, receipts and expenditures are for fiscal years (October to September); gross domestic product (GDP) is for the four quarters ending in Q3. For 2019, receipts and expenditures are for the 12 months ending in May; GDP is the average of 2018:Q4 and 2019:Q1. Receipts and expenditures are on a unified-budget basis. 29. Federal government debt held by the public NOTE: The data for gross domestic product (GDP) are at an annual rate. Federal debt held by the public equals federal debt less Treasury securities held in federal employee defined benefit retirement accounts, evaluated at the end of the quarter. of federal debt held by the public to nominal GDP rose to around 77 percent in fiscal 2018 and was quite elevated relative to historical norms (figure 29). The Congressional Budget Office projects that this ratio will rise further over the next several years. . . . and the fiscal position of most state and local governments is stable The fiscal position of most state and local governments is stable, although there is a range of experiences across these governments. The revenue of state governments has grown moderately in recent quarters, as the economic expansion continues to push up income and sales tax collections. At the local level, property tax collections continue to rise, pushed higher by past house price gains. Real state and local government purchases grew modestly last year; however, outlays have surged so far this year, driven largely by a boost in construction spending. State and local infrastructure spending was weak for many years, and there appears to be demand for higher expenditures in this area. State and local government payrolls expanded slowly last year and over the first five months of 2019, and employment by these governments remains below its peak before the current expansion. The expected path of the federal funds rate over the next several years has moved down Market-based measures of the expected path for the federal funds rate over the next several years have declined substantially since the end of 2018 (figure 30). Various factors contributed to this shift, including increased investor concerns about downside risks to the global economic outlook and rising trade tensions. In addition, investors reportedly interpreted FOMC communications over the first half of 2019 as signaling the Federal Reserve is likely to lower the target range for the federal funds rate in light of muted Survey-based measures of the expected path of the policy rate also shifted down relative to the levels observed at the end of 2018. According to the results of the most recent Survey of Primary Dealers and Survey of Market Participants, both conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York just before the June FOMC meeting, the median of respondents’ modal projections implies a declining trajectory for the target range of the federal funds rate for 2019, which flattens out in 2020. Relative to the December survey, the median of these projections moved down 50 basis points for July 2019 and 100 basis points for December 2019.14 Additionally, market-based measures of uncertainty about the policy rate approximately one to two years ahead increased, on balance, from their levels at the end of last December. The nominal Treasury yield curve has moved down and continued to flatten Since the end of 2018, the nominal Treasury yield curve shifted down and flattened further, with the 2-, 5-, and 10-year nominal Treasury yields all declining about 70 basis points on net (figure 31). The decrease in Treasury yields, which is consistent with the revision in market participants’ expectations for the path of policy rates, largely reflects FOMC communications as well as investors’ concerns about the global economic outlook and the escalation of trade disputes. Option- implied volatility on swap rates—an indicator of uncertainty about Treasury yields—has increased notably, on net, since the beginning of the year. In particular, measures of near- 14. The results of the Survey of Primary Dealers and the Survey of Market Participants are available on the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s website at https:// www.newyorkfed.org/markets/primarydealer_survey_ questions.html and https://www.newyorkfed.org/ markets/survey_market_participants, respectively. 30. Market-implied federal funds rate path NOTE: The federal funds rate path is implied by quotes on overnight index swaps—a derivative contract tied to the effective federal funds rate. The implied path as of July 1, 2019, is compared with that as of December 28, 2018. The path is estimated with a spline approach, assuming a term premium of 0 basis points. The July 1, 2019, path extends through March 2023 and the December 28, 2018, path through December 2022. 31. Yields on nominal Treasury securities 32. Yield and spread on agency mortgage-backed securities NOTE: The data are daily. Yield shown is for the Fannie Mae 30-year current coupon, the coupon rate at which new mortgage-backed securities would be priced at par, or face, value. Spread shown is to the average of the 5- and 10-year nominal Treasury yields. Data extend through June 26, 2019. 33. Corporate bond yields, by securities rating NOTE: Investment-grade is the 10-year triple-B, which reflects the effective yield of the ICE BofAML 7-to-10-year triple-B U.S. Corporate Index (C4A4). High-yield is the 10-year high-yield and reflects the effective yield of the ICE BofAML 7-to-10-year U.S. Cash Pay High Yield Index (J4A0). Data extend through June 26, 2019. term interest rate uncertainty have reached the levels seen at the end of 2018. Yields on 30-year agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS)—an important factor influencing mortgage interest rates—decreased in line with the decline in the 10-year nominal Treasury yield and remained low by historical standards (figure 32). Likewise, yields on both investment-grade and high-yield corporate debt declined significantly from the levels in late 2018 and stayed very low (figure 33). Despite widening in May, the spreads on corporate bond yields over comparable- maturity Treasury yields have narrowed, on net, over the first half of 2019 and are close to their historical medians. Broad equity price indexes increased on net After declining sharply at the end of 2018, broad U.S. stock market indexes have recovered, on net, over the first half of 2019 (figure 34). The broad rebound in stock prices—which included all major economic sectors—was reportedly supported by Federal Reserve communications that were perceived as more accommodative than previously anticipated. Stocks fluctuated in May and June as downside risks and trade tensions were offset by further expectations of easier monetary policy. Measures of implied and realized stock price volatility for the S&P 500 index declined notably on net. Following the highs seen at the end of 2018, these volatility measures declined until late April, with the VIX—a measure of implied volatility—returning to near the 10th percentile of its historical distribution and with realized volatility close to the 30th percentile of its historical range (figure 35). At the beginning of May, following the escalation of trade tensions, these volatility measures increased and have remained elevated since then, but they have stayed well below the high levels of December and now stand close to their historical medians. Several measures of financial conditions that aggregate large sets of financial data into summary indexes eased considerably since the end of 2018 but have tightened a bit since the beginning of May, in line with the decline in stock prices over that month, and have remained relatively elevated since then. (For a discussion of financial stability issues, see the box “Developments Related to Financial Stability.”) Markets for Treasury securities, mortgage- backed securities, and municipal bonds have functioned well Available indicators of Treasury market functioning have generally remained stable since the beginning of 2019, with a variety of measures—including bid-ask spreads, bid sizes, and estimates of transaction costs—displaying few signs of liquidity pressures. Liquidity conditions in the agency MBS market were also generally stable. Credit conditions in municipal bond markets remained stable as well, with yield spreads on 20-year general obligation municipal bonds over comparable- maturity Treasury securities declining somewhat on net. Money market rates were little changed Rates across money markets were little changed, on balance, in the first half of 2019. Conditions in domestic short-term funding markets continued to be broadly stable since the end of 2018. Overnight secured and unsecured rates declined in line with the technical adjustment announced after the May FOMC meeting, which lowered the interests paid on required and excess reserve balances by 5 basis points. Other short-term interest rates, including those on commercial paper and negotiable certificates of deposit, were also little changed since the beginning of the year. Bank credit continued to expand, and bank profitability remained robust Credit provided by commercial banks to fund businesses as well as commercial and residential real estate continued to grow in 2019, albeit at a slower pace than in the second 34. Equity prices SOURCE: Standard & Poor’s Dow Jones Indices via Bloomberg. (For Dow Jones Indices licensing information, see the note on the Contents page.) 35. S&P 500 volatility Realized volatility NOTE: The VIX is a measure of implied volatility that represents the expected annualized change in the S&P 500 index over the following 30 days. For realized volatility, five-minute S&P 500 returns are used in an exponentially weighted moving average with 75 percent of weight distributed over the past 20 days. The framework used by the Federal Reserve Board for assessing the resilience of the U.S. financial system focuses on financial vulnerabilities in four broad areas: asset valuations, household and business debt, leverage in the financial sector, and funding risks. The Financial Stability Report published on May 6, 2019, presents the most recent, detailed assessment of these vulnerabilities.1 This discussion summarizes its key findings, updated, where appropriate, to reflect developments since its publication. Asset valuations remain somewhat elevated in a number of markets. Treasury term premiums are near record lows. Forward-looking measures of Treasury market volatility have recently increased, especially for shorter-dated Treasury securities. Equity prices appear to be somewhat elevated relative to earnings, with the forward equity price-to-earnings ratio for the S&P 500 remaining above the median value of its historical distribution since the mid-1980s (figure A). In commercial real estate markets, capitalization rates remain at historically low levels. Residential real estate prices are also somewhat high relative to rents (accounting for borrowing costs and long-run trends), although house price growth slowed materially in the past year. valuation pressures in the leveraged loan market eased somewhat in recent months, and the spreads on lower-rated leveraged loans are now above the median value over the past 20 years. In corporate bond markets, spreads of 10-year corporate bonds over benchmark rates are close to the median of their historical distributions. vulnerabilities associated with total private-sector credit remain at a moderate level relative to the past several decades, and total debt has advanced roughly in line with economic activity over the past five years. Leverage in the business sector remains near its highest level in the past 20 years, and business debt has grown faster than gross domestic product (GDP) since 2012 NOTE: Aggregate forward price-to-earnings ratio of S&P 500 firms. Data are based on expected earnings for 12 months ahead and extend through June 2019. The plus sign shows daily data corresponding to July 1, 2019. (figure B). Rapid debt growth, while broad based across different parts of the business sector, is concentrated among the riskiest firms, and there are signs that credit standards for new leveraged loans are weak and have deteriorated further over the past six months. In the corporate bond market, the distribution of credit ratings among investment-grade bonds has worsened, with the share of bonds rated Baa (or triple-B) reaching near-record levels. While broader corporate credit performance remains solid amid a growing economy and debt-service costs are relatively low, a broader repricing of risk or a slowdown in economic activity could pose notable risks to borrowing firms and their creditors. Such developments could increase the downside risk to economic activity more generally. In contrast, in the household sector, debt growth is concentrated among borrowers with high credit scores, and the debt-to-GDP ratio continues to trend down (figure B). 1. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2019), Financial Stability Report (Washington: Board of Governors, May), https://www.federalreserve.gov/ publications/2019-may-financial-stability-report-purpose.htm. vulnerabilities stemming from leverage at financial institutions remain low. Capital relative to risk-weighted (continued) NOTE: Data are quarterly. The shaded bars indicate periods of business recession as defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research. GDP is gross domestic product. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Board, Statistical Release Z.1, “Financial Accounts of the United States”; Bureau of Economic Analysis via Haver Analytics, national income and product accounts, Table 1.1.5: Gross Domestic Product; Board staff calculations. assets at the largest banks has remained largely stable over the past few years. Results of the annual Dodd- Frank Act Stress Tests, released on June 21, 2019, indicate that participating banks are sufficiently resilient to continue lending to creditworthy borrowers even in a severe macroeconomic scenario. The exposure of banks to nonbank financial institutions—such as finance companies, asset managers, securitization vehicles, and mortgage real estate investment trusts— continued to increase in the first quarter of 2019. Some of those firms are significant business lenders, adding to banks’ exposure to elevated losses in the corporate sector. Leverage of broker-dealers increased slightly in 2018 but remains near historically low levels. Leverage has also stayed low at life insurance companies and at property and casualty insurance firms. At hedge funds, leverage increased in the first quarter of 2019 to levels slightly below its 2018 peak. vulnerabilities stemming from liquidity and maturity mismatches remain low. Banks hold large quantities of liquid assets, and their reliance on short-term wholesale funding is near its historical lows. Although assets under management at prime money market funds— which are more susceptible to runs than government funds—have increased since the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) reforms went into place in 2016, they remain well below their pre-reform levels. Holdings of U.S. corporate bonds by mutual funds increased substantially over the past decade, raising concerns about the mismatch between daily redemptions allowed by these funds and the time required to sell their assets. Rules adopted in 2016 by the SEC to strengthen mutual funds’ and exchange- traded funds’ liquidity risk management have started going into effect in the past year.2 Downside risks to U.S. financial stability from abroad remain moderate, but several near-term risk events could generate meaningful spillovers to the United States. Two prominent European risks are a “no deal” Brexit, which remains a possible outcome later in the year, and Italian fiscal challenges. Also, an escalation of the trade tensions between the United States and its major trading partners, along with financial market reactions, could exacerbate uncertainty and increase the downside risk to global economic activity. In China, high levels of nonfinancial- sector debt expose the financial sector to a slowdown in economic growth. The effects of any of these events on global financial markets could be amplified if they deepen the stresses in already vulnerable emerging market economies. These dynamics could tighten financial conditions in the United States and negatively affect the creditworthiness of U.S. firms. The countercyclical capital buffer (CCyB) is a macroprudential tool that the Federal Reserve can use to increase the resilience of the financial system by raising capital requirements on internationally active banking organizations when financial vulnerabilities are meaningfully above normal. On March 6, 2019, the Board voted to maintain the CCyB at 0 percent. 2. See Securities and Exchange Commission (2016), “Investment Company Liquidity Risk Management Programs,” final rule, 17 C.F.R. pts. 210, 270, and 274, October 13, https://www.sec.gov/rules/final/2016/33-10233.pdf. 36. Ratio of total commercial bank credit to nominal gross domestic product 37. Profitability of bank holding companies NOTE: The data are quarterly and are seasonally adjusted. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Board, Form FR Y-9C, Consolidated 38. Real gross domestic product growth in selected advanced foreign economies half of 2018. By contrast, consumer loan growth accelerated since the beginning of the year. In the first quarter of 2019, the pace of total bank credit expansion was about in line with that of nominal GDP, leaving the ratio of total commercial bank credit to current-dollar GDP little changed relative to last December (figure 36). Overall, measures of bank profitability remained solid in the first quarter of 2019, supported by wider net interest margins and steady loan growth (figure 37). Advanced foreign economies have been slowly emerging from the recent soft patch After a significant slowdown in the second half of last year, growth picked up in many advanced foreign economies (AFEs) at the start of 2019, but at a still restrained pace (figure 38). Notwithstanding continued weakness in the manufacturing sector and softening external demand, domestic demand in the AFEs generally improved amid rising employment and wages as well as easier financial conditions. The pickup in growth also reflected temporary factors. Economic activity in the euro area was boosted by the fading effects of car production disruptions in Germany and protests in France in 2018. Growth in the United Kingdom surged as expectations of trade disruptions surrounding the original date of the United Kingdom’s exit from the European Union, or Brexit, led to stockpiling by households and firms. Economic activity in Canada, by contrast, remained depressed by oil production cuts, but recent indicators point to a rebound in growth in the second quarter. Core inflation remained low in advanced foreign economies The rebound in energy prices earlier in the year pushed up consumer price inflation in many AFEs (figure 39). However, despite further improvement in labor market conditions, inflationary pressures remained contained, with core inflation readings notably muted in the euro area and Japan. In Canada and the United Kingdom, by contrast, core inflation rates moved close to 2 percent. AFE central banks took a more accommodative policy stance With activity only slowly picking up and core inflation persistently low, European Central Bank (ECB) communications took a more accommodative tone. In March, the ECB indicated that it would keep its policy rate in negative territory through at least the middle of next year and rolled out a new round of loans for euro-area banks to reduce the risk of renewed funding pressures. In June, ECB President Mario Draghi added that the ECB would introduce new stimulus measures if the economic outlook did not improve. The Bank of Canada and Bank of England signaled more-gradual increases in interest rates, given a moderation in the pace of global economic activity. The Reserve Bank of Australia in June and July cut its policy rate in response to below-target inflation and weak economic growth. Central banks’ more accommodative policy stances supported AFE asset prices The more accommodative policy stance in major AFEs contributed to an overall easing of financial conditions in the first half of the year. Market-implied paths of policy rates and long-term interest rates on sovereign bonds have generally fallen sharply, as in the United States (figure 40). Broad stock market indexes across AFEs are up, on net, since January (figure 41). However, concerns about global growth and rising trade tensions weighed on risky asset prices over the course of May and June. Sovereign bond spreads in Italy fluctuated amid uncertainty about the country’s fiscal outlook. 39. Consumer price inflation in selected advanced foreign economies NOTE: The data for the euro area incorporate the flash estimate for 40. Nominal 10-year government bond yields in selected advanced economies NOTE: The data are weekly averages of daily benchmark yields. The weekly data begin on Thursdays and extend through July 1, 2019. 41. Equity indexes for selected foreign economies NOTE: The data are weekly averages of daily data. The weekly data begin on Thursdays and extend through July 1, 2019. 42. Real gross domestic product growth in selected emerging market economies NOTE: The data for China are seasonally adjusted by Board staff. The data for Korea, Mexico, and Brazil are seasonally adjusted by their respective government agencies. Economic activity in emerging Asia struggled to gain a solid footing In China, real GDP growth picked up in the first quarter, supported in part by fiscal and monetary policy measures that targeted smaller businesses and infrastructure spending, as well as by the more favorable financial conditions amid investor optimism on a U.S.–China trade deal (figure 42). Recent activity indicators, however, suggest that the underlying momentum in the economy remains relatively subdued against the backdrop of reemerging trade tensions, global weakness in trade and manufacturing, and the Chinese authorities’ continued caution about providing substantial further credit stimulus. Amid moderating global trade and activity, real GDP growth in other Asian economies in the first quarter generally remained below their 2018 pace, with growth in Korea turning negative (see the box “The Persistent Slowdown in Global Trade and Manufacturing”). Latin American economies continued to underperform In Mexico, real GDP contracted in the first quarter following generally weak performance in the past two years. Tighter fiscal policy and disruptions from labor unrest weighed on activity amid a backdrop of softening U.S. manufacturing demand and persistent declines in petroleum production. Recent indicators suggest some improvement in the second quarter, although uncertainty regarding trade relations with the United States appears to have increased. In Brazil, real GDP also contracted in the first quarter, as a mining disaster and ongoing weakness in the Argentine economy weighed on Brazilian economic activity. Investment continued to decline, held down by uncertainty over whether Brazil’s government would enact major fiscal and other economic reforms. Financial conditions in many emerging market economies improved, on net, despite the reemergence of trade tensions Financial conditions in many emerging market economies (EMEs) eased earlier in the year in response to the more accommodative policy stance of the Federal Reserve and major AFE central banks. However, in recent months, political uncertainties in some EMEs and renewed trade tensions between the United States and major trading partners have weighed on EME asset prices. On net, broad measures of EME sovereign bond spreads over U.S. Treasury rates are down a little, while benchmark EME equity indexes are a bit higher since the beginning of the year. Flows to dedicated EME mutual funds increased earlier in the year but turned negative in the second quarter (figure 43). While deteriorations in asset prices and capital flows have been sizable for some economies, particularly Turkey and Argentina, broad indicators of financial stress in EMEs are below those seen during other periods of significant stress in recent years. The dollar depreciated a little Over the first half of the year, the foreign exchange value of the U.S. dollar fluctuated but was, on net, a little lower (figure 44). Increased investor optimism about prospects for trade negotiations early this year as well as downward-revised expectations for U.S. interest rates led to a depreciation of the dollar. But the more accommodative tone of communications from major foreign central banks and safe-haven flows—in part in response to trade tensions and concerns about global growth—helped push the dollar up. In addition, the Chinese renminbi has come under some downward pressure since trade tensions escalated in recent months. 43. Emerging market mutual fund flows and spreads Bond fund flows (right axis) Equity fund flows (right axis) EMBI+ (left axis) NOTE: The bond and equity fund flows data are quarterly sums of weekly data from January 1, 2015, to June 26, 2019. The fund flows data exclude funds located in China. The J.P. Morgan Emerging Markets Bond Index Plus (EMBI+) data are weekly averages of daily data. The weekly data begin on Thursdays and extend through June 28, 2019. SOURCE: For bond and equity fund flows, EPFR Global; for EMBI+, 44. U.S. dollar exchange rate indexes NOTE: The data, which are in foreign currency units per dollar, are weekly averages of daily data. The weekly data begin on Thursdays and extend through July 1, 2019. As indicated by the arrow, increases in the data represent U.S. dollar appreciation, and decreases represent U.S. dollar depreciation. After expanding briskly in 2017, the growth of global goods trade and manufacturing, as indicated by industrial production, has slowed significantly (figure A). Even so, other aspects of economic activity, importantly services, have held up. A number of factors are likely contributing to the recent slowdown in trade and manufacturing growth, and disentangling them is difficult. First, new tariffs appear to have lowered imports and exports in the United States and else where, while uncertainty surrounding trade policy could be leading firms to delay investment decisions and reduce capital expenditures. Second, a downturn in global sales for technology goods has restrained trade and manufacturing activity, especially in emerging Asia. Finally, a general slowdown in global demand, reflecting idiosyncratic factors specific to different economies, has likely weighed on demand for traded goods. Regarding the first of these factors, global trade tensions have risen sharply since early 2018, fueled by both higher tariffs and uncertainty about the prospects for future trade policy. The United States has increased tariffs on over $250 billion in imports by an average of nearly 25 percentage points, and U.S. trading partners have retaliated. Several studies indicate that most of the cost of these higher tariffs has been passed through to U.S. importers.1 If we assume a commonly used elasticity of 1.5 for the response of imports to changes in prices, it implies that tariffs may have lowered U.S. imports by about $70 billion, or about 0.5 percent of world goods imports.2 Taking into account the effect NOTE: Imports and industrial production (IP) are quarterly averages of monthly data. G-20 GDP is seasonally adjusted gross domestic product (GDP) volume estimates at 2010 purchasing power parities (PPPs) for the Group of 20 economies. of higher tariffs imposed by foreign countries as well, these estimates suggest that the overall direct effects of higher tariffs on global trade flows are, to date, likely to be material but modest relative to the observed step- down from 5.7 percent growth in 2017 to 1.5 percent growth in 2018. 1. For two recent working papers that analyze the effects of the tariff changes on trade volumes and import prices, see Mary Amiti, Stephen J. Redding, and David E. Weinstein (2019), “The Impact of the 2018 Trade War on U.S. Prices and Welfare,” CEPR Discussion Paper DP13564 (London: Centre for Economic Policy Research, March), https://cepr. org/sites/default/files/news/FreeDP_Mar05.pdf; and Pablo D. Fajgelbaum, Pinelopi K. Goldberg, Patrick J. Kennedy, and Amit K. Khandelwal (2019), “The Return to Protectionism,” NBER Working Paper Series 25638 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, March). rising uncertainty about the prospects for trade policy may also be weighing on trade and manufacturing. Measures of trade policy uncertainty spiked last year, largely reflecting concerns about current and prospective tariff hikes along with renegotiations of trade agreements (figure B). Higher uncertainty may lead businesses to delay investment purchases as they wait for the policy uncertainties to be resolved. Indeed, (continued) 2. See David K. Backus, Patrick J. Kehoe, and Finn E. Kydland (1994), “Dynamics of the Trade Balance and the Terms of Trade: The J-Curve?” American Economic Review, vol. 84 (March), pp. 84–103. NOTE: The data extend through June 2019. At an index value of 100, 1 percent of news articles contain references to trade policy uncertainty. SOURCE: Dario Caldara, Matteo Iacoviello, Patrick Molligo, Andrea Prestipino, and Andrea Raffo (2019), “The Economic Effects of Trade Policy Uncertainty,” manuscript presented at the 91st meeting of the Carnegie-Rochester-NYU Conference on Public Policy, held at New York University, New York, April 12–13. investment spending growth has slowed in many areas of the global economy since 2017. Although this slowdown may reflect a number of factors, concerns about trade policy have been flagged in many recent surveys of business attitudes and intentions, including the Beige Book. The global tech cycle—a synchronized pattern of production and trade in electronics and software across economies—has also contributed to the decline in global trade and manufacturing growth. This cycle is particularly important for emerging Asia, where about one-third of exports are technology related. Global semiconductor sales surged in 2017 but fell sharply in the last months of 2018 (figure C). The fall in large part reflected a contraction in demand in China, particularly evident in mobile phone purchases. Recent data, however, suggest that this cycle may have bottomed out, as Chinese mobile phone production picked up in April along with exports of electronics in emerging Asia through May. Finally, a regular feature of the data is that trade and manufacturing production move with overall gross domestic product (GDP) growth but with considerably more cyclical volatility (a pattern that can be seen in figure A). Trade and manufacturing production largely consist of durable goods, the purchase of which tends to be especially sensitive to economic conditions. Thus, although global trade and manufacturing slowed much more sharply than GDP last year, part of their sharp slowing likely just reflected a response to a more general slowing in global economic growth. A number of factors have contributed to the step-down in global activity. A deleveraging campaign by China’s authorities was an important factor in the slowdown of the Chinese economy. Growth in Europe has been restrained by complications with meeting tighter emissions standards for new motor vehicles in Germany, protests in France, and the ongoing uncertainties associated with Brexit. And financial stresses have weighed on some emerging market economies, especially Argentina and Turkey. NOTE: The semiconductor data are 3-month moving averages. SOURCE: Semiconductor Industry Association via Haver Analytics. The FOMC maintained its target range for the federal funds rate From late 2015 through the end of 2018, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) gradually increased its target range for the federal funds rate as the economy continued to make progress toward the Committee’s congressionally mandated objectives of maximum employment and price stability. In its meetings over the first half of 2019, the Committee judged that the stance of monetary policy was appropriate to achieve its dual mandate, and it decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 2¼ to 2½ percent (figure 45). These decisions reflected incoming information showing the solid fundamentals of the U.S. economy supporting continued growth and strong employment. Looking ahead, the FOMC will act as appropriate to sustain the expansion, with a strong labor market and inflation near its 2 percent objective near the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objective as the most likely outcomes. For much of this period, the Committee indicated that, in light of global economic and financial developments and muted inflation pressures, it would be patient as it determines what future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate may be appropriate to support these outcomes. At the June meeting, however, the Committee noted that uncertainties about the outlook had increased.15 Since the beginning of May, the tenor of incoming information on economic activity, on balance, has become somewhat more downbeat, and uncertainties about the economic outlook have increased. Growth indicators from around the world have disappointed, on net, raising concerns about the strength of the global economy. Meanwhile, contacts in business and agriculture have reported heightened concerns over trade developments. In light of these uncertainties and muted inflation pressures, At its meetings since the beginning of the year, the Committee stated that it continued to view a sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation 15. See the FOMC statement issued after the June meeting, which is available on the Monetary Policy portion of the Board’s website at https://www. federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy.htm. 45. Selected interest rates the Committee indicated that it will act as appropriate to sustain the expansion, with a strong labor market and inflation near its objective. The Committee is firmly committed to its symmetric 2 percent inflation objective. In the Committee’s economic projections released after the June meeting, participants generally revised down their individual assessments of the appropriate path for the policy rate from their assessments at the time of the March meeting (see Part 3 of this report for more details). Future changes in the federal funds rate will depend on the economic outlook and risks to the outlook as informed by incoming data The FOMC has continued to emphasize that the actual path of monetary policy will depend on the evolution of the economic outlook and risks to the outlook as informed by incoming data. Specifically, in deciding on the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its objectives of maximum employment and symmetric 2 percent inflation. This assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. In addition to weighing a wide range of economic and financial data and information received from business contacts and other informed parties around the country, policymakers regularly consult prescriptions for the interest rate arising from various monetary policy rules. These rule prescriptions can serve as useful guidelines to the FOMC in the course of arriving at its policy decisions. Nonetheless, numerous practical considerations make clear that the FOMC cannot mechanically set the policy rate by following the prescriptions of any specific rule. The FOMC’s framework for conducting monetary policy involves a systematic approach in keeping with key principles of good monetary policy but allows for more flexibility than is implied by simple policy rules (see the box “Monetary Policy Rules and Their Interactions with the Economy”). Since the beginning of the year, the FOMC has issued two statements regarding monetary policy implementation and balance sheet normalization At its January meeting, the Committee indicated that it intends to continue to implement monetary policy in a regime in which the provision of an ample supply of reserves ensures that control over the level of the federal funds rate and other short-term interest rates is exercised primarily through the setting of the Federal Reserve’s administered rates, and in which active management of the supply of reserves is not required.16 After the March FOMC meeting, the Committee issued a statement indicating that it plans to conclude the reduction of the Federal Reserve’s securities holdings at the end of September.17 (The box “Framework for Monetary Policy Implementation and Normalization of the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet” details the recent decision about policy implementation and balance sheet normalization.) The Committee is prepared to adjust the details for completing balance sheet normalization in light of economic and financial developments, consistent with its congressionally mandated objectives of maximum employment and price stability. 16. See the Statement Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation and Balance Sheet Normalization, which is available on the Board’s website at https:// www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/policy- normalization.htm. 17. See the Balance Sheet Normalization Principles and Plans, which can be found on the Board’s website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/policy- normalization.htm. 46. Federal Reserve assets and liabilities Treasury securities held outright NOTE: “Credit and liquidity facilities” consists of primary, secondary, and seasonal credit; term auction credit; central bank liquidity swaps; support for Maiden Lane, Bear Stearns, and AIG; and other credit facilities, including the Primary Dealer Credit Facility, the Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility, the Commercial Paper Funding Facility, and the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility. “Other assets” includes unamortized premiums and discounts on securities held outright. “Capital and other liabilities” includes reverse repurchase agreements, the U.S. Treasury General Account, and the U.S. Treasury Supplementary Financing Account. The data extend through June 26, 2019. The Federal Reserve’s total assets have continued to decline from about $4.1 trillion last December to about $3.8 trillion at present, with holdings of Treasury securities at approximately $2.1 trillion and holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities at approximately $1.5 trillion (figure 46). As the Federal Reserve has continued to gradually reduce its securities holdings, the level of reserve balances in the banking system has declined. In particular, the level of reserve balances has decreased by about $150 billion since the end of last year and by about $1.3 trillion since its peak in 2014.18 The Federal Reserve’s implementation of monetary policy has continued smoothly Since the middle of March, the effective federal funds rate has traded slightly above the interest rate paid on reserve balances. At the May meeting, the Federal Reserve made a third small technical adjustment to lower the setting of the interest rate on excess reserves by 5 basis points to a level 15 basis points below the top of the target range for the federal funds rate; this adjustment successfully fostered trading in the federal funds market at rates well within the FOMC’s target range.* Overall, rates across money markets were broadly stable since the beginning of 2019, and the usage of the overnight reverse repurchase agreement facility has remained low. Meanwhile, interest income on the Federal Reserve’s securities holdings has continued to result in sizable remittances to the U.S. Treasury. Preliminary data indicate that the Federal Reserve remitted about $27 billion in the first half of 2019. The Federal Reserve has started the review of its strategic framework for monetary policy 18. Since the start of the normalization program, reserve balances have dropped by approximately $700 billion. On July 8, 2019, the sentence was corrected to replace the Committee’s 2 percent objective, the FOMC judged it an appropriate time for the Federal Reserve to conduct a public review of its strategic framework for monetary policy—including the policy strategy, tools, and communication practices. The goal of this assessment is to identify possible ways to improve the Committee’s current policy framework in order to ensure that the Federal Reserve is best positioned going forward to achieve its statutory mandate of maximum employment and price stability. The review includes outreach to and consultation with a broad range of people and groups interested in the U.S. economy. The Federal Reserve System is currently conducting a series of Fed Listens events around the country, typically with a town hall format, to hear perspectives from representatives of business and industry, labor leaders, community and economic development officials, academics, nonprofit organization executives, and others. Policymakers plan to report their findings to the public during the first half of 2020. Monetary policy rules are mathematical formulas Economists have analyzed many monetary policy that relate a policy interest rate, such as the federal funds rate, to a small number of other economic variables—typically including the deviation of inflation from its target value and a measure of resource slack in the economy. The prescriptions for the policy interest rate from these rules can provide helpful guidance for the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). This discussion presents five policy rules—illustrative of the many rules that have received attention in the research literature—and provides examples of two ways to compute historical prescriptions of policy rules. The two ways differ in terms of whether the implications of the rule prescriptions feed through to the macroeconomy and potentially back to the policy rule prescriptions themselves. The presentation highlights the uses and limitations of each way for informing the FOMC’s systematic conduct of monetary policy. rules, including the well-known Taylor (1993) rule. Other rules include the “balanced approach” rule, the “adjusted Taylor (1993)” rule, the “price level” rule, and the “first difference” rule (figure A).3 These policy rules embody the three key principles of good monetary policy and take into account estimates of how far the economy is from the Federal Reserve’s dual-mandate goals of maximum employment and price stability. Four of the five rules include the difference between the rate of unemployment that is sustainable in the longer run and the current unemployment rate (the unemployment rate gap); the first-difference rule includes the change in the unemployment gap rather than its level.4 In (continued on next page) The effectiveness of monetary policy is enhanced when it is well understood by the public.1 In simple models of the economy, good economic performance can be achieved by following a monetary policy rule that fosters public understanding and that incorporates key principles of good monetary policy.2 One such principle is that monetary policy should respond in a predictable way to changes in economic conditions. A second principle is that monetary policy should be accommodative when inflation is below policymakers’ longer-run inflation objective and employment is below its maximum sustainable level; conversely, monetary policy should be restrictive when the opposite holds. A third principle is that, to stabilize inflation, the policy rate should be adjusted over time by more than one-for- one in response to persistent increases or decreases in inflation. 3. The Taylor (1993) rule was suggested in John B. Taylor (1993), “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie- Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 39 (December), pp. 195–214. The balanced-approach rule was analyzed in John B. Taylor (1999), “A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules,” in John B. Taylor, ed., Monetary Policy Rules (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), pp. 319–41. The adjusted Taylor (1993) rule was studied in David Reifschneider and John C. Williams (2000), “Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Era,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 32 (November), pp. 936–66. A price-level rule was discussed in Robert E. Hall (1984), “Monetary Strategy with an Elastic Price Standard,” in Price Stability and Public Policy, proceedings of a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 2–3 (Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City), pp. 137–59, https://www.kansascityfed.org/publicat/ sympos/1984/s84.pdf. Finally, the first-difference rule is based on a rule suggested by Athanasios Orphanides (2003), “Historical Monetary Policy Analysis and the Taylor Rule,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 50 (July), pp. 983–1022. A comprehensive review of policy rules is in John B. Taylor and John C. Williams (2011), “Simple and Robust Rules for Monetary Policy,” in Benjamin M. Friedman and Michael Woodford, eds., Handbook of Monetary Economics, vol. 3B (Amsterdam: North-Holland), pp. 829–59. The same volume of the Handbook of Monetary Economics also discusses approaches other than policy rules for deriving policy rate prescriptions. 1. For a discussion of how the public’s understanding of monetary policy matters for the effectiveness of monetary policy, see Janet L. yellen (2012), “Revolution and Evolution in Central Bank Communications,” speech delivered at the Haas School of Business, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, Calif., November 13, https://www.federalreserve.gov/ newsevents/speech/yellen20121113a.htm. 2. For a discussion regarding principles for the conduct of monetary policy, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2018), “Monetary Policy Principles and Practice,” Board of Governors, https://www.federalreserve.gov/ monetarypolicy/monetary-policy-principles-and-practice.htm. 4. The Taylor (1993) rule represented slack in resource utilization using an output gap (the difference between the current level of real gross domestic product (GDP) and the level that GDP would be if the economy were operating at maximum employment, measured in percent of the latter. The rules in figure A represent slack in resource utilization using the unemployment gap instead, because that gap better captures the FOMC’s statutory goal to promote maximum employment. However, movements in these alternative measures of resource utilization are highly correlated. For more information, see the note below figure A. Taylor (1993) rule, adjusted FD represent the values of the nominal federal funds rate prescribed by the Taylor (1993), Note: Rt balanced-approach, adjusted Taylor (1993), price-level, and first-difference rules, respectively. Rt denotes the actual nominal federal funds rate for quarter t, πt is four-quarter price inflation for quarter t, ut is the LR is the level of the neutral real federal funds rate in the longer run that, on average, is unemployment rate in quarter t, and rt expected to be consistent with sustaining maximum employment and inflation at the FOMC’s 2 percent longer-run objective, LR is the rate of unemployment in the longer run. Zt is the cumulative sum of past deviations of the federal πLR. In addition, ut funds rate from the prescriptions of the Taylor (1993) rule when that rule prescribes setting the federal funds rate below zero. PLgapt is the percent deviation of the actual level of prices from a price level that rises 2 percent per year from its level in a specified starting period. The Taylor (1993) rule and other policy rules are generally written in terms of the deviation of real output from its full capacity level. In these equations, the output gap has been replaced with the gap between the rate of unemployment in the longer run and its actual level (using a relationship known as Okun’s law) in order to represent the rules in terms of the FOMC’s statutory goals. Historically, movements in the output and unemployment gaps have been highly correlated. Box note 3 provides references for the policy rules. addition, four of the five rules include the difference between recent inflation and the FOMC’s longer- run objective (2 percent as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE)), while the price-level rule includes the gap between the level of prices today and the level of prices that would have been realized if inflation had been constant at 2 percent from a specified starting year.5 The price-level rule thereby takes account of the deviation of inflation from the long-run objective in earlier periods as well as the current period, whereas the other rules do not make up past misses of the inflation objective. The adjusted Taylor (1993) rule recognizes that the federal funds rate cannot be reduced materially below zero, and that following the prescriptions of the standard Taylor (1993) rule after a recession during which the federal funds rate has fallen to its lower bound may therefore not provide enough policy accommodation. To make up for the cumulative shortfall in accommodation, the adjusted rule prescribes only a gradual return of the policy rate to the (positive) levels prescribed by the standard Taylor (1993) rule after the economy begins to recover. Similarly, the price-level rule specified in figure A recognizes that the federal funds rate cannot be reduced materially below zero. If inflation runs below the 2 percent objective during periods when the price-level rule prescribes setting the federal funds rate well below zero, the rule will, over time, call for more accommodation to make up for the past inflation shortfall. Policymakers regularly examine the historical 5. Calculating the prescriptions of the price-level rule requires selecting a starting year for the price level from which to cumulate the 2 percent annual rate of inflation. Figure B uses 1998 as the starting year. Around that time, the underlying trend of inflation and longer-term inflation expectations stabilized at a level consistent with PCE price inflation being close to 2 percent. prescriptions of different policy rules to help understand the past stance of monetary policy and to inform their current policy decisions. The most straightforward way to compute such prescriptions is to use historical values for the unemployment rate and inflation, as well (continued) Taylor (1993) rule, adjusted NOTE: The rules use historical values of inflation, the federal funds rate, and the unemployment rate. Inflation is measured as the 4-quarter percent change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) excluding food and energy. Quarterly projections of long-run values for the federal funds rate and the unemployment rate are derived through interpolations of biannual projections from Blue Chip Economic Indicators. The long-run value for inflation is taken as 2 percent. The target value of the price level is the average level of the price index for PCE excluding food and energy in 1998 extrapolated at 2 percent per year. The target federal funds rate data extend through 2019:Q2. as estimates of the longer-run value of the interest rate and the longer-run value of the unemployment rate, in each policy rule.6 The policy prescriptions from the various rules based on this approach provide different prescriptions for the federal funds rate, as shown in figure B. Presented in this way, each point on the lines in the figure is a snapshot of what the policy rules would have prescribed, given the economic conditions of that time. Because there is no definitive standard for favoring one rule over another, consulting a range of rules is generally preferable to relying on any particular rule. Although almost all of the simple policy rules would have called for values for the federal funds rate that were increasing in recent years, the prescribed values vary widely across rules. 6. The Taylor (1993), balanced-approach, adjusted Taylor (1993), and price-level rules all require an estimate of the neutral interest rate in the longer run. In addition, all of the rules use an estimate of the rate of unemployment in the longer run. Both of these objects are determined by structural features in the economy and are not directly observable. The box “Complexities of Monetary Policy Rules” in the July 2018 Monetary Policy Report describes the complications in assessing simple policy rules that arise from uncertainty about the neutral interest rate in the longer run. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2018), Monetary Policy Report (Washington: Board of Governors, July), pp. 37–41, https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/ files/20180713_mprfullreport.pdf. The current discussion uses estimates of these objects from survey data. One key consideration in evaluating monetary policy rules based solely on historical data is that the policy prescriptions from the rules do not take into account the fact that the economy would have evolved differently if the federal funds rate had followed the alternative paths prescribed by the rules. For example, if the FOMC had followed a policy rule in the past that prescribed higher values for the federal funds rate than actually occurred, the unemployment rate would likely have been higher and inflation lower than they actually turned out to be. In turn, these different outcomes for unemployment and inflation would have fed back into the policy rule, resulting in policy prescriptions that differ from those based on the historical data and shown in figure B. Proper consideration of these feedback effects requires using an economic model, which is a mathematical representation of how economic activity, inflation, the policy interest rate, and other variables interact over time. With such a model, one can assess how inflation and the unemployment rate might have evolved if a particular policy rule had been followed over some historical period in a way that incorporates these feedback effects. Federal Reserve staff regularly use models of the U.S. economy to study how economic outcomes could have differed if monetary policy had followed various rules. (continued on next page) Figure C provides one illustrative example of how accounting for feedback effects can alter the prescriptions from a particular rule over a given period. The figure compares the historical prescriptions of the Taylor (1993) rule calculated without feedback—as in the earlier section—with the prescriptions from the same rule incorporating feedback effects. The rule prescriptions with feedback effects result from an empirical simulation of the FRB/US model.7 The simulation begins in the first quarter of 2001, a period when the prescription of the Taylor (1993) rule without feedback roughly coincides with the historical value of the federal funds rate. The three panels in the figure display the paths for the federal funds rate (top panel), the unemployment rate (middle panel), and four-quarter PCE inflation (bottom panel). The historical data are shown by the black lines. The gray dashed line in the top panel shows the historical prescription of the Taylor (1993) rule without any feedback, the same as the gray dashed line shown in figure B, and the blue dashed- and-dotted line shows the prescriptions with feedback effects. Because monetary policy affects the economy only with a delay, the paths of the unemployment rate and the inflation rate are not much different from their historical values over the first year of the simulation, despite the fact that the Taylor (1993) rule calls for much higher interest rates than actually observed over that period. By 2002, however, the higher rate path under the Taylor (1993) rule causes the economy to slow, resulting in a higher unemployment rate and lower inflation—the blue dashed-and-dotted lines in the middle and bottom panels of figure C, respectively—compared with the historical values. Consequently, the policy rate path in the simulation diverges from the rate path prescribed when feedback effects are not included. Indeed, by the middle of 2003, the value of the federal funds rate is substantially higher in the calculation without feedback effects than it is in the FRB/US model simulation that incorporates feedback from the economy. This difference highlights 7. FRB/US is a large-scale macroeconomic model developed by the Board’s staff for forecasting, constructing alternative scenarios, and evaluating monetary policy strategies. The model and related information are available on the Board’s website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/econres/us-models- about.htm. An example of the use of FRB/US for monetary policy analysis can be found in Janet L. yellen (2012), “Perspectives on Monetary Policy,” speech delivered at the Boston Economic Club Dinner, Boston, June 6, https://www. federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/yellen20120606a.htm. the limitations in assessing policy rules over history if the prescriptions from the rules are notably different from the historical policy rate path and the effects of the prescriptions of such rules for the economy are not taken into account. While model simulations can capture the effects of policy rules on the economy and what those economic effects imply for the settings of the policy rate, there are important limitations to such exercises. Each simulation is tied to a particular economic model, and changes in the model can change the prescriptions from the given policy rule. Models are necessarily simplifications of reality, and there is no agreed-upon “best” model representation of the U.S. economy. Indeed, there is substantial diversity among the models favored by economists for this kind of analysis. Finally, in the real world, the structure of the economy changes over time, so an economic model used for studying a historical episode such as the one featured here may not be relevant for future policy considerations. Model-based simulations with feedback add an important dimension to our understanding of the effects of policy rules. However, it is important to stress that the usefulness of such rules for obtaining and communicating current and future policy rate prescriptions is still limited by a range of practical considerations, even beyond the concerns about which specific model to use. Monetary policy rules feature only a small number of variables and thus exclude many important indicators that are consulted by policymakers. The policy rules here, for example, do not include measures of financial and credit market conditions, indicators of consumer and business sentiment, and data on expectations; these factors are often very informative for the future course of the economy. Moreover, simple policy rules do not take into account possible risks to the economic outlook, which may justify a policy response over and above what would be implied by the most likely outcomes for the economy.8 (continued) 8. The box “Monetary Policy Rules and Their Role in the Federal Reserve’s Policy Process” in the February 2018 Monetary Policy Report details the limitations of monetary policy rules in accounting for a broad set of risk considerations. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2018), Monetary Policy Report (Washington: Board of Governors, February), pp. 35–38, https://www.federalreserve. gov/monetarypolicy/files/20180223_mprfullreport.pdf. Rate of unemployment in the longer run NOTE: Data start in 2000:Q1 and extend through 2006:Q4. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia; Wolters Kluwer, Blue Chip Economic Indicators; Federal Reserve Board staff estimates. At its meetings in January and March of this year, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) made important decisions regarding its framework for monetary policy implementation and the process of normalizing the size of its balance sheet. The issues associated with these decisions have been discussed over several FOMC meetings and have been part of an ongoing process of the Committee’s deliberations.1 sheet normalization in light of economic and financial developments. Moreover, the Committee would be prepared to use its full range of tools, including altering the size and composition of its balance sheet, if future economic conditions were to warrant a more accommodative monetary policy than can be achieved solely by reducing the federal funds rate. After indicating in previous communications that, in the longer run, the Committee intends to operate in a regime in which it holds no more securities than necessary to implement monetary policy efficiently and effectively, the FOMC decided at its January meeting to continue to implement monetary policy in a regime with an ample supply of reserves.2 Such a system, which has been in place since late 2008, does not require active management of reserves through frequent open market operations. Instead, with ample reserves in the banking system, the federal funds rate is expected to settle near the rate of interest paid on excess reserves. This system has proven to be an efficient means of controlling the policy rate and effectively transmitting the stance of policy to a wide array of other money market rates and to broader financial conditions. In the statement released after its January meeting, the FOMC also indicated that it continues to view the target range for the federal funds rate as its primary tool to adjust the stance of monetary policy. Nonetheless, the Committee is prepared to adjust the details of its plans for balance announced that it intends to conclude the reduction of its aggregate securities holdings in the System Open Market Account at the end of September 2019.3 Consistent with its decision at the March FOMC meeting, the Committee slowed balance sheet runoff in May by reducing the cap for monthly redemptions of Treasury securities from $30 billion to $15 billion (left panel of figure A). In connection with its intention to cease balance sheet runoff entirely at the end of September 2019 and consistent with its aim of holding primarily Treasury securities in the longer run, the Committee also stated that it intends to continue to allow its holdings of agency securities to decline. Therefore, beginning in October 2019, principal payments received from holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) will be reinvested in Treasury securities through secondary- market purchases subject to a maximum amount of $20 billion per month. Purchases of Treasury securities will initially be conducted across a range of maturities to roughly match the maturity composition of Treasury securities outstanding.4 Any principal payments from 1. For summaries of these discussions, see the minutes from the FOMC meetings in November and December of last year as well as the minutes of this year’s January and March meetings, which are available on the Board’s website at https:// www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm. 2. See the Statement Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation and Balance Sheet Normalization, which is available on the Board’s website at https://www.federalreserve. gov/monetarypolicy/policy-normalization.htm. (continued) 3. See the Balance Sheet Normalization Principles and Plans, which can be found on the Board’s website at https://www. federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/policy-normalization.htm. 4. Details on the reinvestment of principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of agency securities, including information on the distribution of Treasury purchases, are available on the Federal Reserve Bank of New york’s website at agency securities holdings in excess of the monthly $20 billion maximum will continue to be reinvested into agency MBS (right panel of figure A). When the process of normalizing the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet concludes at the end of September, reserves will likely be somewhat above the level necessary for an efficient and effective implementation of monetary policy. If so, the Committee plans after September to keep the size of the Federal Reserve’s securities holdings roughly https://www.newyorkfed.org/markets/treasury-reinvestments- purchases-faq.html. The FOMC will revisit the reinvestment plan in connection with its deliberations regarding the longer-run composition of the System Open Market Account portfolio. NOTE: Reinvestment and redemption amounts of Treasury securities are projections starting in June 2019. The data extend through February 2020. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Bank of New York; Federal Reserve Board staff calculations. constant for a while. During this period, reserve balances will continue to decline gradually as currency and other nonreserve liabilities increase. Once the Committee judges that reserve balances have declined to the level consistent with the efficient and effective implementation of monetary policy, the FOMC plans to resume periodic open market operations to accommodate the normal trend growth in the demand for the Federal Reserve’s liabilities.5 5. In contrast to the Federal Reserve’s large-scale asset purchases conducted over recent years, these periodic technical open market operations would not have any implication for the stance of monetary policy; rather, such operations would be aimed at maintaining a level of reserve balances in the banking system consistent with efficient and effective policy implementation. NOTE: Reinvestment and redemption amounts of agency debt and mortgage-backed securities are projections starting in June 2019. Starting in October 2019, principal payments from holdings of agency securities below $20 billion per month are reinvested into Treasury securities, while those above are reinvested into agency mortgage-backed securities. The data extend through February 2020. In conjunction with the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting held on June 18–19, 2019, meeting participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real gross domestic product (GDP) growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for each year from 2019 to 2021 and over the longer run. Each participant’s projections were based on information available at the time of the meeting, together with his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy—including a path for the federal funds rate and its longer-run value— and assumptions about other factors likely to affect economic outcomes.19 The longer- run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the value to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy.20 “Appropriate monetary policy” is defined as the future path of policy that each participant deems most likely to foster outcomes for economic activity and inflation that best satisfy his or her individual interpretation of the statutory mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability. Participants who submitted longer-run projections generally expected that, under appropriate monetary policy, growth of real GDP in 2019 would run at or somewhat above their individual estimates of its longer-run rate. Thereafter, almost all participants expected 19. Five members of the Board of Governors were in 20. One participant did not submit longer-run real GDP growth to edge down, with the vast majority of participants projecting growth in 2021 to be at or below their estimates of its longer-run rate. All participants who submitted longer-run projections continued to expect that the unemployment rate would run at or below their estimates of its longer- run level through 2021. Compared with the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) from March 2019, most participants revised down slightly their projections for the unemployment rate from 2019 through 2021. All participants marked down somewhat their projections for 2019 for total inflation, as measured by the four-quarter percent change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), and almost all did so for their projections for core inflation. All participants projected that inflation would increase in 2020 from 2019, and a majority expected another slight increase in 2021. The vast majority of participants expected that inflation would be at or slightly above the Committee’s 2 percent objective in 2021. Core PCE price inflation was also projected to increase over the projection period, rising to 2.0 percent in 2021. Table 1 and figure 1 provide summary statistics for the projections. As shown in figure 2, about half of participants expected that the evolution of the economy, relative to their objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation, would likely warrant keeping the federal funds rate at its current level through the end of 2019; the same number projected that a lower level for the federal funds rate would be appropriate by year-end. The medians of participants’ assessments of the appropriate level of the federal funds rate in Table 1. Economic projections of Federal Reserve Board members and Federal Reserve Bank presidents, under their individual assessments of projected appropriate monetary policy, June 2019 Percent Longer run Longer run Longer run Memo: Projected appropriate policy path Federal funds rate . . . . . . . March projection . . . . . Note: Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP) and projections for both measures of inflation are percent changes from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. PCE inflation and core PCE inflation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) and the price index for PCE excluding food and energy. Projections for the unemployment rate are for the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. Each participant’s projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy. Longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. The projections for the federal funds rate are the value of the midpoint of the projected appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the projected appropriate target level for the federal funds rate at the end of the specified calendar year or over the longer run. The March projections were made in conjunction with the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on March 19–20, 2019. One participant did not submit longer-run projections for the change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, or the federal funds rate in conjunction with the March 19–20, 2019, meeting, and one participant did not submit such projections in conjunction with the June 18–19, 2019, meeting. 1. For each period, the median is the middle projection when the projections are arranged from lowest to highest. When the number of projections is even, the median is the average 2. The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each year. 3. The range for a variable in a given year includes all participants’ projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year. 4. Longer-run projections for core PCE inflation are not collected. 2020 and 2021 were close to the median of their assessments of the longer-run federal funds rate level. Nearly all participants lowered their projections for the appropriate level of the federal funds rate, relative to March, at some point in the forecast period. Although nearly half of the participants revised their projections for 2019 to levels 25 basis points or 50 basis points below the current level, the median projection for the federal funds rate for the end of 2019 was unchanged. The medians for the federal funds rate for 2020 and 2021 were 50 basis points and 25 basis points lower than in March, respectively. uncertainty around their unemployment rate projections as being similar to the average of the past 20 years, and about the same number viewed uncertainty as higher. Participants’ assessments of risks to their outlooks for output growth and the unemployment rate shifted notably relative to their assessments in March. As a result, most participants viewed the risks for GDP growth as weighted to the downside and the risks for the unemployment rate as weighted to the upside. About half of participants viewed the risks to inflation as being broadly balanced, with a similar number viewing inflation risks as being weighted to the downside. Most participants regarded the uncertainties around their forecasts for GDP growth, total inflation, and core inflation as broadly similar to the average of the past 20 years. About half of the participants viewed the level of A more complete description of the SEP will be released with the minutes of the June 18–19, 2019, FOMC meeting on July 10. Figure 1. Medians, central tendencies, and ranges of economic projections, 2019–21 and over the longer run Longer run Longer run Longer run Note: Definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to the projections table. The data for the actual values of the variables are annual. Longer run Note: Each shaded circle indicates the value (rounded to the nearest ⅛ percentage point) of an individual participant’s judgment of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the appropriate target level for the federal funds rate at the end of the specified calendar year or over the longer run. One participant did not submit longer-run projections for the federal funds rate. emerging market economy implied volatility for the S&P 500 index The Board of Governors is pleased to submit its Monetary Policy Report pursuant to section 2B of the Federal Reserve Act. Statement on Longer-run goaLS and monetary PoLicy Strategy Adopted effective January 24, 2012; as reaffirmed effective January 25, 2022 The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) is firmly committed to fulfilling its statutory mandate from the Congress of promoting maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates. The Committee seeks to explain its monetary policy decisions to the public as clearly as possible. Such clarity facilitates well-informed decisionmaking by households and businesses, reduces economic and financial uncertainty, increases the effectiveness of monetary policy, and enhances transparency and accountability, which are essential in a democratic society. Employment, inflation, and long-term interest rates fluctuate over time in response to economic and financial disturbances. Monetary policy plays an important role in stabilizing the economy in response to these disturbances. The Committee’s primary means of adjusting the stance of monetary policy is through changes in the target range for the federal funds rate. The Committee judges that the level of the federal funds rate consistent with maximum employment and price stability over the longer run has declined relative to its historical average. Therefore, the federal funds rate is likely to be constrained by its effective lower bound more frequently than in the past. Owing in part to the proximity of interest rates to the effective lower bound, the Committee judges that downward risks to employment and inflation have increased. The Committee is prepared to use its full range of tools to achieve its maximum employment and price stability goals. The maximum level of employment is a broad-based and inclusive goal that is not directly measurable and changes over time owing largely to nonmonetary factors that affect the structure and dynamics of the labor market. Consequently, it would not be appropriate to specify a fixed goal for employment; rather, the Committee’s policy decisions must be informed by assessments of the shortfalls of employment from its maximum level, recognizing that such assessments are necessarily uncertain and subject to revision. The Committee considers a wide range of indicators in making these assessments. The inflation rate over the longer run is primarily determined by monetary policy, and hence the Committee has the ability to specify a longer-run goal for inflation. The Committee reaffirms its judgment that inflation at the rate of 2 percent, as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, is most consistent over the longer run with the Federal Reserve’s statutory mandate. The Committee judges that longer-term inflation expectations that are well anchored at 2 percent foster price stability and moderate long-term interest rates and enhance the Committee’s ability to promote maximum employment in the face of significant economic disturbances. In order to anchor longer-term inflation expectations at this level, the Committee seeks to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time, and therefore judges that, following periods when inflation has been running persistently below 2 percent, appropriate monetary policy will likely aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time. Monetary policy actions tend to influence economic activity, employment, and prices with a lag. In setting monetary policy, the Committee seeks over time to mitigate shortfalls of employment from the Committee’s assessment of its maximum level and deviations of inflation from its longer-run goal. Moreover, sustainably achieving maximum employment and price stability depends on a stable financial system. Therefore, the Committee’s policy decisions reflect its longer-run goals, its medium-term outlook, and its assessments of the balance of risks, including risks to the financial system that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. The Committee’s employment and inflation objectives are generally complementary. However, under circumstances in which the Committee judges that the objectives are not complementary, it takes into account the employment shortfalls and inflation deviations and the potentially different time horizons over which employment and inflation are projected to return to levels judged consistent with its mandate. The Committee intends to review these principles and to make adjustments as appropriate at its annual organizational meeting each January, and to undertake roughly every 5 years a thorough public review of its monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices. The Limited Recovery of Labor Supply . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 Differences in Wage and Employment Growth across Jobs and Workers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 How Widespread Has the Rise in Inflation Been? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 Supply Chain Bottlenecks in U.S. Manufacturing and Trade . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 Developments Related to Financial Stability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34 Developments in the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet and Money Markets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44 Forecast Uncertainty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62 note: This report reflects information that was publicly available as of noon EST on February 23, 2022 (the one exception is the GDP data published on February 24, 2022). Unless otherwise stated, the time series in the figures extend through, for daily data, February 22, 2022; for monthly data, January 2022; and, for quarterly data, 2021:Q4. In bar charts, except as noted, the change for a given period is measured to its final quarter from the final quarter of the preceding period. For figures 23 and 35, note that the S&P/Case-Shiller U.S. National Home Price Index, the S&P 500 Index, and the Dow Jones Bank Index are products of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates and have been licensed for use by the Board. Copyright © 2022 S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC, a division of S&P Global, and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Redistribution, reproduction, and/or photocopying in whole or in part are prohibited without written permission of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC. For more information on any of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC’s indices, please visit www.spdji.com. S&P® is a registered trademark of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC, and Dow Jones® is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. Neither S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC, Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC, their affiliates, nor their third-party licensors make any representation or warranty, express or implied, as to the ability of any index to accurately represent the asset class or market sector that it purports to represent, and neither S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC, Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC, their affiliates, nor their third-party licensors shall have any liability for any errors, omissions, or interruptions of any index or the data included therein. summary U.S. economic activity posted further impressive gains in the second half of last year, but inflation rose to its highest level since the early 1980s. The labor market tightened substantially further amid high demand for workers and constrained supply, with the unemployment rate reaching the median of Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants’ estimates of its longer-run normal level and nominal wages rising at their fastest pace in decades. With demand strong, and amid ongoing supply chain bottlenecks and constrained labor supply, inflation increased appreciably last year, running well above the FOMC’s longer-run objective of 2 percent and broadening out to a wider range of items. As 2022 began, the rapid spread of the Omicron variant appeared to be causing a slowdown in some sectors of the economy, but with Omicron cases having declined sharply since mid-January, the slowdown is expected to be brief. Over the second half of last year, the FOMC held its policy rate near zero to support the continued economic recovery. The Committee began phasing out net asset purchases in November and accelerated the pace of the phaseout in December; net asset purchases will end in early March. With inflation well above the FOMC’s longer-run objective and a strong labor market, the Committee expects it will soon be appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate. Economic activity and the labor market. In the second half of 2021, gross domestic product (GDP) growth slowed somewhat from its brisk first-half pace but nevertheless rose at a solid annualized rate of 4.6 percent. Average monthly job gains remained robust at 575,000 in the second half. The unemployment rate has plummeted almost 2 percentage points since June and, at 4 percent in January, has reached the median of FOMC participants’ estimates of its longer-run normal level. Moreover, unemployment declines have been widespread across demographic groups. That said, labor force participation only crept up last year and remains constrained. The tight labor supply, in conjunction with a continued surge in labor demand, has resulted in strong nominal wage growth, especially for low-wage workers. Supply bottlenecks also continued to significantly limit activity throughout the second half, while the Delta and Omicron waves led to notable, but apparently temporary, slowdowns in activity. Inflation. The personal consumption expenditures (PCE) price index rose 5.8 percent over the 12 months ending in December, and the index that excludes food and energy items (so-called core inflation) was up 4.9 percent—the highest readings for both measures in roughly 40 years. Upward pressure on inflation from prices of goods experiencing both supply chain bottlenecks and strong demand, such as motor vehicles and furniture, has persisted, and elevated inflation has broadened out to a wider range of items. Services inflation has also stepped up further, reflecting strong wage growth in some service sectors and a significant increase in housing rents. While measures of near-term inflation expectations moved substantially higher over the course of last year, measures of longer-term inflation expectations have moved up only modestly; they remain in the range observed over the decade before the pandemic and thus appear broadly consistent with the FOMC’s longer-run inflation objective of 2 percent. Financial conditions. Yields on nominal Treasury securities across maturities increased notably since mid-2021, with much of the increase having occurred in the past couple of months, as the expected timing for the beginning of the removal of monetary policy accommodation has moved forward significantly. Equity prices decreased slightly, on net, and corporate bond yields rose but remain low, with stable corporate credit quality. Financing conditions for consumer credit continue to be largely accommodative except for borrowers with low credit scores. Mortgage rates for households remain low despite recent increases. Bank lending standards have eased across most loan categories, and bank credit has expanded. All told, financing conditions have been accommodative for businesses and households. Financial stability. While some financial vulnerabilities remain elevated, the large banks at the core of the financial system continue to be resilient. Measures of valuation pressures on risky assets remain high compared with historical values. Nonfinancial-sector leverage has broadly declined, and credit growth in the household sector has been driven almost exclusively by residential mortgages and auto loans to prime-rated borrowers. Vulnerabilities from financial-sector leverage are within their historical range, with relatively lower leverage at banks partially offset by higher leverage at life insurers and hedge funds. Funding markets remain stable. Domestic banks continue to maintain significant levels of high-quality liquid assets, while assets under management at prime and tax-exempt money market funds have declined further since mid-2021. The Federal Reserve continues to evaluate the potential systemic risks posed by hedge funds and digital assets and is closely monitoring the transition away from LIBOR. (See the box “Developments Related to Financial Stability” in Part 1.) International developments. Foreign GDP has continued to recover briskly, on balance, despite successive waves of the pandemic, which have been mirrored in slowdowns and rebounds in economic activity. This recovery has been supported by vaccination rates that have steadily increased in both advanced foreign economies and emerging market economies (EMEs). Inflation rose notably in many economies in the second half of last year, importantly boosted by higher energy and other commodity prices as well as supply chain constraints. Several emerging market foreign central banks and a few advanced- economy foreign central banks have raised policy rates, though foreign monetary and fiscal policies have generally continued to be accommodative. Foreign financial conditions have tightened modestly but are generally contained. In advanced foreign economies, sovereign yields have increased since the first half of last year on firming expectations for higher policy rates. The change in financial conditions in EMEs has been relatively muted in the face of the shift in monetary policy in some advanced economies. The trade-weighted value of the dollar appreciated modestly, on net, over the past six months. Recent geopolitical tensions related to the Russia–Ukraine situation are a source of uncertainty in global financial and commodity markets. Interest rate policy. The FOMC has continued to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent since the previous Monetary Policy Report. With inflation well above the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal and a strong labor market, the Committee expects it will soon be appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate. Balance sheet policy. From June 2020 until November 2021, the Federal Reserve expanded its holdings of Treasury securities by $80 billion per month and its holdings of agency mortgage-backed securities by $40 billion per month. In December 2020, the Committee indicated that it would continue to increase its holdings of securities at least at this pace until the economy had made substantial further progress toward its maximum-employment and price-stability goals. Last November, the Committee judged that this criterion had been achieved and began to reduce the monthly pace of its net asset purchases. In December, in light of inflation developments and further improvements in the labor market, the Committee announced it would double the pace of reductions in its monthly net asset purchases. At its January meeting, the FOMC decided to continue to reduce its net asset purchases at this accelerated pace, which will bring them to an end in early March, and issued a statement of principles for its planned approach for significantly reducing the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet.1 A number of participants at the meeting commented that conditions would likely warrant beginning to reduce the size of the balance sheet sometime later this year.2 In assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the Committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. The Committee is firmly committed to its price- stability and maximum-employment goals and is prepared to use its tools to prevent higher inflation from becoming entrenched while promoting a sustainable expansion and strong labor market. Low labor supply. Labor supply has been slow to rebound even as labor demand has been remarkably strong. The labor force participation rate remains well below estimates of its longer-run trend, principally reflecting a wave of retirements among older individuals and increases in the number of people out of the labor force and engaged in caregiving responsibilities. The ongoing pandemic has 1. See the January 26, 2022, press release regarding the Principles for Reducing the Size of the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet, available at https://www.federalreserve. gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20220126c.htm. 2. The minutes for the January 2022 FOMC meeting note these comments and are available on the Federal Reserve’s website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/ monetarypolicy/fomcminutes20220126.htm. also affected labor supply through fear of the virus or the need to quarantine. Moreover, savings buffers accumulated during the pandemic may have enabled some people to remain out of the labor force. (See the box “The Limited Recovery of Labor Supply” in Part 1.) Wage and employment growth across jobs and workers. Wage and employment gains were widespread across jobs and industries last year, with the lowest-wage jobs experiencing the largest gains in both median wages and employment. Wage growth in the leisure and hospitality industry accelerated sharply, which, together with a lagging employment rebound and high job openings, suggests a lack of available workers in the industry. Median wages also increased across racial and ethnic groups, leaving differences in wage levels across groups little changed relative to 2019. (See the box “Differences in Wage and Employment Growth across Jobs and Workers” in Part 1.) Broadening of inflation. Higher PCE price inflation broadened out over the course of 2021, with the share of products experiencing notable price increases moving appreciably higher. The broadening was evident in both goods and services, though most of last year’s very high inflation readings were concentrated in goods, a reflection of the strong demand and supply bottlenecks that have particularly affected these items. (See the box “How Widespread Has the Rise in Inflation Been?” in Part 1.) Supply bottlenecks. Supply chain bottlenecks have plagued the economy for much of the past year. Against a backdrop of robust demand for goods, global distribution networks have been strained, and domestic manufacturers have had trouble finding the materials and labor needed to fill orders for their products. U.S. ports have been congested amid record volumes of shipping, and delivery times for materials have remained elevated. Supply shortages of semiconductors have been particularly acute and have weighed heavily on motor vehicle production and sales. While there are some signs of improvement, general supply chain bottlenecks are not expected to resolve for some time. (See the box “Supply Chain Bottlenecks in U.S. Manufacturing and Trade” in Part 1.) Developments in the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. The size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet continued to grow, albeit at a slower rate given the reduced monthly pace of net asset purchases since November. However, reserve balances—the largest liability on the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet—were little changed, on net, reflecting growth in nonreserve liabilities such as currency and overnight reverse repurchase agreements (ON RRP). The elevated level of reserves continued to put broad downward pressure on short-term interest rates, while the decline in Treasury bill supply over 2021 has contributed to a shortage of short- term investments. Amid these developments, the ON RRP facility continued to serve its intended purpose of helping to provide a floor under short-term interest rates and support effective implementation of monetary policy. (See the box “Developments in the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet and Money Markets” in Part 2.) The labor market has continued to recover rapidly 1. Nonfarm payroll employment Payroll employment increased by 3.5 million jobs in the second half of 2021, bringing the gains for the year to a robust 6.7 million. And despite the headwind caused by the Omicron wave, employment growth in January remained robust at 467,000 (figure 1). Payroll gains over the past year have been widespread across industries, with a particularly large increase in the leisure and hospitality sector as people continued their return to many activities that had been curtailed by the pandemic. Meanwhile, the unemployment rate continued to move down rapidly, declining from 6.7 percent at the end of 2020 to 4.0 percent this January (figure 2). Notably, the nearly 2 percentage point decline in the unemployment rate since June of last year was the fastest half-year decline since the 1950s, apart from the unprecedented rebound when the economy first reopened in 2020. Moreover, this decline was broad based across racial and ethnic groups and was particularly large for Hispanics and African Americans (figure 3). While these recent declines brought the gaps between Hispanic and African American unemployment rates and those of whites and Asians to near historic lows, the gaps nevertheless remain and largely reflect long- standing structural issues. 2. Civilian unemployment rate Labor demand is very strong, but labor supply remains constrained . . . Last year’s job gains were driven by an appreciable and steady rise in labor demand as the economy reopened and activity bounced back. By the end of the year, the number of unfilled job openings was about 60 percent above pre-pandemic levels and at an all-time high. However, labor supply struggled to 3. Unemployment rate, by race and ethnicity NOTE: Unemployment rate measures total unemployed as a percentage of the labor force. Persons whose ethnicity is identified as Hispanic or Latino may be of any race. Small sample sizes preclude reliable estimates for Native Americans and other groups for which monthly data are not reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. 4. Labor force participation rate and employment-to-population ratio keep up. In particular, the labor force participation rate—which measures the share of people either working or actively seeking work—moved up only a little over the past year and remains below its February 2020 level (figure 4).3 Several pandemic-related factors appear to be holding back labor NOTE: The labor force participation rate and the employment- to-population ratio are percentages of the population aged 16 and over. 3. The 0.3 percentage point jump in the labor force participation rate (LFPR) in January 2022 is the result of revisions to the Current Population Survey (CPS) population controls, which introduced a discontinuity in the LFPR between December and January. (The Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) does not revise its published estimates for December 2021 and earlier months.) Population controls—population estimates for disaggregated demographic groups that are used to weight the CPS sample to make it representative of the U.S. population—are updated annually based on information provided by the Census Bureau. The BLS has indicated that the LFPR revision was mostly due to an increase in the size of the population in age groups that participate in the labor force at high rates (those aged 35 to 64) and a large decrease in the size of the population aged 65 and older, which participates at a low rate. supply, including a pandemic-induced surge in retirements, increased caregiving responsibilities, and fears of contracting COVID-19. (See the box “The Limited Recovery of Labor Supply.”) As a result, the recovery in employment—though rapid—has been incomplete, with payrolls nearly 3 million below their pre-pandemic level as of January. . . . resulting in an extremely tight labor market . . . A wide range of indicators have been pointing to a very tight labor market, reflecting robust demand for workers and constrained supply. There were two job openings per unemployed person at year-end, the highest level on record (figure 5). Both households’ and small businesses’ perceptions of labor market tightness were near or above the highest levels observed in the history of these series. The share of workers quitting jobs each month, an indicator of the availability of attractive job prospects, climbed from 2.4 percent to 2.9 percent last year, reaching an all-time high. Moreover, employers continued to report widespread hiring difficulties. Measures of hourly labor compensation growth have risen sharply over the past year in nominal terms, reflecting the influences of strong labor demand and pandemic- related reductions in labor supply. Total hourly compensation as measured by the employment cost index, which includes both wages and benefits, rose at an annual rate of 5.2 percent in the second half of 2021, lifting the 12-month change to 4.4 percent, well above pre-pandemic rates (figure 6). Wage growth as computed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, which tracks the median 12-month wage growth of individuals responding to the Current Population Survey, has also been rising smartly, as have average hourly earnings and compensation per hour in the business 5. Ratio of job openings to job seekers and quits rate NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through December 2021. The vacancy-to-unemployment ratio data are the ratio of job openings to unemployed excluding temporary layoffs. 6. Measures of change in hourly compensation NOTE: Business-sector compensation is on a 4-quarter percent change basis. For the private-sector employment cost index, change is over the 12 months ending in the last month of each quarter; for private-sector average hourly earnings, the data are 12-month percent changes; for the Atlanta Fed’s Wage Growth Tracker, the data are shown as a 3-month moving average of the 12-month percent change. Although labor demand has bounced back strongly over the past year, labor supply has been much slower to rebound, resulting in an extremely tight labor market. In particular, the labor force participation rate (LFPR)—the share of working-age adults either employed or actively seeking work—fell early in the pandemic and changed little last year despite plentiful job openings and rapidly rising wages (fi gure A).1 The behavior of the LFPR refl ects a combination of factors that have limited the recovery of labor supply following the pandemic. The most important of these factors are listed in turn. this factor is likely to dwindle as the date when these individuals had previously planned to retire is reached, provided that younger cohorts continue to retire at expected rates. (continued) Retirements: The retired share of the population is now substantially higher than before the pandemic, accounting for more than two-thirds of the net decline in the LFPR. About half (0.6 percentage point) of this increase was to be expected even in the absence of the pandemic, as additional members of the large baby- boom generation have reached retirement age in the past two years.2 The other half of the increase comes from excess retirements, above and beyond what would have been expected in the absence of the pandemic, due to individuals “pulling forward” their planned future retirements by a couple of years.3 The effect of Expected retirement . . . . . . Other reasons, including COVID-19 fears . . . . . . . . . . 1. The table shows changes only through December 2021 to maintain comparability with pre-pandemic data. With the release of January 2022 data, the BLS revised the population base for labor force statistics, which complicates comparisons with pre-pandemic data. 2. For estimates of the effects of population aging on the LFPR during the 2020–22 period that predate the pandemic, see Joshua Montes (2018), “CBO’s Projection of Labor Force Participation Rates,” Working Paper Series 2018-04 (Washington: Congressional Budget Offi ce, March), https:// www.cbo.gov/publication/53616. Note: The data are monthly and extend through December 2021. The data comprise individuals aged 16 and over. Contributions are derived from Current Population Survey (CPS) non-labor-force participants’ answers to the question “What best describes your current situation at this time?” We break out catego- ries for the answers “in retirement”; “taking care of home or family,” which we categorize as caregiving; “ill or disabled” and “in school,” which we combine; and “other.” Contribution lines are seasonally adjusted by Federal Reserve Board staff . Details may not sum to totals due to rounding. *Adults with at least one child between ages 6 and 17. **Adults with at least one child only between ages 0 and 5. SourCe: Bureau of Labor Statistics; Federal Reserve Board staff calculations using CPS microdata. 3. Federal Reserve Board staff calculations from the Current Population Survey indicate that many of the excess retirements are concentrated among individuals aged 71 to 73 at the beginning of the pandemic, who had likely planned to retire in the next few years. Caregiving: Many individuals who have left the labor force have taken on caregiving responsibilities during the pandemic, accounting for an additional 0.4 percentage point of the LFPR shortfall as of December 2021.4 Caregiving responsibilities among parents of school-aged children exerted a large drag on labor supply in 2020, when schools were largely closed. This drag on labor supply eased over the course of 2021 as schools reopened, although the ongoing pandemic may leave parents unsure whether in-person schooling could be disrupted again. Other caregiving responsibilities (for example, elder care) remain a drag on labor supply, accounting for nearly all of the negative contribution of this category to the LFPR. Additional factors: Labor supply has also been held back by other short-term factors related to the pandemic, including fear of contracting the virus and— especially during the Omicron wave—high numbers of quarantining workers.5 As of early January 2022, nearly 4. The contribution of caregiving responsibilities is measured by the increase in nonparticipants in the Current Population Survey who report “taking care of home or family” as their current situation. Note that this question refers to the respondent’s current situation rather than the causal reason why they left the labor force; nonetheless, it is reasonable to infer that caregiving responsibilities are an important factor contributing to the net decline in LFPR. 5. Many workers have had to quarantine during the Omicron wave, resulting in the number of workers absent from work due to illness being more than 600,000 higher in December 2021 than is typical for this time of year and about 2.5 million higher in January 2022. However, because these 3 percent of out-of-work adults reported fear of contracting or spreading the virus as their main reason for being out of work; the rate is even higher among individuals with no college education, who are more likely to work in contact-intensive sectors when employed.6 This factor may exacerbate other labor supply factors, as retirees or caregivers may be especially fearful of contracting or spreading the virus. Additionally, many households built up larger-than- normal savings during the pandemic, which may have enabled workers to retire, spend time on caregiving, or remain out of the labor force until virus conditions subside. Finally, reduced immigration likely has held back total labor supply, even though the effect on the LFPR is likely to be much smaller.7 workers are counted as employed in the Current Population Survey, these absences do not affect the LFPR. In addition, some vaccine-hesitant workers who are subject to vaccine mandates may have left the labor force and may be reluctant to return. 6. See the data from week 41 of the Household Pulse Survey, which can be found on the Census Bureau’s website at https://www.census.gov/data/tables/2021/demo/hhp/hhp41. html#tables. 7. Slower immigration during the pandemic period has reduced population growth—and labor force growth—since 2019, lowering the foreign-born working-age population in the United States by about 2 million people, according to one estimate. See Giovanni Peri and Reem Zaiour (2022), “Labor Shortages and the Immigration Shortfall,” Econofact, January 11, https://econofact.org/labor-shortages-and-the- immigration-shortfall. Although foreign-born individuals tend to have higher LFPRs than the overall population, the difference is not large enough for the reduced immigration to have a substantial effect on the (overall) LFPR. 7. Change in business-sector output per hour NOTE: Changes are measured from Q4 of the year immediately preceding the period through Q4 of the final year of the period. SOURCE: Bureau of Labor Statistics via Haver Analytics. sector.4 Indeed, nominal wages are increasing at the fastest pace in at least 20 years. This wage growth has been widespread across most sectors and particularly large in the leisure and hospitality sector and for lower-wage workers. (See the box “Differences in Wage and Employment Growth across Jobs and Workers.”) Even so, in the aggregate, these wage gains did not keep pace with the rise in prices last year. Labor productivity also appears to have accelerated The extent to which sizable wage gains raise firms’ costs and act as a source of inflation pressure depends importantly on the pace of productivity growth. In that regard, the behavior of labor productivity since the start of the pandemic has been encouraging. Over the 2020–21 period, productivity growth in the business sector averaged 2.3 percent per year— about 1 percentage point faster than its average pace since the mid-2000s (figure 7). Some of this acceleration in productivity might be the result of transitory factors. For example, worker effort, which surged in response to employment shortages and hiring difficulties, appears to be elevated, possibly above sustainable levels.5 But other pandemic- related developments could have a more persistent effect on productivity growth. For example, the pandemic has resulted in a high 4. The average hourly earnings and compensation per hour measures are no longer likely to be as significantly affected by changes in the composition of the workforce as they were early in the pandemic, when job losses were much larger for lower-wage workers, which raised average wages and measured wage growth. This process then reversed as many lower-wage workers, particularly in services, were rehired, thus lowering average wages and measured wage growth. The employment cost index and Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta wage growth measure are largely free of such composition effects. 5. The November 2021 Beige Book—in which the Federal Reserve reports on discussions with our business and other contacts throughout the country—reported that many employers were planning to increase hiring because of concerns that their current workforce was being overworked. Wages have increased strongly during the past year, especially for workers in lower-paying jobs and industries. For example, fi gure A shows that compensation growth for leisure and hospitality jobs as measured by the employment cost index was stronger than for goods-producing and service-producing industries overall in the second half of 2021. The leisure and hospitality industry was substantially affected by social distancing earlier in the pandemic, leading to outsized employment losses relative to other industries and a much weaker recovery. However, job openings for this industry are very high, which, in combination with strong wage growth, indicates that the comparatively weak employment rebound in leisure and hospitality now largely refl ects a lack of available workers. The industry-specifi c effects of the pandemic are also apparent in the patterns of employment and wages for lower-paying jobs relative to higher-paying jobs. As shown in fi gure B, job losses initially aligned closely with workers’ level of earnings, with the lowest-wage jobs (which are disproportionately found in service- producing industries) experiencing the greatest employment declines. As the economy has reopened, lower-wage employment has rebounded more. Consistent with the rebound in labor demand for these jobs coupled with hiring diffi culties, fi gure C shows that wage growth has been especially strong for lower- wage jobs. (continued on next page) NOTE: The data are NOTE: Series are adjusted to make total employment consistent with Current Employment Statistics private employment. Wage quartile cutoffs are adjusted for wage growth over time. The data extend through January 15, 2022. Finally, fi gure D illustrates how wages have evolved across racial and ethnic groups over the course of the pandemic. In 2019, median hourly wages were around $1 higher for Asian and white workers relative to Black and Hispanic workers. From 2019 to 2021, median wages increased between $1.10 and $1.90 for all groups, leaving the disparities in wage levels across these groups little changed relative to 2019.1 NOTE: Quartiles are defined by hourly wage distribution from base period of year-over-year calculations. Wages are measured as hourly earnings, excluding tips, overtime, and other forms of compensation. The data extend through January 15, 2022. 1. The wage estimates in fi gure D are only for workers paid hourly and exclude the incorporated self-employed. Because hourly wages for demographic groups are published at only an annual frequency by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, it is not possible to infer from these data whether some demographic groups experienced faster wage gains more recently (for example, whether wage growth has been faster for demographic groups with lower median wages in the second half of 2021, mirroring the more rapid wage growth for lower-paying jobs, as illustrated in fi gure C). NOTE: The data exclude incorporated self-employed. SOURCE: Bureau of Labor Statistics. rate of new business formation, the widespread adoption of remote work technology, and a wave of labor-saving investments. Nevertheless, it is too early to tell what the ultimate effect of the pandemic will be on productivity growth in coming years. Finally, fi gure D illustrates how wages have evolved the pandemic. In 2019, median hourly wages were Inflation increased significantly last year . . . to Black and Hispanic workers. From 2019 to 2021, median wages increased between $1.10 and $1.90 for all groups, leaving the disparities in wage levels across Consumer prices posted further sizable increases in the second half of 2021. Monthly increases in personal consumption expenditures (PCE) prices averaged about the same in the second half as in the first half, bringing the 12-month change in December to 5.8 percent—far above the Federal Open Market Committee’s (FOMC) longer-run objective of 2 percent (figure 8). The core PCE price index, which excludes the more volatile food and energy prices categories, rose 4.9 percent last year as supply chain bottlenecks, hiring difficulties, and other capacity constraints amid strong demand exerted pervasive upward pressure on prices. Notably, these were the largest price increases since the early 1980s. In January, a further sizable rise in the consumer price index (CPI) indicated that price pressures had not yet begun to abate. these groups little changed relative to 2019.1 8. Change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures 1. The wage estimates in fi gure D are only for workers paid hourly and exclude the incorporated self-employed. Because hourly wages for demographic groups are published it is not possible to infer from these data whether some demographic groups experienced faster wage gains more recently (for example, whether wage growth has been faster NOTE: Quartiles are defined by hourly wage distribution from base second half of 2021, mirroring the more rapid wage growth for period of year-over-year calculations. Wages are measured as hourly lower-paying jobs, as illustrated in fi gure C). earnings, excluding tips, overtime, and other forms of compensation. The Trimmed mean data extend through January 15, 2022. Excluding food and energy NOTE: The data extend through December 2021. SOURCE: For trimmed mean, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas; for all . . . and became more broad based in the second half . . . Whereas the sizable price increases seen last spring were concentrated in a few key items, inflationary pressures broadened over the second half of 2021. As an illustration, the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas trimmed mean index, which removes the PCE categories with the largest price increases and decreases each month, rose only modestly in the first half of last year but picked up in the second half and increased 3.1 percent for the year as a whole— its highest reading since 1991. NOTE: The data exclude incorporated self-employed. The broadening of price inflation is further evident when examining the price indexes for major PCE categories (figure 9). In the first half of 2021, rising inflation was driven by 9. Personal consumption expenditures price indexes NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through December 2021. SOURCE: Bureau of Economic Analysis via Haver Analytics. 10. Spot prices for commodities NOTE: The data are weekly averages of daily data and extend through NOTE: The data extend through December 2021. SOURCE: Bureau of Economic Analysis via Haver Analytics. sharp increases in prices for certain goods such as motor vehicles, which experienced strong demand coupled with severe supply chain bottlenecks; a recovery in demand for nonhousing services, where many prices rebounded after having softened earlier in the pandemic; and rapid increases in energy prices. In the second half, prices of those items continued to move higher, and prices began to rise more rapidly for food and beverages (as increases in the costs of food commodities, labor, and transportation were passed on to consumers) as well as for housing services (as rents began to reflect the large increase in housing demand). (See the box “How Widespread Has the Rise in Inflation Been?”) . . . with further upward pressure on inflation from rising commodity and import prices Oil prices continued climbing over the second half of last year and into this year, reaching their highest level in over seven years (figure 10). Demand for oil rose as the global economy recovered further, and oil supply was constrained by U.S. oil production disruptions due to Hurricane Ida and by only modest production increases by OPEC (Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries) and its partners. Geopolitical tensions with Russia have also contributed to higher energy prices, including oil and natural gas. Consumer price infl ation increased markedly in 2021, with the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) rising 5.8 percent over the 12 months through December, following a subdued increase of 1.3 percent in 2020. In the fi rst half of last year, the increase in infl ation was driven by a fairly small number of categories. In contrast, over the second half of the year, relatively high price increases became more widespread, suggesting that broader-based infl ationary pressures had taken hold. This discussion reviews how infl ation evolved across a comprehensive set of product categories last year to help shed light on the forces generating higher infl ation. Although price increases driven by bottlenecks and was stable at around 35 percent between 2016 and 2019—close to the average share observed since the mid-1990s—and continued to be stable in 2020. However, the share of products with more than 3 percent infl ation increased last year to above 60 percent. And, as is evident from the black line, the share of categories with price increases of more than 3 percent (annual rate) over a three-month window increased gradually over the course of the year. As shown by the left panel, the share of product categories with infl ation above 3 percent temporarily reached a similar level on two other occasions since the 1990s (in 2001 and 2007), but this share is still notably lower than that in the high-infl ation regime of the 1970s. As seen in fi gure B, which reports the shares of production constraints have been more concentrated in a relatively small set of product categories that have been particularly affected by these supply–demand imbalances, labor shortages, rising wages, and other broad-based cost pressures likely contributed to a pickup in infl ation across a wide range of goods and services. Figure A divides PCE into 146 product categories and presents the share of those categories for which prices were increasing by over 3 percent.1 This share product categories with 12-month price changes above 3 percent separately for goods and services, the increase in the breadth of large price increases was especially unusual for goods. yet the share of higher infl ation in services has also been moving up in the past few months, likely in part because of mounting infl ation pressures from the labor market. (continued on next page) 1. The fi gure presents the consumption-weighted share of product categories with 12-month price changes—and, for the recent period, annualized three-month price changes—over 3 percent. The calculation based on three-month changes provides a timely account of broadening in total PCE price infl ation but is somewhat more volatile. A price increase of 3 percent is one standard deviation above the mean of annualized price increases for the different PCE product categories from 2016 to 2019. NOTE: Each series is created from 146 product categories. Each product category is weighted by its expenditure share in personal consumption expenditures. Series are derived from 12-month price changes, except where otherwise indicated. The data extend through December 2021. The flat line in each panel marks where 50 percent of product categories experience inflation over 3 percent. B. Share of personal consumption expenditures goods and services categories with inflation over 3 percent NOTE: The series for goods is created from 81 product categories, and the series for services is created from 65 product categories. Each product category is weighted by its expenditure share in personal consumption expenditures (PCE) goods or PCE services. Series are derived from 12-month price changes. The data extend through December 2021. The flat line in each panel marks where 50 percent of product categories experience inflation over 3 percent. While robust price increases became more prevalent across product categories in the past year, the size of price increases still varied signifi cantly across product categories. To better understand the drivers of the high aggregate infl ation last year, fi gure C presents the full distribution of price changes for different products and further emphasizes the different roles being played by prices of goods versus services in explaining changes in this distribution compared with the 2016–19 period. In fi gure C, the blue line depicts the distribution of annualized monthly price changes observed from 2016 to 2019, while the black line depicts the dis trib ution in 2021.2 In both periods, this distribution is very wide, refl ec t ing the sizable heterogeneity in price behavior across items. The higher and broader infl ation during 2021 is refl ected in the chart as a rightward shift in the dis trib u- tion of price changes relative to the 2016–19 period.3 (continued) 2. For each of the 146 disaggregated product categories Annualized monthly price change for a given product category NOTE: The height of each line indicates the share of personal consumption expenditures (PCE) spent on product categories whose annualized monthly price changed by the percentage indicated on the horizontal axis. Values on the horizontal axis are binned in unit increments and are truncated at positive and negative 25 percent. Blue shading indicates that the PCE spending share was greater in 2016 to 2019 than in 2021 for the associated values of price change on the horizontal axis. Gray shading indicates that the PCE spending share was greater in 2021 than in 2016 to 2019 for the associated values of price change on the horizontal axis. The histogram includes 146 product categories over the periods indicated. mapped back to 1972, the chart presents one-month annualized infl ation rates for each of the months indicated in the legend. From 2016 to 2019 there are 7,008 observations (48 months times 146 categories) sorted into 51 bins (negative 25 or lower, negative 24, . . . , negative 1, 0, 1, . . . , 24, and 25 or higher), while in 2021 there are 1,752 observations (12 months times 146 categories). The product categories are weighted according to their share in overall PCE. The comparison shown in fi gure C does not importantly depend on the length of the pre-pandemic comparison period; for example, the distribution of price changes over 2000 to 2019 looks similar to the distribution over 2016 to 2019. 3. As the price change distribution shifts rightward and infl ation becomes more broadly experienced across product categories, a greater percent of spending occurs on products with infl ation exceeding 3 percent, as depicted in fi gure A. However, by combining all increases of at least 3 percent, fi gure A does not portray the marked increase in the number of very large price increases, particularly for goods affected by supply chain disruptions. Four aspects of the change in the distribution are worth noting: (1) fewer items with price decreases, which are depicted in the blue shaded areas below zero on the horizontal axis (2) a notable decline in the occurrence of price increases of between 1 and 4 percent, shown by the blue shaded area in the middle of the distribution (3) more items with infl ation between 5 and 12 percent as well as slightly more with infl ation between 13 and 24 percent, shown in the gray shaded area in those ranges on the horizontal axis top of the distribution, indicated by the large (gray shaded) spike in the share of items with price increases of at least 25 percent can be better understood by considering the contributions of goods and services to the changes. First, the left panel of fi gure D shows the contribution of goods to the total price change distribution between 2016 and 2019 (the blue line) and 2021 (the black line). Goods account for about 4 percentage points of the 6 percentage point increase in the spike at the top of the price change distribution in fi gure C as well as nearly all of the rightward shift in the price change distribution in excess of 12 percent infl ation. Moreover, the increased occurrence of high infl ation for goods is a stark departure from small positive or slightly negative price changes between 2016 and 2019 (seen in the blue shading). These observations are consistent with the very large price increases in goods categories such as motor vehicles and other categories disrupted by supply constraints against the backdrop of strong demand as consumption shifted away from services during the pandemic. Second, the right panel of fi gure D shows the contribution of services to the total price change distribution. Services account for the vast majority of the shift from the middle of the distribution of price changes (the blue shaded area) to infl ation between 5 and 12 percent (the gray shaded area), while they account for less than one-third of the increase in the spike at the top of the distribution. In summary, the share of products experiencing notable price increases moved appreciably higher in 2021, with the broadening due to both goods and services prices. That said, most of last year’s very high infl ation readings were concentrated in goods—a refl ection of strong demand in the face of supply bottlenecks that have particularly affected these items. Finally, although currently more widespread than in recent history, large price increases were considerably less widespread than was seen during the high-infl ation regime of the 1970s. In the period ahead, the large price changes in goods may ease once supply chain disruptions fi nally resolve, but, if labor shortages continue and wages rise faster than productivity in a broad-based way, infl ation pressures may persist and continue to broaden out. D. Distribution of inflation across personal consumption expenditures product categories D1. Contribution of goods Annualized monthly price change for a given product category Annualized monthly price change for a given product category Note: The height of each line indicates the share of personal consumption expenditures (PCE) spent on product categories whose annualized monthly price changed by the percentage indicated on the horizontal axis. Values on the horizontal axis are binned in unit increments and are truncated at positive and negative 25 percent. Blue shading indicates that the PCE spending share was greater in 2016 to 2019 than in 2021 for the associated values of price change on the horizontal axis. Gray shading indicates that the PCE spending share was greater in 2021 than in 2016 to 2019 for the associated values of price change on the horizontal axis. The histograms include 81 product categories for goods (left panel) and 65 product categories for services (right panel) over the periods indicated. Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis; Federal Reserve Board staff calculations. 11. Nonfuel import price index 12. Measures of inflation expectations CIE, projected onto 10-year SPF CIE, projected onto Michigan NOTE: The Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF) data are quarterly, begin in 2007:Q1, and extend through 2022:Q1. The Index of Common Inflation Expectations (CIE) data are quarterly and extend through 2022:Q1. The Michigan survey data are monthly and extend through February 2022; the February data are preliminary. Nonfuel commodity prices have risen with the global economic recovery since the first half of last year, reflecting considerable increases in the prices of both industrial metals and agricultural commodities. Although still below their peak last year, lumber prices have increased sharply again in recent months because of elevated demand from residential construction and supply disruptions. Import prices and the cost of transporting imported goods—a cost not included in measured import prices—are rising, and bottlenecks in supply chains have exacerbated the rise (see the box “Supply Chain Bottlenecks in U.S. Manufacturing and Trade”). Import price inflation has also remained elevated largely because of continued increases in commodity prices, bringing the 12-month change through January 2022 to 6.9 percent (figure 11). Measures of near-term inflation expectations rose notably, but longer- term expectations moved up less Inflation expectations likely influence actual inflation by affecting wage- and price-setting decisions. In the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers, households’ expectations for inflation over the next 12 months continued to climb, reaching levels that are among the highest observed since the early 1980s (figure 12). In contrast, expectations for average inflation over the next 5 to 10 years from the same survey flattened out in the second half of 2021 after having moved up modestly in the first half, and they now stand near levels observed about a decade ago. Meanwhile, 10-year PCE inflation expectations in the Survey of Professional Forecasters edged up, on net, since mid-2021 and stood at 2.2 percent in the first quarter of this year. That increase was driven by higher expectations for the next five years, with expectations for inflation remaining at 2 percent over years 6 through 10. Over the past year, global transportation and distribution networks have been overwhelmed, and manufacturers have struggled to fi nd the materials and labor needed to meet demand for their products. Demand for goods has been notably boosted, as ongoing concerns about COvID-19 have led consumers and businesses to shift spending away from services, such as travel, in favor of goods, such as those related to increased time at home. While some distribution and production bottlenecks showed signs of improvement toward the end of last year, other bottlenecks are expected to remain for some time. The surge in demand for imports has strained shipping networks worldwide, and U.S. ports have been particularly congested. About one-third of all U.S. goods imports (by value) arrive via seaborne containers, and, consistent with the strength in imports of consumer and capital goods in 2021, the number of containers processed at domestic ports last year was signifi cantly higher than in any previous year (fi gure A). The combined ports of Los Angeles and Long Beach have faced substantial congestion, with the number of ships waiting for a berth recently reaching an all-time high.1 Elevated levels of port congestion in the United States and abroad have caused on-time arrivals of global shipping vessels to plunge and have resulted in dramatic increases in charter rates for container ships (fi gure B). Moreover, once goods arrive in port, major bottlenecks in U.S. trucking and rail transportation have further delayed their movement. Trucking cargo rates have risen sharply since mid-2020, and some measures are now more than 15 percent above the levels prevailing in 2019. (continued on the next page) 1. Though primarily driven by strong demand for goods, the congestion has been worsened by COvID-19 outbreaks in emerging Asia, where port delays have tied up vessels and containers, sending ripple effects through the global network. B. Developments in shipping Cost of chartering a container ship NOTE: The seaborne containers data are monthly, are not seasonally adjusted, and extend through December 2021. The real goods imports data are quarterly and are seasonally adjusted. NOTE: “On schedule” is defined as a vessel arriving within 1 day of its listed schedule. The shipping data are monthly averages of daily data and extend through February 22, 2022. Vessel reliability data are monthly and extend through December 2021. Distribution problems have also weighed heavily on domestic production. In 2021, a record number of manufacturers reported that an insuffi cient supply of materials was one reason they were unable to produce at full capacity (fi gure C). Together with increasingly strong demand for goods, these limitations on production led to backlogs of orders and to supplier delivery times well above historical norms (fi gure D). With supply unable to satisfy demand, prices for a wide range of goods increased last year, sometimes sharply. Indeed, the producer price index for overall manufacturing was more than 15 percent higher in the fourth quarter of 2021 than its year-earlier level ( fi gure E). Domestic production has been further hampered by manufacturers’ inability to hire and retain skilled (continued) NOTE: Gaps in series represent the end of the Annual Survey of Plant Capacity in 2006 and the start of the Quarterly Survey of Plant Capacity in 2008. Survey respondents are given the choice of many reasons for operating below capacity and may select more than one reason. NOTE: Values greater than 50 indicate that more respondents reported longer delivery times or order backlogs relative to a month earlier than reported shorter delivery times or order backlogs. SOURCE: Institute for Supply Management, ISM Manufacturing Report on Business. labor. Despite adding about 350,000 workers in 2021, by the end of the year manufacturing employment was still about 250,000 below where it was just before the pandemic. Although manufacturers have long noted diffi culties in fi nding workers, labor market conditions were particularly tight in 2021. At the end of the year, factory workers were quitting their jobs at near-record rates, and manufacturing plants had listed approximately 850,000 job openings—about twice as many openings as in the 2017–19 period. The motor vehicle sector has faced a particularly acute and well-publicized shortage of semiconductor chips, refl ecting a combination of factors. On the demand side, consumers’ appetite for cars and trucks has remained remarkably strong, and the chip content per vehicle has increased.2 Meanwhile, the supply of semiconductors was disrupted by COvID- induced shutdowns in foreign countries—such as Malaysia and vietnam—that are major players in the semiconductor supply chain. Even when enough of certain types of chips have been available, an undersupply of complementary chips has, at times, created problems for manufacturers. These chip shortages have led to widespread shutdowns and production slowdowns at U.S. motor vehicle assembly plants. Without an ample supply of new vehicles, many dealerships sold off remaining inventories and raised prices. The lean inventories and high prices weighed heavily on vehicle sales for much of 2021. Recently, however, semiconductor shortages have begun to ease somewhat, as indicated by an increase in U.S. vehicle production (fi gure F). Nevertheless, these shortages have persisted, and statements by some auto 2. Although the chip content per vehicle has been rising for a while, demand for some vehicles particularly rich in semiconductors—notably, electric vehicles and luxury models—has risen especially sharply during the pandemic. industry executives suggest that they expect production bottlenecks to continue well into this year. Outside the auto sector, supply chain bottlenecks show some signs of improvement. Capacity expansion at some ports in late 2021 and waning seasonal demand likely contributed to recent declines in the cost of shipping. Additionally, inland rail hubs have decongested somewhat, facilitating the fl ow of containers inland. Also, late last year, domestic manufacturers saw slower increases in the price of inputs, improving delivery times, and fewer items in short supply than they had earlier. A few commodities have experienced a notable increase in availability. One example is steel, for which delivery times and prices have fallen sharply after having been elevated for much of last year. NOTE: The data are quarterly averages and are adjusted using Federal Reserve Board seasonal factors. The dot represents the monthly value for January 2022. Inflation compensation implied by Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities NOTE: The data are at a business-day frequency and are based on smoothed nominal and inflation-indexed Treasury yield curves. Market-based measures of inflation compensation, which are based on financial instruments linked to inflation, are sending a similar message. A measure of CPI inflation compensation over the next five years implied by Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS) continued to rise, on net, through the second half of 2021, reaching its highest level over the past decade.6 In contrast, the TIPS- based measure of CPI inflation compensation 5 to 10 years ahead rose over the first half of 2021 but has settled around 2¼ to 2½ percent since then (figure 13). While elevated relative to pre-pandemic levels, this measure is well within the range of values observed in the first half of the previous decade and, because CPI inflation tends to run around ¼ percentage point above PCE price inflation, it suggests inflation compensation close to 2 percent on a PCE basis. The common inflation expectations (CIE) index constructed by Federal Reserve Board staff combines a wide variety of inflation expectations measures—including the measures cited earlier—into a single indicator that is rescaled to match the level and volatility of existing inflation expectation indicators.7 6. Inflation compensation implied by the yields on Treasury securities, known as the TIPS breakeven inflation rate, is defined as the difference between yields on conventional Treasury securities and yields on TIPS, which are linked to actual outcomes regarding headline CPI inflation. Inferring inflation expectations from such market-based measures of inflation compensation is not straightforward, because these measures are affected by changes in premiums that provide compensation for bearing inflation and liquidity risks. These measures likely also capture shifts in the demand and supply of TIPS relative to those of nominal Treasury securities. 7. The CIE is estimated using a dynamic factor model. The level of the model’s estimated factor does not have an economic interpretation and therefore must be rescaled to match an existing indicator of inflation expectations to yield a level interpretation. For more details, see Hie Joo Ahn and Chad Fulton (2021), “Research Data Series: Index of Common Inflation Expectations,” FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March 5), https://doi.org/10.17016/2380-7172.2873. The measures used in the CIE differ along several key dimensions—the type of economic agent, data source (survey- or market-based measure), time horizon, and inflation measure. Both CIE indexes shown in figure 12 look most similar to the measures of longer-term expectations: They trended up in the first half of last year, reversing the downward drift observed in the years before the pandemic, but then flattened out at a level similar to those observed roughly a decade ago. Gross domestic product growth stepped down modestly in the second half of last year . . . The level of real gross domestic product (GDP) recovered further in the second half of 2021, but growth was somewhat slower, on average, than in the first half (figure 14). GDP growth is reported to have slowed notably to 2.3 percent at an annual rate in the third quarter but rebounded to a brisk 7 percent in the fourth quarter. Despite the solid average growth in the second half, several factors—including last summer’s Delta wave and waning fiscal stimulus—likely weighed on demand growth. Moreover, supply chain bottlenecks, hiring difficulties, and other capacity constraints continued to significantly restrain economic activity. While there have been some recent signs of these constraints easing, the time frame for further improvement is highly uncertain. All told, at the end of 2021 GDP stood 3 percent above its level in the fourth quarter of 2019, before the pandemic began, but 1.5 percent below its level if growth had continued at its average pace over the five years before the pandemic. . . . while the rapid spread of the Omicron variant appears to have slowed the pace of economic activity early this year Fueled by the highly transmissible Omicron variant, new cases of COVID-19 began rising sharply in mid-December, peaked in mid-January with daily cases about three times as high as last winter’s surge, and have 14. Real gross domestic product 15. Real personal consumption expenditures NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through December 2021. SOURCE: Bureau of Economic Analysis via Haver Analytics. fallen quickly since then. Although Omicron appears to cause less severe symptoms than previous variants, several indicators suggest it has damped the pace of economic activity early this year. High-frequency indicators reveal that flight cancellations, school closures, and temporary closings of small businesses jumped as the new year began, while demand for COVID-sensitive services like air travel, lodging, and restaurant meals flagged. Nevertheless, with cases rapidly declining and spending indicators having rebounded, Omicron seems likely to cause the continued reopening of the economy to slow only briefly. Real consumer spending growth eased . . . Consumer spending on goods edged lower, on balance, over the second half of 2021 as the boost from fiscal stimulus waned and low inventories held back purchases of some goods, particularly motor vehicles. Even so, goods spending remains quite elevated relative to its pre-pandemic trend (figure 15). The further reopening of the economy boosted spending on services in the second half, albeit at a less rapid pace than last spring, as the Delta wave weighed on demand for in-person services in the summer and the Omicron wave began to do so late in the year. Despite the continued recovery in services spending, this spending remains well below its pre-pandemic trend. In all, the data over the second half of 2021 indicate only a moderate amount of rebalancing of consumer demand toward services and away from goods. . . . as higher prices damped otherwise healthy income and wealth positions . . . Real consumer spending has been supported by further gains in household income and wealth, but that support was curbed by the marked rise in prices over the past year, especially for households that have not benefited from higher asset prices. Household disposable income in nominal terms has proven resilient due to the improving labor market, even as fiscal stimulus has waned, but after factoring in the higher prices, real disposable incomes edged lower over the year. Nevertheless, also supporting consumption, in the aggregate, are the substantial savings households have accumulated from curtailed services spending and historic levels of household-focused fiscal stimulus distributed earlier in the pandemic, as evidenced by a personal saving rate that, while no longer elevated, has not fallen below its pre-pandemic trend (figure 16). Furthermore, as a result of the large gains in home and equity prices since mid-2020, the wealth position of households that own these assets remains very solid (figure 17). . . . and contributed to declining consumer sentiment Amid the continued acceleration in prices in the second half of last year and despite solid household balance sheets, a closely watched index of consumer sentiment plunged (figure 18). Since the middle of 2021, the University of Michigan index fell below the levels seen at the onset of the pandemic, as survey respondents’ concerns over inflation weighed heavily on their outlooks. The Conference Board index, an alternative measure of consumer sentiment, also deteriorated but, in contrast to the Michigan index, remains well above its earlier pandemic lows. Meanwhile, consumer credit conditions continued to normalize Financing has been generally available to support these gains in consumer spending. Standards for consumer loans, which banks reported eased in 2021 relative to 2020, are now generally in line with the standards that persisted before the pandemic; as a result, financing conditions are now largely accommodative for borrowers with high credit scores, though lending standards and terms remain somewhat tighter than pre- pandemic levels for borrowers with low credit scores. After initial declines at the onset of the pandemic, the growth rate of consumer 16. Personal saving rate NOTE: The data extend through December 2021. SOURCE: Bureau of Economic Analysis via Haver Analytics. 17. Wealth-to-income ratio NOTE: The series is the ratio of household net worth to disposable personal income. The data extend through 2021:Q3. NOTE: The data extend through February 2022. The February data for the Michigan survey are preliminary. 19. Consumer credit flows NOTE: The data are seasonally adjusted by the Federal Reserve Board. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Board, Statistical Release G.19, “Consumer 20. Private housing starts and permits 21. New and existing home sales Existing home sales include only single-family sales and extend through December 2021. Existing home sales include single-family, condo, and co-op sales. NOTE: The data are monthly. New home sales SOURCE: For new home sales, Census Bureau; for existing home sales, credit recovered strongly in 2021, driven by the continued expansion of auto loans and an appreciable rebound in credit card balances (figure 19). Delinquency rates for nonprime auto and credit card borrowers remained well below pre-pandemic levels, likely stemming from forbearance programs and fiscal support. Housing construction fell as supply constraints held back activity . . . Residential investment is well above pre- pandemic levels but fell back somewhat last year, as construction was limited by persistent bottlenecks that led to materials shortages. In recent months, the sector has shown signs of a rebound, as single-family permits have risen steadily (figure 20). Nevertheless, the timing of the resolution of these supply constraints remains highly uncertain. Prices of lumber and other materials have moved up appreciably, and shortages of other construction inputs— such as labor and lots ready for development— remain acute. Demand for housing surged earlier during the pandemic and has remained strong, with home sales well above levels seen in the years before the pandemic despite very tight inventory of homes available for sale (figure 21). This surge in demand is likely due to a combination of factors, including increased work-from-home arrangements; shifts away from other types of consumer spending, such as travel and leisure; and mortgage rates that remain low despite notable recent increases (figure 22). Meanwhile, mortgage credit remained broadly available for a wide range of potential borrowers. Although mortgage credit for borrowers with low credit scores remained tighter than before the pandemic, it eased over the second half of last year. . . . which has contributed to record house price growth As a result of supply constraints and surging demand, house price growth reached record levels, and, even after adjusting for overall inflation, home prices have surpassed their peak of the mid-2000s (figure 23). According to data from Zillow, national house prices rose almost 20 percent last year. Moreover, strong house price growth has been widespread across the United States, as nearly 80 percent of metropolitan areas experienced annual house price increases of at least 10 percent. Homebuying sentiment, as measured by the Michigan survey, remains depressed, reflecting the low inventory of homes and high prices. Business investment slowed in response to supply constraints . . . Investment in equipment and intangibles grew at an annual rate of just 4 percent in the second half of last year, a marked step-down from the nearly 14 percent pace in the first half. As with other sectors of the economy, investment demand has remained strong, while supply constraints have limited spending, as evidenced by shipments of capital goods increasingly lagging orders and equipment prices rising sharply. Supply bottlenecks in the motor vehicle sector have been particularly acute, and business spending on vehicles declined appreciably in the second half of 2021. Investment in nonresidential structures declined further last year despite a sharp rebound in oil drilling and remains well below pre-pandemic levels (figure 24). This sector typically lags in recoveries, and shortages of building materials may be further restraining activity. . . . while financing conditions remain accommodative Corporate financing conditions through capital markets remained broadly accommodative for nonfinancial firms and continued to be supported by corporate bond yields that remain very low by historical standards. Amid these low yields and ample investor demand, gross issuance of corporate bonds continued at a robust pace, albeit down from the exceptional pace seen in 2020. In contrast, bank lending to businesses was, on net, subdued last year. 22. Mortgage rates NOTE: The data are contract rates on 30-year, fixed-rate conventional home mortgage commitments and extend through February 17, 2022. 23. Real prices of existing single-family houses NOTE: Series are deflated by the personal consumption expenditures SOURCE: Bureau of Economic Analysis via Haver Analytics; CoreLogic Home Price Index; Zillow, Inc., Real Estate Data; S&P/Case-Shiller U.S. National Home Price Index. The S&P/Case-Shiller index is a product of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. (For Dow Jones Indices licensing information, see the note on the Contents page.) 24. Real business fixed investment 25. Real imports and exports of goods and services 26. U.S. trade and current account balances NOTE: GDP is gross domestic product. Current account balance data While commercial real estate loans grew at a modest pace similar to the years just before the pandemic, commercial and industrial loan balances contracted as a result of loan forgiveness associated with the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP), elevated paydowns, and generally weak borrower demand. Meanwhile, financing conditions for small businesses have improved notably over the past year and have generally been stable in recent months. Lending standards have eased, and loan origination volumes are in line with pre- pandemic levels, though loan demand remains weak for the smallest firms. Moreover, default and delinquency rates are now within their pre- pandemic range. Nevertheless, the pandemic continues to negatively affect the operations of small businesses, especially in the most affected industries (accommodation and food services, arts, entertainment, and recreation). The strong U.S. demand has partly been met through a rapid rise in imports Driven by the strength in U.S. economic activity, particularly the strong demand for goods and a desire to restock inventories, U.S. imports have continued to increase at a notable pace. High levels of imported goods have kept international logistics channels operating under high pressure, which has continued to impair the timely delivery of goods to U.S. customers. By contrast, U.S. exports increased modestly over the second half of 2021 and remain below pre-pandemic levels (figure 25). Given the relative strength in imports compared with exports, both the nominal trade deficit and the current account deficit have increased as a share of GDP relative to 2019 (figure 26). Federal fiscal actions provided a diminishing degree of support to economic activity . . . In response to the pandemic, the federal government enacted a historic set of fiscal policies to ameliorate hardship caused by the viral outbreak and support the economic recovery. Policies such as stimulus checks, supplemental unemployment insurance, and child tax credit payments have aided households; grants-in-aid have supported state and local governments; and business support programs such as the PPP have helped sustain firms. Although these temporary policies continue to support the level of GDP, they have begun to unwind and are now likely imposing a drag on GDP growth as the effects on spending wane over time. In addition to pandemic-support policies, the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act will gradually boost spending on infrastructure over the next 10 years and is only partially offset by new revenues and other spending reductions. . . . while significantly raising the budget deficit and federal debt Overall, the Congressional Budget Office estimates that fiscal policies enacted since the start of the pandemic—including the infrastructure bill—will increase federal deficits by roughly $5.4 trillion by the end of fiscal year 2030, with the largest deficit effects in fiscal 2020 and 2021.8 These policies, combined with the effects of automatic stabilizers—the reduction in tax receipts and increase in transfers that occur as a consequence of depressed economic activity— caused the federal deficit to surge to 15 percent of nominal GDP in fiscal 2020 and remain elevated at 12½ percent in fiscal 2021. But with fiscal support fading, the deficit is expected to fall sharply this year to a level closer to that observed in the years just before the pandemic (figure 27). 8. For more information, see Congressional Budget Office (2020), “The Budgetary Effects of Laws Enacted in Response to the 2020 Coronavirus Pandemic, March and April 2020,” June, https://www.cbo.gov/system/files/2020- 06/56403-CBO-covid-legislation.pdf; Congressional Budget Office (2021), “The Budgetary Effects of Major Laws Enacted in Response to the 2020–21 Coronavirus Pandemic, December 2020 and March 2021,” September, https://www.cbo.gov/system/files/2021-09/57343- Pandemic.pdf; and Congressional Budget Office (2021), “Senate Amendment 2137 to H.R. 3684, the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, as Proposed on August 1, 2021,” August 9, https://www.cbo.gov/system/ files/2021-08/hr3684_infrastructure.pdf. 27. Federal receipts and expenditures NOTE: The receipts and expenditures data are on a unified-budget basis and are for fiscal years (October through September); gross domestic product (GDP) data are on a 4-quarter basis ending in Q3. The dots represent fiscal year 2022 projections for receipts and expenditures An Update to the from the Congressional Budget Office’s July 2021 report, Budget and Economic Outlook: 2021 to 2031. 28. Federal government debt and net interest outlays Debt held by the public NOTE: The data for net interest outlays are annual, begin in 1948, and extend through 2021. Net interest outlays are the cost of servicing the debt held by the public. Federal debt held by the public equals federal debt less Treasury securities held in federal employee defined-benefit retirement accounts, evaluated at the end of the quarter. The data for federal debt are annual from 1901 to 1951 and quarterly thereafter and extend through 2021:Q3. GDP is gross domestic product. 29. State and local tax receipts NOTE: State tax data are year-over-year percent changes of 12-month moving averages, begin in June 2012, extend through December 2021, and are aggregated over all states except Wyoming, for which data are not available. Revenues from Washington, DC, are also excluded. Data are missing for July through December for Connecticut, October through December for New Mexico, and December for Nevada and Oregon, as these states have longer reporting lags than others. Property tax data are year-over-year percent changes of 4-quarter moving averages, begin in 2012:Q2, extend through 2021:Q3, and are primarily collected by local governments. As a result of the unprecedented fiscal support over the past two years, federal debt held by the public jumped to around 100 percent of nominal GDP in 2020—the highest debt- to-GDP ratio since 1947—and remained at a similar level in 2021. Nevertheless, net interest outlays—primarily reflecting debt service payments—have remained relatively flat over the past two years due to historically low interest rates on government borrowing (figure 28). State and local government finances have been bolstered by federal aid and strong growth in tax revenue . . . Federal policymakers have provided a historic level of fiscal support to state and local governments, with aid totaling nearly $1 trillion—more than covering pandemic- related budget shortfalls in the aggregate. Moreover, following the pandemic-induced slump, total state tax collections rose smartly in 2021, pushed up by the economic expansion (figure 29). At the local level, property taxes have continued to rise apace, and the typically long lags between changes in the market value of real estate and changes in taxable assessments suggest that property tax revenues will continue to rise going forward, given the rise in house prices. Meanwhile, conditions in municipal bond markets remained accommodative: Yields stayed near historical lows, and issuance continued at a solid pace, on par with pre-pandemic issuance. . . . but hiring and construction outlays continued to lag Despite the return to in-person schooling this year and the strong fiscal position of state and local governments, employment levels have regained only about one-half of their sizable pandemic losses, with the shortfall concentrated in public education (figure 30). One reason appears to be that public-sector wages have not kept pace with the rapid gains in the private sector, which is likely inhibiting the ability of these governments to staff back up to pre-pandemic levels. Meanwhile, real construction outlays by state and local governments appear to have declined significantly in 2021, and real infrastructure spending by these governments is currently about 10 percent below pre-pandemic levels. The path of the federal funds rate expected to prevail over the next few years steepened notably The market-based expected path of the federal funds rate steepened notably amid news about the labor market recovery, rising inflation pressures, and the accompanying prospect of tighter monetary policy. Market-based measures suggest that investors anticipate the federal funds rate will soon begin to rise and move above 1 percent in the middle of this year, about two and a half years earlier than expected in July (figure 31).9 Similarly, according to the results of the Survey of Primary Dealers and the Survey of Market Participants, both conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York in January, the median respondent views the target range as most likely to increase later in the current quarter, about one and a half years earlier than in the June surveys.10 Treasury yields increased substantially across maturities . . . Yields on nominal Treasury securities across maturities have risen notably since early July, with much of the increase having occurred in the past couple of months as the anticipation for an imminent start to the removal of monetary accommodation has firmed (figure 32). Uncertainty about longer-term 9. These measures are based on a straight read of market quotes and are not adjusted for term premiums. 10. The results of the Survey of Primary Dealers and the Survey of Market Participants are available on the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s website at https://www.newyorkfed.org/markets/primarydealer_ survey_questions.html and https://www.newyorkfed.org/ markets/survey_market_participants, respectively. 30. State and local government payroll employment NOTE: The data are seasonally adjusted. SOURCE: Bureau of Labor Statistics via Haver Analytics. 31. Market-implied federal funds rate path NOTE: The federal funds rate path is implied by quotes on overnight index swaps—a derivative contract tied to the effective federal funds rate. The implied path as of July 9, 2021, is compared with that as of February 22, 2022. The path is estimated with a spline approach, assuming a term premium of 0 basis points. The July 9, 2021, path extends through 2025:Q3 and the February 22, 2022, path through 2026:Q1. 32. Yields on nominal Treasury securities 33. Corporate bond yields, by securities rating, and municipal bond yield NOTE: Investment-grade corporate reflects the effective yield of the ICE Bank of America Merrill Lynch (BofAML) triple-B U.S. Corporate Index (C0A4). High-yield corporate reflects the effective yield of the ICE BofAML High Yield Index (H0A0). Municipal reflects the yield to worst of the ICE BofAML U.S. Municipal Securities Index (U0A0). SOURCE: ICE Data Indices, LLC, used with permission. 34. Yield and spread on agency mortgage-backed securities is for the uniform mortgage-backed securities 30-year current coupon, the coupon rate at which new mortgage-backed securities would be priced at par, or face, value, for dates after May 31, 2019; for earlier dates, the yield shown is for the Fannie Mae 30-year current coupon. Spread shown is to the average of the 5-year and 10-year nominal Treasury yields. NOTE: The data are daily. Yield shown SOURCE: Department of the Treasury; J.P. Morgan. Courtesy of J.P. interest rates—as measured by the implied volatility embedded in the prices of near-term swap options on 10-year swap interest rates— also increased markedly, reportedly reflecting an increase in uncertainty about inflation and the policy outlook. . . . while spreads of other long-term debt to Treasury securities widened moderately Across credit categories, corporate bond yields have risen substantially, and their spreads over yields on comparable-maturity Treasury securities have widened moderately since early July (figure 33). Still, both yields and spreads remain near the bottom of their historical distributions, and corporate credit quality is generally healthy and stable. News about the spread of new coronavirus variants appeared to have only limited and temporary effects on corporate bond spreads. Since early July, yields on 30-year agency mortgage-backed securities—an important pricing factor for home mortgage rates— increased, and spreads over comparable- maturity Treasury securities widened moderately but stayed near the low end of their historical range (figure 34). Municipal bond yields moved higher, and spreads over comparable-maturity Treasury securities widened to levels close to their historical medians. Broad equity price indexes declined slightly on net Broad indexes of equity prices decreased a little, on net, since early July. Recent declines amid expectations of an earlier beginning to the removal of policy accommodation have offset previous gains, which were supported by strong corporate earnings that had seemed resilient to pandemic developments (figure 35). Stocks of small-capitalization firms underperformed notably, as the likelihood for a tighter stance of monetary policy has increased. Bank stock prices rose, on net, buoyed by an improved economic outlook and expectations of higher levels of interest rates and net interest margins in the future. Measures of volatility for the S&P 500 index, both an option-implied metric (the VIX) and a comparable forward-looking measure based on realized volatility, increased somewhat amid evolving monetary policy expectations and concerns over the Omicron variant and stand above their respective historical medians (figure 36). (For a discussion of financial stability issues, see the box “Developments Related to Financial Stability.”) Markets for Treasury securities, mortgage- backed securities, and corporate and municipal bonds functioned well . . . Markets for Treasury securities and mortgage- backed securities functioned smoothly since July even as some measures of liquidity conditions for Treasury securities deteriorated moderately, which reflected increased yield volatility due, in part, to uncertainty about the path of monetary policy. Measures of market functioning in corporate and municipal bond markets indicated liquid and stable trading conditions. Bid-ask spreads for corporate bonds across credit ratings currently stand below pre-pandemic levels and near the bottom of their historical distributions. . . . while short-term funding market conditions remained stable Short-term funding markets continued to function smoothly. The effective federal funds rate and other overnight unsecured rates declined slightly relative to the interest rate on reserve balances since early July. Secured overnight rates remained stable, with the Secured Overnight Financing Rate steady at the offering rate on the overnight reverse repurchase agreement (ON RRP) facility on most days since early July. Ample liquidity and a limited supply of Treasury bills kept short- term interest rates low and led to increased usage of the ON RRP facility. (See the box “Developments in the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet and Money Markets” in Part 2.) 35. Equity prices SOURCE: S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC via Bloomberg. (For Dow Jones Indices licensing information, see the note on the Contents page.) 36. S&P 500 volatility Expected volatility NOTE: The VIX is a measure of implied volatility that represents the expected annualized change in the S&P 500 index over the following 30 days. The expected volatility series shows a forecast of 1-month realized volatility, using a heterogeneous autoregressive model based on 5-minute S&P 500 returns. This discussion reviews vulnerabilities in the U.S. fi nancial system. The framework used by the Federal Reserve Board for assessing the resilience of the U.S. fi nancial system focuses on fi nancial vulnerabilities in four broad areas: asset valuations, business and household debt, leverage in the fi nancial sector, and funding risks. Although some asset valuations are elevated, measures of household and business leverage have declined, and the banking system has shown considerable resilience since the onset of the pandemic. Structural vulnerabilities in other parts of the fi nancial system are still being addressed, including those related to various types of investment funds and vulnerabilities in Treasury market functioning. Prices of risky assets remain elevated, supported in part by a low interest rate environment and low term premiums on Treasury securities. One common measure of equity valuations, the ratio of equity prices to forecast earnings, remains high compared with historical values. Spreads on corporate bonds and leveraged loans continue to be low. Price indexes for a range of commercial real estate sectors are at or near historical highs, and vacancy rates have declined. Residential home prices have continued to rise, with nearly 80 percent of metropolitan statistical areas seeing double-digit annual growth rates during 2021. NOTE: The dots represent 2022:Q1 nowcasts. The shaded bars indicate periods of business recession as defined by the National Bureau of GDP is gross domestic product. Economic Research. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Board, Statistical Release Z.1, “Financial Accounts of the United States”; National Income and Product Accounts, Bureau of Economic Analysis; Federal Reserve Board staff calculations. pandemic, including airlines, hotels, and restaurants, leverage remains elevated and interest coverage ratios are lower. Nonfi nancial-sector leverage has broadly declined. The rapid growth of nominal gross domestic product (GDP) has brought the ratio of nominal credit to nominal GDP, which measures the aggregate debt owed by the private nonfi nancial sector relative to the size of the economy, down to near its pre- pandemic levels (fi gure A). Household debt relative to nominal GDP remains fi rmly below its long- run trend, and household credit growth has been driven almost exclusively by prime-rated borrowers. Homeowner equity is high, and mortgage delinquency and foreclosure rates are below their pre-pandemic levels despite the end of pandemic-related relief and forbearance programs. Because of high corporate cash holdings, aggregate net nonfi nancial business leverage sits at its lowest level since 2014. Fueled by strong earnings and low borrowing costs, most businesses saw a sharp increase in their ability to service their debt burdens, with the interest coverage ratio (the ratio of earnings to interest expenses) for the median fi rm solidly above pre-pandemic levels and near historical highs. However, for fi rms in industries hit hardest by the vulnerabilities from fi nancial-sector leverage are well within their historical range. Risk-based capital ratios at domestic bank holding companies reached a 20-year high during the fi rst quarter of 2021. These capital ratios declined modestly over the rest of the year as banks increased their share repurchases and dividend payouts amid an improved economic outlook and the Federal Reserve’s lifting of restrictions on capital distributions. Throughout 2021, robust economic growth and strong capital markets contributed to high bank profi tability, which fosters resilience through greater loss absorption capacity and an ability to retain earnings to raise capital if needed. In contrast, leverage at certain nonbank fi nancial institutions, including life insurers and hedge funds, has remained near historical highs. Data limitations and the complexity of hedge fund strategies can obscure the true nature of leverage in that sector. However, one common measure of hedge fund leverage, the ratio of gross notional exposures to equity capital, is near its peak since data became available in 2012. (continued) Funding markets remain relatively stable. Domestic banks continue to maintain signifi cant levels of high- quality liquid assets. Assets under management at prime and tax-exempt money market funds (MMFs), which experienced signifi cant outfl ows during the March 2020 turmoil, continued to decline, on net, since mid-2021, while those at government MMFs remained near historical highs. In December 2021, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) proposed reforms to MMFs intended to mitigate the fi nancial stability risks they pose, including the adoption of swing pricing for certain fund types, increased liquidity requirements, and other measures meant to make them more resilient to redemptions. The market for digital assets, including stablecoins, has grown rapidly. The market value of stablecoins exceeded $150 billion as of January 2022. As detailed in a November 2021 report released by the President’s Working Group on Financial Markets, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Offi ce of the Comptroller of the Currency, some stablecoins are partially backed by assets that may lose value or become illiquid, making them susceptible to runs.1 Prefunded resources at central counterparties (CCPs) are high, particularly relative to current market volatility, reducing the likelihood of margin shortfalls and liquidity strains if volatility increases. Nevertheless, increased retail trading has exposed new challenges for the risk-management frameworks of the CCPs that clear equities and equity options. Financial institutions with signifi cant holdings of long-term fi xed-rate debt instruments (for example, Treasury securities, agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS), corporate bonds, and mortgage loans), such as banks and mutual funds, may recognize revaluation losses if long-term interest rates increase further, though some of those losses could be offset by higher interest income. 1. See President’s Working Group on Financial Markets, york, SEC, and Commodity Futures Trading Commission released a report detailing ongoing vulnerabilities in the U.S. Treasury market and principles to promote a well- functioning Treasury market.2 The report also outlined multiple ongoing workstreams designed to further enhance the group’s understanding of Treasury market vulnerabilities and to consider policy options that may further strengthen the market. The shift away from the widely used U.S. dollar (USD) LIBOR reference rates stepped up notably in recent months, in line with regulatory guidance to end most new use of USD LIBOR by December 31, 2021, and well ahead of the cessation of those rates on June 30, 2023. The transition away from USD LIBOR has largely been completed in fl oating-rate debt markets, where nearly 90 percent of new issuance now references the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (SOFR). In securitization markets, the government- sponsored enterprises had stopped accepting LIBOR adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) in 2020, are now accepting only SOFR ARMs, and have tied all of their associated MBS issuance to SOFR. Interest rate swap markets saw increases in volumes for SOFR-based trades in the second half of 2021, and this pace accelerated rapidly in January such that SOFR-based swaps trading now accounts for the majority of risk traded in this market, indicating widespread awareness and adoption of risk-free reference rates. Eurodollar futures have lagged the swap market, although volumes for SOFR-based futures contracts are increasing there also. The transition in business lending has been slower, although recent data suggest that the use of USD LIBOR as a reference rate for business loans has fallen sharply since the start of the year and that the pace of SOFR adoption is accelerating. 2. See U.S. Department of the Treasury, Board of Governors 37. Growth in total loans and leases NOTE: The data are calculated as monthly annualized growth rates and are seasonally and break adjusted. 38. Profitability of bank holding companies NOTE: The data are quarterly and are seasonally adjusted. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Board, Form FR Y-9C, Consolidated 39. Foreign real gross domestic product is computed on a representative sample of 40 countries and aggregated using U.S. trade weights. The data extend through 2021:Q3. Bank credit expanded and bank profitability remained strong Total loans and leases outstanding at commercial banks expanded significantly in the second half of last year, driven by continued solid growth in commercial real estate, residential real estate, and consumer loans, which outweighed declines in commercial and industrial loans (figure 37). In both October and January, the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices, conducted by the Federal Reserve, reported easier standards for most loan categories over the second half of 2021.11 In the January survey, respondents generally anticipated a further easing of lending standards and stronger loan demand over the current year. Bank profitability remained strong, declining slightly over the second half of last year but remaining at pre-pandemic levels, helped by the continued release of loan loss reserves, given solid credit quality indicators (figure 38). Delinquency rates on bank loans remained low relative to historical averages throughout the second half of 2021. The recovery abroad continued in the second half of the year . . . Economic activity abroad continued to recover briskly in the second half of last year (figure 39), as a noticeable pickup in vaccinations and greater adaptability allowed many foreign economies to further reopen. Unemployment rates in advanced foreign economies (AFEs) have now generally returned to levels near those that prevailed before the pandemic. That said, the emergence of the Delta variant of the virus last summer slowed the recovery of some economies, especially in Asia, and resulted in factory and port closures, which, in turn, exacerbated supply bottlenecks. 11. The survey is available on the Federal Reserve Board’s website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/data/ sloos/sloos.htm. More recently, the Omicron outbreak has been a headwind and a risk, especially for countries with lower vaccination rates; and order backlogs in industries such as automobile manufacturing remain high. Still, production bottlenecks in Asia have started to unwind. . . . and foreign inflation increased significantly in most economies As in the United States, foreign inflation has picked up noticeably since late 2020 (figure 40). This higher inflation has been mostly driven by soaring prices for energy and food, which, combined, account for well over half of the level of inflation abroad (figure 41). Higher prices for core goods have also contributed to the rise of inflation, but core inflation abroad has risen less than in the United States, in part because demand for durable goods in foreign economies appears to have increased relatively less sharply. Many foreign central banks are tightening monetary policy or have signaled a future shift in stance In light of elevated inflation, many policymakers are moving to reduce the significant monetary stimulus undertaken since the start of the pandemic. Several emerging market central banks, including those of Brazil, Korea, and Mexico, have already raised their policy rates because of concerns over the persistence of inflationary pressures. In AFEs, a few central banks, including those of New Zealand, Norway, and the United Kingdom, have started raising their policy rates, and the Bank of Canada has signaled its intention to raise its policy rate soon (figure 42). Others have taken steps to normalize their balance sheet policies: The Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, and the Reserve Bank of Australia have ceased net asset purchases, and the European Central Bank plans to reduce its asset purchases this year. In contrast, the Bank of Japan has communicated that it is not in a rush to tighten policy, noting that measures of 40. Consumer price inflation in selected foreign economies 41. Consumer price inflation in foreign economies Advanced foreign economies Emerging market economies NOTE: The advanced foreign economy aggregate is the average of Canada, the euro area, and the United Kingdom, weighted by U.S. goods imports. The emerging market economy aggregate is the average of Argentina, Brazil, Chile, China, Colombia, Hong Kong, India, Israel, Mexico, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, South Korea, and the 5 original member countries of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, weighted by U.S. goods imports. The inflation measure is the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices for the euro area and the consumer price index for other economies. The key identifies bars in order from top to bottom. The data are the Q4-over-Q4 percent change for 2021. 42. 12-month policy expectations for selected advanced foreign economies NOTE: The data are weekly averages of daily 12-month market-implied central bank policy rates. The 12-month policy rates are implied by quotes on overnight index swaps tied to the policy rates. The data extend through February 18, 2022. 43. Nominal 10-year government bond yields in selected advanced foreign economies NOTE: The data are weekly averages of daily benchmark yields and underlying inflation in Japan remain below its 2 percent target. Foreign financial conditions tightened some but remain accommodative . . . Expectations for faster removal of monetary policy accommodation, amid higher inflation and easing concerns about the pandemic, led to notable increases in sovereign yields in several AFEs (figure 43). Despite expectations for tighter monetary policy, the strength in corporate earnings and reduced concerns about the pandemic have supported AFE equities, which are little changed, on net, since mid-2021. The change in financial conditions in emerging market economies (EMEs) has been relatively muted despite the shift in advanced-economy monetary policy expectations and increased geopolitical tensions. Net inflows to EME- dedicated funds stepped down and hovered around zero, in contrast with notable outflows during the 2013–14 period, and EME sovereign spreads widened only somewhat (figure 44). In China, solvency problems in the real estate sector and regulatory uncertainty appeared to weigh on stock prices of large Chinese firms listed in Hong Kong, with the Hang Seng Index decreasing notably. Brazilian equity prices also decreased amid political uncertainty, while some other EME stock indexes registered moderate gains. More recently, geopolitical tensions surrounding Russia and Ukraine have led to the underperformance of Eastern European equity indexes. . . . and the dollar appreciated moderately on net The broad dollar index—a measure of the trade-weighted value of the dollar against foreign currencies—has risen modestly since mid-2021 (figure 45). The dollar appreciated against Latin American currencies amid increased political uncertainty in some countries, while it was mixed against Asian EME currencies. The dollar appreciated against many AFE currencies, in part reflecting the more notable increase in the U.S. near-term yields compared with the AFE counterparts. 44. Emerging market mutual fund flows and spreads Equity fund flows (right scale) Bond fund flows (right scale) EMBI+ (left scale) NOTE: The bond and equity fund flows data are semiannual sums of weekly data from December 28, 2006, to December 29, 2021, and a monthly sum of weekly data from December 30, 2021, to January 26, 2022. Weekly data span Thursday through Wednesday, and the semiannual and monthly values are sums over weekly data for weeks ending in that half year or month. The fund flows data exclude funds located in China. The J.P. Morgan Emerging Markets Bond Index Plus (EMBI+) data are weekly averages of daily data, extend through January 28, 2022, and exclude Venezuela. SOURCE: For bond and equity fund flows, EPFR Global; for EMBI+, 45. U.S. dollar exchange rate indexes NOTE: The data, which are in foreign currency units per dollar, are weekly averages of daily values of the broad dollar index, advanced foreign economies (AFE) dollar index, and emerging market economies (EME) dollar index. The weekly data extend through February 18, 2022. As indicated by the leftmost arrow, increases in the data reflect U.S. dollar appreciation and decreases reflect U.S. dollar depreciation. The Federal Open Market Committee has maintained the federal funds rate near zero . . . The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has been providing forward guidance for the target range for the federal funds rate, indicating that the range would be maintained at 0 to ¼ percent until specific employment and inflation criteria had been met. Consistent with that guidance, the FOMC has maintained the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent (figure 46). In December, the Committee concluded that the inflation criteria in the forward guidance had been met and the target range would be maintained until labor market conditions had reached levels consistent with the Committee’s assessments of maximum employment. In January, the Committee stated that, with inflation well above 2 percent and a strong labor market, it expected it would soon be appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate. . . . and the Committee has gradually reduced the monthly pace of its net asset purchases of Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities, which will end in early March From June 2020 until November 2021, the Federal Reserve had been expanding its holdings of Treasury securities by $80 billion per month and its holdings of agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) by $40 billion per month. At its November meeting, in light of the substantial further progress the economy had made toward maximum employment and price stability, the Committee decided to reduce the monthly pace of its net asset purchases by $10 billion per month for Treasury securities and by $5 billion per month for agency MBS. At its December meeting, in light of inflation developments and the further improvement in the labor market, the Committee began to reduce the monthly pace of net purchases more rapidly, by 46. Selected interest rates NOTE: The 2-year and 10-year Treasury rates are the constant-maturity yields based on the most actively traded securities. SOURCE: Department of the Treasury; Federal Reserve Board. $20 billion per month for Treasury securities and by $10 billion per month for agency MBS. At its January meeting, the Committee decided to continue to reduce the monthly pace of net purchases and conclude net purchases in early March. The FOMC will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook The Committee will continue to monitor incoming economic data and would be pre- pared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate to manage risks that could impede the attainment of its goals. The Committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of information, including read ings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments. With appropriate policy, inflation is expected to decline over the course of the year as supply constraints ease and demand moderates due to waning effects of fiscal support and the removal of monetary policy accommodation. The FOMC will use its policy tools as appropriate to prevent higher inflation from becoming entrenched while promoting a sustainable expansion and strong labor market. The Federal Reserve issued a statement regarding principles for reducing the size of its balance sheet Following the conclusion of its January meeting, the FOMC issued a set of principles regarding its planned approach for significantly reducing the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet.12 With these principles, 12. See the January 26, 2022, press release regarding the Principles for Reducing the Size of the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet, available at https:// www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/ monetary20220126c.htm. the Committee reiterated its view that changes in the target range for the federal funds rate are its primary means of adjusting the stance of monetary policy and conveyed its expectation that reducing the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet would occur after the process of increasing the target range for the federal funds rate had begun. The Committee also noted that it would determine the timing and pace of reductions in the size of its balance sheet so as to promote its maximum- employment and price-stability goals and that reductions would occur over time in a predictable manner, primarily by adjusting the amounts reinvested of principal payments received from securities held in the System Open Market Account (SOMA). Furthermore, the FOMC communicated that, over time, it intended to maintain securities holdings in amounts needed to implement monetary policy efficiently and effectively in its ample reserves regime. The Committee also noted that, in the longer run, it intended to hold primarily Treasury securities in the SOMA, thereby minimizing the effect of Federal Reserve holdings on the allocation of credit across sectors of the economy. Finally, the Committee emphasized that it was prepared to adjust any details of its approach in light of economic and financial developments. The size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet continued to grow, although at a diminished pace since November The Federal Reserve’s balance sheet has grown to $8.9 trillion from $8.1 trillion in July, reflecting continued net asset purchases of U.S. Treasury securities and agency mortgage- backed securities to support smooth market functioning and foster accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses (figure 47). All of the Federal Reserve’s emergency credit and liquidity facilities have been closed for new lending for some time, and the residual outstanding balances at those facilities have continued to decline.13 The Federal Reserve established two standing repurchase agreement facilities Reserve balances have changed little, on net, since July and stand near $4 trillion. Usage of the overnight reverse repurchase agreement facility increased significantly. (See the box “Developments in the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet and Money Markets.”) 13. A list of credit and liquidity facilities established by the Federal Reserve in response to COVID-19 is available on the Federal Reserve’s website at https://www. federalreserve.gov/funding-credit-liquidity-and-loan- facilities.htm. In July of last year, the Federal Reserve established a domestic standing repurchase agreement (repo) facility and a standing repo facility for foreign and international monetary authorities. These facilities are intended to serve as backstops in money markets to support the effective implementation of monetary policy and smooth market functioning. The rates for these facilities have been maintained at levels somewhat higher than rates in overnight funding markets, consistent with their intended roles as backstops. 47. Federal Reserve assets and liabilities Other assets Credit and liquidity facilities Agency debt and mortgage-backed securities holdings Treasury securities held outright NOTE: “Other assets” includes repurchase agreements, FIMA (Foreign and International Monetary Authorities) repurchase agreements, and unamortized premiums and discounts on securities held outright. “Credit and liquidity facilities” consists of primary, secondary, and seasonal credit; term auction credit; central bank liquidity swaps; support for Maiden Lane, Bear Stearns Companies, Inc., and AIG; and other credit and liquidity facilities, including the Primary Dealer Credit Facility, the Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility, the Commercial Paper Funding Facility, the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility, the Primary and Secondary Market Corporate Credit Facilities, the Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility, the Municipal Liquidity Facility, and the Main Street Lending Program. “Agency debt and mortgage-backed securities holdings” includes agency residential mortgage-backed securities and agency commercial mortgage-backed securities. “Capital and other liabilities” includes reverse repurchase agreements, the U.S. Treasury General Account, and the U.S. Treasury Supplementary Financing Account. The key identifies shaded areas in order from top to bottom. The data extend through February 16, 2022. The size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet increased from $4.2 trillion before the pandemic to its current level of roughly $8.9 trillion, largely refl ecting an increase in System Open Market Account holdings from asset purchases (fi gure A). As net asset purchases have continued, albeit at a slower pace in recent months, the Federal Reserve’s liabilities have also increased (fi gure B).1 This discussion reviews recent developments in the size and composition of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet and conditions in money markets. The Federal Reserve’s net asset purchases continued notably the overnight reverse repurchase agreements (ON RRP)—increased substantially. Another Federal (continued) Other assets Loans Central bank liquidity swaps Repurchase agreements Agency debt and MBS Treasury securities held outright at a pace of $120 billion per month from July through October. At its November meeting—in light of the substantial further progress the economy had made toward the Federal Open Market Committee’s goals since December 2020—the Committee decided to begin reducing the monthly pace of its net asset purchases by $10 billion per month for Treasury securities and $5 billion per month for agency mortgage-backed securities. At its December meeting—in light of infl ation developments and further improvement in the labor market—the Committee decided to double the pace of reductions in its net asset purchases, implying that increases in securities holdings would cease by mid-March. The Federal Reserve’s net asset purchases since July 2021 have led to an $813 billion increase in its total assets (fi gure C). Federal Reserve liabilities increased in line with changes in its assets. The level of reserve balances was little changed, on net, while other liabilities—most NOTE: MBS is mortgage-backed securities. The key identifies shaded areas in order from top to bottom. The data extend through February 16, 2022. 1. For general explanations of several liabilities on the Federal Reserve’s bala2nce sheet, see the box “The Role of Liabilities in Determining the Size of the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet” in Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2019), Monetary Policy Report (Washington: Board of Governors, February), pp. 41–43, https://www.federalreserve. gov/monetarypolicy/files/20190222_mprfullreport.pdf. Balances.” 1. For general explanations of several liabilities on the Federal Reserve’s bala2nce sheet, see the box “The Role of Liabilities in Determining the Size of the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet” in Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2019), Monetary Policy Report (Washington: Board of Governors, February), pp. 41–43, https://www.federalreserve. gov/monetarypolicy/files/20190222_mprfullreport.pdf. Balances.” Net unamortized premiums Reserves held by depository Foreign offi cial and Note: MBS is mortgage-backed securities. PPPLF is Paycheck Protection Reserve liability—balances maintained in the Treasury General Account (TGA)—varied signifi cantly over recent months in connection with developments related to the debt limit. The U.S. Treasury lowered its outstanding balance in the TGA from $725 billion in the beginning of July 2021 to a low of $42 billion on December 16, 2021. Following the debt limit resolution on December 16, 2021, which raised the debt limit of the U.S. government, both net Treasury bill issuance and the TGA balance increased to more normal levels.2 Money markets continued to function smoothly amid these developments, with ample liquidity putting broad downward pressure on short-term interest rates. In addition, the limited supply of Treasury bills during the debt limit episode pushed bill yields lower. In this environment of ample liquidity, limited Treasury bill supply, and low repurchase agreement rates, the ON RRP facility continued to serve its intended purpose of helping to provide a fl oor under short-term interest rates and support effective implementation of monetary policy.3 Usage of the facility has nearly doubled, on average, since early July, primarily driven by greater participation from government money market funds.4 The ON RRP take-up reached a record high of $1.9 trillion on year-end before retracing to around $1.6 trillion in early January. 2. For details, see U.S. Congress, Senate (2021), “A Joint Resolution Relating to Increasing the Debt Limit,” S.J. Res., 117 Cong. Congressional Record (daily edition), vol. 167, December 14, pp. S 9134–53, https://www.congress.gov/ bill/117th-congress/senate-joint-resolution/33. 3. The ON RRP facility helps keep the effective federal funds rate from falling below the target range set by the Federal Open Market Committee, as institutions with access to the ON RRP should be unwilling to lend funds below the ON RRP’s preannounced offering rate. The ON RRP facility is primarily used by nonbank counterparties such as money market funds. The rate offered through the ON RRP facility complements the interest on reserve balances rate in supporting effective monetary policy implementation. 4. In light of the potential for expanded use of the facility and given growth in money market fund assets under management in recent years, the Federal Open Market Committee raised the per-counterparty cap on ON RRP participation to $160 billion per day from $80 billion at its September 2021 meeting. The following material was released after the conclusion of the December 14–15, 2021, meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee. In conjunction with the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting held on December 14–15, 2021, meeting participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real gross domestic product (GDP) growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for each year from 2021 to 2024 and over the longer run. Each participant’s projections were based on information available at the time of the meeting, together with her or his assessment of appropriate monetary policy—including a path for the federal funds rate and its longer-run value— and assumptions about other factors likely to affect economic outcomes. The longer- run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the value to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. “Appropriate monetary policy” is defined as the future path of policy that each participant deems most likely to foster outcomes for economic activity and inflation that best satisfy his or her individual interpretation of the statutory mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability. Table 1. Economic projections of Federal Reserve Board members and Federal Reserve Bank presidents, under their individual assumptions of projected appropriate monetary policy, December 2021 Percent Longer run Longer run Longer run Memo: Projected appropriate policy path Note: Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP) and projections for both measures of inflation are percent changes from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. PCE inflation and core PCE inflation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index for personal consump- tion expenditures (PCE) and the price index for PCE excluding food and energy. Projections for the unemployment rate are for the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. Each participant’s projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy. Longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the econ- omy. The projections for the federal funds rate are the value of the midpoint of the projected appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the projected appropriate target level for the federal funds rate at the end of the specified calendar year or over the longer run. The September projections were made in conjunction with the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on September 21–22, 2021. One participant did not submit longer-run projections for the change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, or the federal funds rate in conjunction with the September 21–22, 2021, meeting, and one participant did not submit such projections in conjunction with the December 14–15, 2021, meeting. 1. For each period, the median is the middle projection when the projections are arranged from lowest to highest. When the number of projections is even, the median is the 2. The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each year. 3. The range for a variable in a given year includes all participants’ projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year. 4. Longer-run projections for core PCE inflation are not collected. Figure 1. Medians, central tendencies, and ranges of economic projections, 2021–24 and over the longer run Longer run Longer run Longer run Longer run Note: Definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. The data for the actual values of the variables are annual. Longer run Note: Each shaded circle indicates the value (rounded to the nearest 1/8 percentage point) of an individual participant’s judgment of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the appropriate target level for the federal funds rate at the end of the specified calendar year or over the longer run. One participant did not submit longer-run projec- tions for the federal funds rate. Figure 3.A. Distribution of participants’ projections for the change in real GDP, 2021–24 and over the longer run Longer run Note: Definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Figure 3.B. Distribution of participants’ projections for the unemployment rate, 2021–24 and over the longer run Longer run Note: Definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Figure 3.C. Distribution of participants’ projections for PCE inflation, 2021–24 and over the longer run Longer run Note: Definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Note: Definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Figure 3.E. Distribution of participants’ judgments of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the appropriate target level for the federal funds rate, 2021–24 and over the longer run Longer run Note: Definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the percent change in real gross domestic product (GDP) from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The confidence interval around the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the confidence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reflect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections; these current assessments are summa- rized in the lower panels. Generally speaking, participants who judge the uncertainty about their projections as “broadly similar” to the average levels of the past 20 years would view the width of the confidence interval shown in the historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise, participants who judge the risks to their projections as “broadly balanced” would view the confidence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For definitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The confidence interval around the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the confidence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reflect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections; these current assessments are summarized in the lower panels. Generally speaking, participants who judge the uncertainty about their projections as “broadly similar” to the average levels of the past 20 years would view the width of the confidence interval shown in the historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise, participants who judge the risks to their projections as “broadly balanced” would view the confidence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For definitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Risks to core PCE inflation Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the percent change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The confidence interval around the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the confidence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reflect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections; these current assessments are summarized in the lower panels. Generally speaking, participants who judge the uncertainty about their projections as “broadly similar” to the average levels of the past 20 years would view the width of the confidence interval shown in the historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise, participants who judge the risks to their projections as “broadly balanced” would view the confidence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For definitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” Note: For each SEP, participants provided responses to the question “Please indicate your judgment of the uncertainty attached to your projections relative to the levels of uncertainty over the past 20 years.” Each point in the diffusion indexes represents the number of participants who responded “Higher” minus the number who responded “Lower,” divided by the total number of participants. Figure excludes March 2020 when no projections were submitted. Note: For each SEP, participants provided responses to the question “Please indicate your judgment of the risk weighting around your projections.” Each point in the diffusion indexes represents the number of participants who responded “Weighted to the Upside” minus the number who responded “Weighted to the Downside,” divided by the total number of participants. Figure excludes March 2020 when no projections were submitted. Note: The blue and red lines are based on actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the Committee’s target for the federal funds rate at the end of the year indicated. The actual values are the midpoint of the target range; the median projected values are based on either the midpoint of the target range or the target level. The confidence interval around the median projected values is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years. The confidence interval is not strictly consistent with the projections for the federal funds rate, primarily because these projections are not forecasts of the likeliest outcomes for the federal funds rate, but rather projections of participants’ individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy. Still, historical forecast errors provide a broad sense of the uncertainty around the future path of the federal funds rate generated by the uncertainty about the macroeconomic variables as well as additional adjustments to monetary policy that may be appropriate to offset the effects of shocks to the economy. The confidence interval is assumed to be symmetric except when it is truncated at zero - the bottom of the lowest target range for the federal funds rate that has been adopted in the past by the Committee. This truncation would not be intended to indicate the likelihood of the use of negative interest rates to provide additional monetary policy accommodation if doing so was judged appropriate. In such situations, the Committee could also employ other tools, including forward guidance and large-scale asset purchases, to provide additional accommodation. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the confidence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reflect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections. * The confidence interval is derived from forecasts of the average level of short-term interest rates in the fourth quarter of the year indicated; more information about these data is available in table 2. The shaded area encompasses less than a 70 percent confidence interval if the confidence interval has been truncated at zero. Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges Percentage points Note: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root mean squared error of projections for 2001 through 2020 that were released in the winter by var- ious private and government forecasters. As described in the box “Forecast Un- certainty,” under certain assumptions, there is about a 70 percent probability that actual outcomes for real GDP, unemployment, consumer prices, and the federal funds rate will be in ranges implied by the average size of projection errors made in the past. For more information, see David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip (2017), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook Using Historical Forecasting Errors: The Federal Reserve’s Approach,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017–020 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February), https://dx.doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2017.020. 1. Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure that has been most widely used in government and private economic forecasts. Projections are percent changes on a fourth quarter to fourth quarter basis. 3. For Federal Reserve staff forecasts, measure is the federal funds rate. For other forecasts, measure is the rate on 3-month Treasury bills. Projection errors are calculated using average levels, in percent, in the fourth quarter. The economic projections provided by the members of the Board of Governors and the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks inform discussions of monetary policy among policymakers and can aid public understanding of the basis for policy actions. Considerable uncertainty attends these projections, however. The economic and statistical models and relationships used to help produce economic forecasts are necessarily imperfect descriptions of the real world, and the future path of the economy can be affected by myriad unforeseen developments and events. Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, participants consider not only what appears to be the most likely economic outcome as embodied in their projections, but also the range of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of their occurring, and the potential costs to the economy should they occur. Table 2 summarizes the average historical accuracy of a range of forecasts, including those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports and those prepared by the Federal Reserve Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). The projection error ranges shown in the table illustrate the considerable uncertainty associated with economic forecasts. For example, suppose a participant projects that real gross domestic product (GDP) and total consumer prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty attending those projections is similar to that experienced in the past and the risks around the projections are broadly balanced, the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a probability of about 70 percent that actual GDP would expand within a range of 2.3 to 3.7 percent in the current year, 1.3 to 4.7 percent in the second year, 0.8 to 5.2 percent in the third year, and 0.7 to 5.3 percent in the fourth year. The corresponding 70 percent confi dence intervals for overall infl ation would be 1.8 to 2.2 percent in the current year, 1.1 to 2.9 percent in the second year, 1.0 to 3.0 percent in the third year, and 1.1 to 2.9 percent in the fourth year. Figures 4.A through 4.C illustrate these confi dence bounds in “fan charts” that are symmetric and centered on the medians of FOMC participants’ projections for GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and infl ation. However, in some instances, the risks around the projections may not be symmetric. In particular, the unemployment rate cannot be negative; furthermore, the risks around a particular projection might be tilted to either the upside or the downside, in which case the corresponding fan chart would be asymmetrically positioned around the median projection. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over history, participants provide judgments as to whether the uncertainty attached to their projections of each economic variable is greater than, smaller than, or broadly similar to typical levels of forecast uncertainty seen in the past 20 years, as presented in table 2 and refl ected in the widths of the confi dence intervals shown in the top panels of fi gures 4.A through 4.C. Participants’ (continued) current assessments of the uncertainty surrounding their projections are summarized in the bottom-left panels of those fi gures. Participants also provide are weighted to the upside, are weighted to the downside, or are broadly balanced. That is, while the symmetric historical fan charts shown in the top participants’ projections are balanced, participants may judge that there is a greater risk that a given variable will be above rather than below their projections. These judgments are summarized in the lower-right panels of for the future path of the federal funds rate is subject to considerable uncertainty. This uncertainty arises primarily because each participant’s assessment of infl ation over time. If economic conditions evolve change from that point forward. The fi nal line in table 2 shows the error ranges for forecasts of short- term interest rates. They suggest that the historical confi dence intervals associated with projections of the federal funds rate are quite wide. It should be noted, however, that these confi dence intervals are not funds rate, as these projections are not forecasts of the most likely quarterly outcomes but rather are appropriate monetary policy and are on an end-of- year basis. However, the forecast errors should provide the federal funds rate generated by the uncertainty be appropriate to offset the effects of shocks to the around the federal funds rate were to extend below zero, it would be truncated at zero for purposes of the fan chart shown in fi gure 5; zero is the bottom of has been adopted by the Committee in the past. This fan chart would be merely a convention; it would not have any implications for possible future policy decisions regarding the use of negative interest rates to provide additional monetary policy accommodation if doing so were appropriate. In such situations, the Committee could also employ other tools, including forward guidance and asset purchases, to provide fi gure 1 provides information on the range of views across FOMC participants. A comparison of fi gure 1 of the projections across participants is much smaller current assessments of the uncertainty surrounding their projections are summarized in the bottom-left panels of those fi gures. Participants also provide judgments as to whether the risks to their projections are weighted to the upside, are weighted to the downside, or are broadly balanced. That is, while the symmetric historical fan charts shown in the top panels of fi gures 4.A through 4.C imply that the risks to participants’ projections are balanced, participants may judge that there is a greater risk that a given variable will be above rather than below their projections. These judgments are summarized in the lower-right panels of fi gures 4.A through 4.C. As with real activity and infl ation, the outlook for the future path of the federal funds rate is subject to considerable uncertainty. This uncertainty arises primarily because each participant’s assessment of the appropriate stance of monetary policy depends importantly on the evolution of real activity and infl ation over time. If economic conditions evolve in an unexpected manner, then assessments of the appropriate setting of the federal funds rate would change from that point forward. The fi nal line in table 2 shows the error ranges for forecasts of short- term interest rates. They suggest that the historical confi dence intervals associated with projections of the federal funds rate are quite wide. It should be noted, however, that these confi dence intervals are not strictly consistent with the projections for the federal funds rate, as these projections are not forecasts of the most likely quarterly outcomes but rather are projections of participants’ individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy and are on an end-of- year basis. However, the forecast errors should provide a sense of the uncertainty around the future path of the federal funds rate generated by the uncertainty about the macroeconomic variables as well as additional adjustments to monetary policy that would be appropriate to offset the effects of shocks to the economy. around the federal funds rate were to extend below zero, it would be truncated at zero for purposes of the fan chart shown in fi gure 5; zero is the bottom of the lowest target range for the federal funds rate that has been adopted by the Committee in the past. This approach to the construction of the federal funds rate fan chart would be merely a convention; it would not have any implications for possible future policy decisions regarding the use of negative interest rates to provide additional monetary policy accommodation if doing so were appropriate. In such situations, the Committee could also employ other tools, including forward guidance and asset purchases, to provide additional accommodation. While fi gures 4.A through 4.C provide information on the uncertainty around the economic projections, fi gure 1 provides information on the range of views across FOMC participants. A comparison of fi gure 1 with fi gures 4.A through 4.C shows that the dispersion of the projections across participants is much smaller than the average forecast errors over the past 20 years. emerging market economy The Board of Governors is pleased to submit its Monetary Policy Report to the Congress pursuant to section 2B of the Federal Reserve Act. Economic activity expanded at a moderate pace in the ﬁ rst half of 2010 after picking up in the second half of 2009. Some of the increase in real gross domestic product (GDP) in the ﬁ rst half of the year came from a continued turn in the inventory cycle. But more broadly, activity was bolstered by ongoing stimulus from monetary and ﬁ scal policies and generally supportive ﬁ nancial conditions. In the labor market, payrolls rose modestly and hours per worker increased; nevertheless, employment remained signiﬁ cantly below pre-recession levels and unemployment receded only slightly from its recent high. Meanwhile, consumer price inﬂ ation edged lower. Financial markets, although volatile, generally sup- ported economic growth in the ﬁ rst half of 2010. Bank credit, however, remained tight for many borrowers. Moreover, in the second quarter, uncertainty about the consequences of the ﬁ scal pressures in a number of European countries and about the durability of the global recovery led to large declines in equity prices around the world and produced strains in some short- term funding markets. According to the projections prepared in conjunction with the June meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), meeting participants (members of the Board of Governors and presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks) continue to expect that economic activity will expand at a moderate rate over the second half of 2010 and in 2011. However, participants’ current projections for economic growth are somewhat weaker than those prepared for the April FOMC meeting, and unemployment is expected to fall even more slowly than had been anticipated in April. Largely because of uncertainty about the implications of developments abroad, the participants also indicated somewhat greater concern about the downside risks to the economic outlook than they had at the time of the April meeting. After rising at an annual rate of about 4 percent, on average, in the second half of 2009, U.S. real GDP increased at a rate of 2¾ percent in the ﬁ rst quarter of 2010, and available information points to another mod- erate gain in the second quarter. Some of the impetus to the continued recovery in economic activity during the ﬁ rst half of the year came from inventory investment as businesses started to rebuild stocks after the massive liquidation in the latter part of 2008 and in 2009. In addition, ﬁ nal sales continued to ﬁ rm as personal con- sumption expenditures (PCE) rose and as business ﬁ xed investment was spurred by capital outlays that had been deferred during the downturn and by the need of many businesses to replace aging equipment. In the external sector, exports continued to rebound, providing impetus to domestic production, while imports were lifted by the recovery in domestic demand. On the less favor- able side, outlays for nonresidential construction have declined further this year, and despite a transitory boost from the homebuyer tax credit, housing construction has continued to be weighed down by weak demand, a large inventory of distressed or vacant houses, and tight credit conditions for builders and some potential buyers. In addition, state and local governments are still cutting spending in response to ongoing ﬁ scal pressures. The upturn in economic activity has been accom- panied by a modest improvement in labor market con- ditions. On average, private-sector employment rose 100,000 per month over the ﬁ rst half of 2010, with increases across a wide range of industries; businesses also raised their labor input by increasing hours per worker. Nonetheless, the pace of hiring to date has not been sufﬁ cient to bring about a signiﬁ cant reduction in the unemployment rate, which averaged 9¾ percent in the second quarter, only slightly below its recession high of 10 percent in the fourth quarter of 2009. Long- term unemployment has continued to worsen. On the inﬂ ation front, prices of energy and other commodities have declined in recent months, and underlying inﬂ ation has trended lower. The overall PCE price index rose at an annual rate of about ¾ per- cent over the ﬁ rst ﬁ ve months of 2010 (compared with an increase of about 2 percent over the 12 months of 2009), while price increases for consumer expendi- tures other than food and energy items—so-called core PCE—slowed from 1½ percent over the 12 months of 2009 to an annual rate of 1 percent over the ﬁ rst ﬁ ve months of 2010. FOMC participants expect that, with substantial resource slack continuing to restrain cost pressures and longer-term inﬂ ation expectations stable, inﬂ ation is likely to be subdued for some time. Domestic ﬁ nancial conditions generally showed improvement through the ﬁ rst quarter of 2010, but the ﬁ scal strains in Europe and the uncertainty they engendered subsequently weighed on ﬁ nancial markets. As a result, foreign and domestic equity price indexes fell appreciably in the second quarter, and pressures emerged in dollar funding markets; safe-haven ﬂ ows lowered sovereign yields in most of the major advanced economies and boosted the foreign exchange value of the dollar and the Japanese yen. Over the ﬁ rst half of the year, investors marked down expectations for the path of U.S. monetary policy in response to economic and ﬁ nancial developments and to the FOMC’s continued indication that it expected economic conditions to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period. These same factors, as well as safe-haven ﬂ ows, con- tributed to a decline in Treasury rates. Some private borrowing rates, including mortgage rates, also fell. Broad equity price indexes declined, on net, over the ﬁ rst half of 2010. Consumer credit outstanding continued to fall, though at a less rapid pace than in the second half of last year. Larger corporations with access to capital markets were able to issue bonds to meet their ﬁ nancing needs, although some smaller businesses reportedly had considerable difﬁ culties obtaining credit. Standards on many categories of bank loans remained tight, and loans on banks’ books continued to contract, although some- what less rapidly than around year-end. Commercial bank proﬁ tability stayed low by historical standards, as loan losses remained at very high levels. To support the economic expansion, the FOMC maintained a target range for the federal funds rate of 0 to ¼ percent throughout the ﬁ rst half of 2010. To complete the purchases previously announced, over the ﬁ rst three months of the year, the Federal Reserve also conducted large-scale purchases of agency mortgage- backed securities and agency debt in order to provide support to mortgage lending and housing markets and to improve overall conditions in private credit markets. In light of improved functioning of ﬁ nancial markets, the Federal Reserve closed by the end of June all of the special liquidity facilities that it had created to support markets in late 2007 and in 2008. However, in response to renewed dollar funding pressures abroad, in May the Federal Reserve reestablished swap lines with the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the Bank of Japan, the European Central Bank, and the Swiss National Bank. The Federal Reserve continued to develop its tools for draining reserves from the banking system to support the withdrawal of policy accommodation when such action becomes appropriate. The Committee is monitor- ing the economic outlook and ﬁ nancial developments, and it will employ its policy tools as necessary to pro- mote economic recovery and price stability. The economic projections prepared in conjunction with the June FOMC meeting are presented in Part 4 of this report. In general, FOMC participants anticipated that the economic recovery would proceed at a moder- ate pace. The expansion was expected to be restrained in part by household and business uncertainty, per- sistent weakness in real estate markets, only gradual improvement in labor market conditions, waning ﬁ scal stimulus, and slow easing of credit conditions in the banking sector. The projected increase in real GDP was only a little faster than the economy’s longer-run sus- tainable growth rate, and thus the unemployment rate was anticipated to fall only slowly over the next few years. Inﬂ ation was expected to remain subdued over this period. The participants’ projections for economic activity and inﬂ ation were both somewhat lower than those prepared in conjunction with the April FOMC meeting, mainly because of the incoming economic data and the anticipated effects of developments abroad on the U.S. economy. Participants generally judged that the degree of uncertainty surrounding the outlook for both economic activity and inﬂ ation was greater than historical norms. About one-half of the participants viewed the risks to the growth outlook as tilted to the downside, whereas in April, a large majority had seen the risks to growth as balanced; most continued to see balanced risks sur- rounding their inﬂ ation projections. Participants also reported their assessments of the rates to which macro- economic variables would be expected to converge over the longer run under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. The central tendencies of these longer-run projections were 2.5 to 2.8 percent for real GDP growth, 5.0 to 5.3 per- cent for the unemployment rate, and 1.7 to 2.0 percent for the inﬂ ation rate. Real gross domestic product (GDP) increased at an annual rate of 2¾ percent in the ﬁ rst quarter of 2010 after rising about 4 percent on average in the second half of 2009, and it apparently posted another moderate gain in the second quarter (ﬁ gure 1).1 Some of the impe- tus to the continued recovery in economic activity in the ﬁ rst half of the year came from inventory investment as businesses started to rebuild stocks after the mas- sive liquidation in the latter part of 2008 and in 2009. In addition, ﬁ nal sales continued to ﬁ rm as consumer spending moved up, businesses raised their outlays for equipment and software, and demand for U.S. exports strengthened. In contrast, the underlying pace of activ- ity in the housing sector has improved only margin- ally since hitting bottom in 2009. In the labor market, employment rose gradually over the ﬁ rst half of 2010 and average weekly hours worked increased, but the unemployment rate fell just slightly. Headline consumer price inﬂ ation has been low this year, as energy prices have dropped and core inﬂ ation has slowed (ﬁ gure 2). 2. Change in the chain-type price index for personal consumption expenditures, 2004–10 Excluding food and energy NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through May 2010; changes are 1. The oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico is having serious conse- quences for the environment and for many individuals and ﬁ rms in the affected localities. However, the disaster does not appear to have registered sizable effects on the national economy to date. 1. Change in real gross domestic product, 2004–10 The gradual healing of the ﬁ nancial system that began in the spring of 2009 continued through the early spring of 2010. In the ﬁ rst quarter, ﬁ nancial market conditions generally became more supportive of eco- nomic activity, with yields and spreads on corporate bonds declining, broad equity price indexes rising, and measures of stress in many short-term funding markets falling to near their pre-crisis levels. In late April and early May, however, concerns about the effects of ﬁ s- cal pressures in a number of European countries led to increases in credit spreads on many U.S. corporate bonds, declines in broad equity price indexes, and a renewal of strains in some short-term funding markets. Even so, over the ﬁ rst half of the year, mortgage rates and yields on U.S. corporate securities remained at low levels. NOTE: Here and in subsequent figures, except as noted, change for a given period is measured to its final quarter from the final quarter of the preceding period. Personal consumption expenditures (PCE) appear to have posted a moderate advance in the ﬁ rst half of 2010 after turning up in the second half of 2009 (ﬁ gure 3). 3. Real personal consumption expenditures, 2004–10 NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through May 2010. SOURCE: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis. The improvement in employment and hours worked, and the associated pickup in real household incomes, provided important impetus to spending. The rise in household net worth in 2009 and the ﬁ rst quarter of 2010 also likely helped buoy spending, although the drop in stock prices during the spring unwound some of the earlier increase in wealth and—all else being equal—may restrain the rise in real PCE in the second half of the year. The personal saving rate has ﬂ uctuated in a fairly narrow range since the middle of 2009, and it stood at 4 percent in May (ﬁ gure 4). The gains in consumer spending during the ﬁ rst half of 2010 were widespread. Sales of new light motor vehicles (cars, sport utility vehicles, and pickup trucks) rose from an annual rate of 10¾ million units in the fourth quarter of 2009 to 11¼ million units in the sec- ond quarter, supported in part by favorable ﬁ nancing 4. Personal saving rate, 1990–2010 NOTE: The data are quarterly and extend through 2010:Q2; the reading for 2010:Q2 is the average for April and May. 5. Change in real disposable personal income and in real wage and salary disbursements, 2004–10 5. Change in real disposable personal income and in real wage and salary disbursements, 2004–10 NOTE: Through 2009, change is from December to December; for 2010, change is from December to May. conditions for auto buyers. Spending for other goods started the year on a strong note—perhaps boosted by pent-up demand for purchases that had been deferred during the recession—though it appears to have cooled somewhat during the spring. Real outlays for services increased modestly after having only edged up in 2009. Aggregate real disposable personal income (DPI)— personal income less personal current taxes, adjusted to remove price changes—rose at an annual rate of more than 3½ percent over the ﬁ rst ﬁ ve months of the year after barely increasing in 2009 (ﬁ gure 5). Real wage and salary income, which had fallen appreciably in 2009, has regained some lost ground this year, as employment and hours of work have turned up and as real hourly wages have been bolstered by the very low rate of PCE price inﬂ ation. One measure of real wages—average hourly earnings of all employees, adjusted for the rise in PCE prices—increased at an annual rate of roughly 1 percent over the ﬁ rst ﬁ ve months of 2010 after having been about ﬂ at over the 12 months of 2009. With equity values up and house prices holding steady, the ratio of household net worth to DPI edged higher in the ﬁ rst quarter of 2010 after increasing appre- ciably over the last three quarters of 2009. Nonetheless, the wealth-to-income ratio at that time was well below the highs of 2006 and 2007 (ﬁ gure 6). Moreover, equity prices have fallen substantially since the end of the ﬁ rst quarter, a development that has not only depressed net worth but has also adversely affected consumer senti- ment in recent months (ﬁ gure 7). Households continued to reduce their debt in the ﬁ rst half of 2010. Total household debt contracted at an annual rate of about 2½ percent in the ﬁ rst quarter 6. Wealth-to-income ratio, 1990–2010 NOTE: The data are quarterly and extend through 2010:Q1. The wealth- to-income ratio is the ratio of household net worth to disposable personal income. of 2010, with both mortgage debt and consumer credit posting declines. The fall in consumer credit was less rapid than it had been in the second half of 2009, a development that is consistent with banks’ increased willingness to extend consumer installment loans that has been reported in recent results of the Senior Loan Ofﬁ cer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS).2 However, SLOOS respondents also contin- ued to report weak demand for such loans. Reﬂ ecting 2. The SLOOS is available on the Federal Reserve Board’s website 7. Consumer sentiment indexes, 2000–10 NOTE: The Conference Board data are monthly and extend through June 2010; the series is indexed to equal 100 in 1985. The Thomson Reuters/University of Michigan data are monthly and extend through a preliminary estimate for July 2010; the series is indexed to equal 100 in 1966. SOURCE: The Conference Board and Thomson Reuters/University of 8. Household debt service, 1980–2010 NOTE: The data are quarterly and extend through 2010:Q1. Debt service payments consist of estimated required payments on outstanding mortgage and consumer debt. the contraction in household debt, debt service pay- ments—the required principal and interest on existing mortgages and consumer debt—fell as a fraction of disposable income (ﬁ gure 8). Changes in interest rates on consumer loans were mixed during the ﬁ rst half of 2010. Interest rates on new auto loans edged down on balance, and spreads on these loans relative to Treasury securities of compa- rable maturity remained near their average levels over the past decade. Interest rates on credit card loans rose through the ﬁ rst half of 2010; part of the increase early in the year may be attributable to adjustments made by banks prior to the imposition of new rules in February under the Credit Card Accountability Responsibility and Disclosure (Credit CARD) Act.3 Although delinquency rates on auto loans at captive ﬁ nance companies and on credit card loans at commer- cial banks edged down in the ﬁ rst quarter of 2010, they remained at elevated levels. Charge-off rates for credit card loans at commercial banks were also high. The Federal Reserve’s Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) continued to support the issu- ance of consumer asset-backed securities (ABS) until its closure for such securities on March 31 (ﬁ gure 9).4 Subsequently, issuance of consumer ABS was solid during the second quarter. Yields on such securities fell on balance during the ﬁ rst quarter, and spreads on high-quality credit card and auto loan ABS relative to 3. The Credit CARD Act includes some provisions that place restrictions on issuers’ ability to impose certain fees and to engage in risk-based pricing. 4. The TALF extended loans to ﬁ nance investment in ABS. The TALF remained open until June 30 for loans backed by newly issued commercial mortgage-backed securities. 9. Gross issuance of selected asset-backed securities, 2007–10 NOTE: Consumer asset-backed securities (ABS) are securities backed by credit card loans, nonrevolving consumer loans, and auto loans. Data for consumer ABS show gross issuance facilitated by the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) and such issuance outside the TALF. SOURCE: Bloomberg and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. comparable-maturity Treasury securities declined to levels last seen in 2007. Home sales and construction were boosted in the spring by the homebuyer tax credit. But looking through this temporary improvement, underlying housing activ- ity appears to have remained weak this year despite a historically low level of mortgage interest rates. In an environment of soft demand, a large inventory of 10. Private housing starts, 2000–10 NOTE: The data are quarterly and extend through 2010:Q2. SOURCE: Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. foreclosed or distressed properties on the market, and limits on the availability of ﬁ nancing for builders and some potential buyers, homebuilding has stayed at a slow pace. In the single-family sector, new units were started at an average annual rate of about 510,000 units between January and June—just 150,000 units above the quarterly low reached in the ﬁ rst quarter of 2009 (ﬁ gure 10). Activity in the multifamily sector has con- tinued to be held down by elevated vacancy rates and tight credit conditions; starts averaged just 100,000 units at an annual rate during the ﬁ rst half of 2010, essentially the same as in the second half of 2009 and well below the norm of 350,000 units per year that had prevailed over the decade prior to the ﬁ nancial crisis. Home sales surged in the spring, but these increases likely were driven by purchases that were pulled for- ward to qualify for the homebuyer tax credit.5 Sales of existing single-family houses jumped to an annual rate of 5 million units on average in April and May, ½ mil- lion units above their ﬁ rst-quarter pace. However, new home sales agreements—which also appear to have gotten a lift in April from the looming expiration of the 5. In order to receive the homebuyer tax credit, a purchaser had to sign a sales agreement by the end of April. As the law was written, the purchaser had to close on the property by June 30, but the closing deadline was recently changed to September 30. Sales of existing homes are measured at closing, while sales of new homes are mea- sured at the time the contract is signed. 11. Change in prices of existing single-family houses, 1995–2010 NOTE: The data are monthly and extend into 2010:Q2; changes are from one year earlier. The LP price index includes purchase transactions only. The FHFA index (formerly calculated by the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight) also transactions only. The S&P/Case-Shiller index reflects all arm’s-length sales transactions in the metropolitan areas of Boston, Chicago, Denver, Las Vegas, Los Angeles, Miami, New York, San Diego, San Francisco, and Washington, D.C. includes purchase tax credit—plummeted in May, and other indicators of housing demand generally remain lackluster. Meanwhile, house prices, as measured by a num- ber of national indexes, appear to be reaching bottom (ﬁ gure 11). For example, the LoanPerformance repeat- sales price index, which had dropped 30 percent from its peak in 2006 to its trough in 2009, has essentially moved sideways this year. This apparent end to the steep drop in house prices should begin to draw into the market potential buyers who had been reluctant to pur- chase homes when prices were perceived to be at risk of signiﬁ cant further declines. Delinquency rates on most categories of mortgages showed tentative signs of leveling off over the ﬁ rst several months of 2010 but remain well above levels posted a year earlier (ﬁ gure 12). As of May, serious delinquency rates on prime and near-prime loans had edged down to about 15 percent for variable-rate loans and to about 5 percent for ﬁ xed-rate loans.6 For subprime loans, as of April (the latest data available), delinquency rates moved down to about 40 percent for variable-rate loans and slightly less than 20 percent for ﬁ xed-rate loans. About 650,000 homes entered the foreclosure process in the ﬁ rst quarter of 2010, only slightly below the elevated pace seen in 2009. 6. A mortgage is deﬁ ned as seriously delinquent if the borrower is 90 days or more behind in payments or the property is in foreclosure. 12. Mortgage delinquency rates, 2000–10 Fixed rate Fixed rate NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through April 2010 for subprime and May 2010 for prime and near prime. Delinquency rate is the percent of loans 90 days or more past due or in foreclosure. 13. Mortgage interest rates, 1995–2010 Fixed rate NOTE: The data, which are weekly and extend through July 14, 2010, are On balance, interest rates on ﬁ xed-rate mortgages decreased over the ﬁ rst half of 2010, a move that partly reﬂ ected the decline in Treasury yields over that period (ﬁ gure 13). Some ﬁ nancial market participants had reportedly expressed concerns that rates would rise following the March 31 end of large-scale purchases of agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) by the Federal Reserve. However, mortgage rates changed little around that date, and spreads have remained rela- tively narrow. Despite the further fall in mortgage rates, the avail- ability of mortgage ﬁ nancing continued to be con- strained. The April 2010 SLOOS indicated that while banks had generally ceased tightening lending standards on all types of mortgages, they had not yet begun to ease those standards from the very stringent levels that had been imposed over the past few years. Perhaps reﬂ ecting the stringency of lending standards and low levels of home equity for many homeowners, over the ﬁ rst quarter of 2010 indicators of reﬁ nancing activity showed only a modest pickup from the subdued levels posted in the second half of 2009. Reﬁ nancing appeared to pick up late in the second quarter. Overall, residential mortgage debt contracted at a somewhat faster pace in the ﬁ rst half of 2010 than it had in the second half of the previous year. Net issuance of MBS guaranteed by Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, or Ginnie Mae fell during the ﬁ rst half of 2010 after having expanded briskly in the second half of 2009; the fall was largely attributable to weak demand for mortgages and to sizable prepayments on outstanding MBS stemming from repurchases by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac of large numbers of delinquent mortgages out of the pools of mortgages backing agency MBS. The securitization market for mortgage loans not guaranteed by a housing-related government-sponsored enterprise (GSE) or the Federal Housing Administration remained essentially closed. Real business ﬁ xed investment turned up in the fourth quarter of 2009 after more than a year of steep declines, and it appears to have risen further in the ﬁ rst half of 2010. The pickup occurred entirely in spending for equipment and software (E&S), which rebounded in response to the improvement in sales, production, and proﬁ ts. Moreover, businesses have ample internal funds at their disposal. And although bank lending remains constrained—especially for small businesses—ﬁ rms with access to capital markets have generally been able to ﬁ nance E&S projects with the proceeds of bond issu- ance at favorable terms. Real outlays for E&S rose at an annual rate of 11½ percent in the ﬁ rst quarter after an even larger increase in the fourth quarter (ﬁ gure 14). As it had in the fourth quarter, business spending on motor vehicles rose briskly, and outlays on information technology (IT) capital—computers, software, and communica- tions equipment—continued to be spurred by the need to replace older, less-efﬁ cient equipment and by the expansion of the infrastructure for wireless commu- nications networks. In addition, investment in equip- ment other than transportation and IT jumped in the ﬁ rst quarter after falling more than 15 percent in 2009. More recently, orders and shipments for a wide range of equipment rose appreciably this spring, pointing to another sizable increase in real E&S outlays in the sec- ond quarter. Investment in nonresidential structures continued to decline in the ﬁ rst half of 2010 against a backdrop of high vacancy rates, low property prices, and difﬁ cult ﬁ nancing conditions. Real outlays on structures outside of the drilling and mining sector fell at an annual rate of 27½ percent in the ﬁ rst quarter after falling 18 per- cent in 2009, and the incoming data point to continued weakness in the second quarter. Construction of manu- facturing facilities appears to have ﬁ rmed somewhat in recent months and outlays in the power category— though volatile from quarter to quarter—have retained considerable vigor, but spending on ofﬁ ce and commer- cial structures remained on a steep downtrend through May. Meanwhile, real spending on drilling and mining 14. Change in real business fixed investment, 2004–10 High-tech equipment and software Other equipment excluding transportation NOTE: High-tech equipment consists of computers and peripheral equip- structures has posted solid increases in recent quarters in response to the rebound in oil and natural gas prices in the second half of last year; nonetheless, this pickup in activity follows a massive decline in the ﬁ rst half of 2009, and spending in this sector is still well below late-2008 levels. The pace of inventory liquidation slowed dramati- cally in late 2009 as ﬁ rms acted to bring production into closer alignment with sales, and businesses began restocking in the ﬁ rst quarter of 2010 (ﬁ gure 15). That swing in inventory investment added nearly 2 percent- age points to the rise in real GDP in the ﬁ rst quarter. Nonetheless, ﬁ rms appear to be keeping a tight rein on stocks. For example, in the motor vehicle sector, manufacturers held second-quarter production of light vehicles to a pace that pushed days’ supply below his- torical norms—even after adjusting for the reduction 15. Change in real business inventories, 2004–10 Billions of chained (2005) dollars, annual rate over the past couple of years in the number of models, trim lines, and dealerships. Outside of motor vehicles, real inventories rose modestly in the ﬁ rst quarter, and the limited available information suggests that stock- building remained at about this pace in the spring. The inventory-to-sales ratios for most industries covered by the Census Bureau’s book-value data have moved back into a more comfortable range after rising sharply in 2009. 16. Delinquency rates on commercial real estate loans, 1991–2010 16. Delinquency rates on commercial real estate loans, 1991–2010 NOTE: The data for commercial banks and life insurance companies are quarterly and extend through 2010:Q1. The data for commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) are monthly and extend through June 2010. The delinquency rates for commercial banks and CMBS are the percent of loans 30 days or more past due or not accruing interest. The delinquency rate for life insurance companies is the percent of loans 60 days or more past due or not accruing interest. 2010 after having fallen during the second half of 2009 (ﬁ gure 17). Net issuance of corporate bonds increased through April as businesses took advantage of relatively low interest rates to issue longer-term debt, and net issuance of commercial paper turned positive. However, 17. Selected components of net financing for nonfinancial businesses, 2005–10 NOTE: The data for the components except bonds are seasonally adjusted. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Board, flow of funds data. bond issuance fell in May as a result of the market volatility and pullback from risk that accompanied European ﬁ nancial developments. C&I loans declined through May before ﬂ attening out in June, while CRE lending contracted steeply throughout the ﬁ rst half of the year. The decline in commercial bank lending to busi- nesses is partly attributable to weak demand for such loans, as suggested by answers to the April 2010 SLOOS. In addition, respondents to the April survey reported that banks increased premiums charged on riskier C&I loans over the previous three months; and although a small net fraction of banks reported easing standards on those loans, the severe bout of tighten- ing reported over the past several years has yet to be materially unwound (ﬁ gure 18). Moreover, a moderate net fraction of banks tightened standards on CRE loans over the ﬁ rst quarter of 2010. Small businesses face relatively tight credit condi- tions given their lack of direct access to capital mar- kets. Results from the May 2010 Survey of Terms of Business Lending indicated that the spread between the average interest rate on loans with commitment sizes of less than $1 million—loans that were likely made to smaller businesses—and swap rates of com- parable maturity edged down in the second quarter but remained quite elevated. In surveys conducted by the National Federation of Independent Business, the net 18. Net percentage of domestic banks tightening standards and increasing premiums charged on riskier loans to large and medium-sized business borrowers, 1998–2010 NOTE: The data are drawn from a survey generally conducted four times per year; the last observation is from the April 2010 survey, which covers 2010:Q1. Net percentage is the percentage of banks reporting a tightening of standards or an increase in premiums less the percentage reporting an easing or a decrease. The definition for firm size suggested for, and generally used by, survey respondents is that large and medium-sized firms have annual sales of $50 million or more. 19. Net percentage of small businesses that reported more difficulty in obtaining credit, 1990–2010 NOTE: The data are drawn from a survey conducted monthly and are seasonally adjusted; the last observation is from the July 2010 survey, which covers June 2010. The data reflect the proportion of borrowers who sought credit in the past three months that reported more difficulty in obtaining credit less the proportion that reported more ease in obtaining credit. fraction of small businesses reporting that credit had become more difﬁ cult to obtain over the preceding three months remained at historically high levels during the ﬁ rst half of 2010 (ﬁ gure 19). However, the fraction of businesses that cited credit availability as the most important problem that they faced remained small. New issuance in the commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) market, which had resumed in November 2009 with a securitization supported by the Federal Reserve’s TALF program, continued at a very low level in the ﬁ rst half of 2010. The expiration of the legacy CMBS portion of the TALF program on March 31 had little apparent effect on issuance, and spreads on AAA-rated CMBS relative to comparable- maturity Treasury securities generally fell over the ﬁ rst half of the year, though they remained elevated in com- parison with their pre-crisis levels. In the equity market, combined issuance from sea- soned and initial offerings by nonﬁ nancial ﬁ rms slowed a bit in the ﬁ rst quarter of 2010 (ﬁ gure 20). Meanwhile, equity retirements due to cash-ﬁ nanced merger and acquisition deals and share repurchases increased some- what, leaving net equity issuance modestly negative. The deﬁ cit in the federal uniﬁ ed budget appears to be stabilizing—albeit at a very high level—after its sharp 20. Components of net equity issuance, 2005–10 NOTE: Net equity issuance is the difference between equity issued by domestic companies in public or private markets and equity retired through share repurchases, domestic cash-financed mergers, or foreign takeovers of U.S. firms. Equity issuance includes funds invested by private equity partnerships and stock option proceeds. The data for 2010:Q1 are estimated. SOURCE: Thomson Financial, Investment Benchmark Report; Money Tree Report by PricewaterhouseCoopers, National Venture Capital Association, and Venture Economics. run-up in ﬁ scal year 2009. Indeed, over the ﬁ rst nine months of ﬁ scal 2010, the deﬁ cit was a little smaller than that recorded a year earlier, and the ongoing recov- ery in economic activity should help shore up revenues over the remainder of the ﬁ scal year. Nonetheless, the deﬁ cit is still on track to exceed 9 percent of nominal GDP for ﬁ scal 2010 as a whole, only a shade below the 10 percent ﬁ gure for 2009 and substantially above the average value of 2 percent of GDP for ﬁ scal years 2005 to 2007, prior to the onset of the recession and ﬁ nancial crisis. The budget costs of ﬁ nancial stabiliza- tion programs, which added signiﬁ cantly to the deﬁ cit in ﬁ scal 2009, have helped reduce the deﬁ cit this year as the sum of (1) repayments and downward revisions of expected losses in the Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP) and (2) banks’ required prepayments to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation of three years of deposit insurance premiums has exceeded the additional payments by the Treasury to the housing-related GSEs. However, the deﬁ cit has continued to be boosted by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA) and other policy actions and by the still-low level of eco- nomic activity, which is damping revenues and pushing up cyclically sensitive outlays. After falling 16½ percent in ﬁ scal 2009, federal receipts edged up ½ percent in the ﬁ rst nine months of ﬁ scal 2010 compared with the same period in ﬁ s- cal 2009; they currently stand around 14½ percent of GDP—the lowest percentage in 60 years (ﬁ gure 21). Taken together, individual income and payroll taxes were 4½ percent lower than a year earlier, in part because of the weakness in wage and salary income 21. Federal receipts and expenditures, 1990–2010 NOTE: Through 2009, receipts and expenditures are for fiscal years (October through September); gross domestic product (GDP) is for the four quarters ending in Q3. For 2010, receipts and expenditures are for the 12 months ending in June, and GDP is the average of 2009:Q4 and 2010:Q1. Receipts and expenditures are on a unified-budget basis. last fall and the low level of net ﬁ nal payments on 2009 tax liabilities this spring; in addition, the revenue pro- visions in ARRA had a larger negative effect on indi- vidual collections during the ﬁ rst nine months of ﬁ scal 2010 than they did during the comparable period of ﬁ s- cal 2009. In contrast, corporate receipts turned back up after a dramatic drop in 2008 and 2009. Outlays through June were nearly 3 percent lower than those during the ﬁ rst nine months of ﬁ scal 2009, but the decrease was more than accounted for by a marked downswing in total net outlays for the TARP, the GSE conservatorship, and federal deposit insurance. Excluding these ﬁ nancial transactions, outlays rose 10 percent compared with a year earlier, mainly because of the effects of the weak labor market on income- support programs (such as unemployment insurance and food stamps) and because of the spending associ- ated with ARRA and other stimulus-related policies. In addition, net interest payments have been pushed up by the higher levels of outstanding debt. As measured in the national income and product accounts (NIPA), real federal expenditures on consump- tion and gross investment—the part of federal spending that is a direct component of GDP—rose at an annual rate of only 1 percent in the ﬁ rst quarter (ﬁ gure 22). Defense spending—which tends to be erratic from quar- ter to quarter—posted just a small rise, and nondefense purchases only inched up after a large stimulus-related increase in the second half of 2009. Real federal pur- chases likely increased somewhat faster in the second quarter, boosted by the surge in hiring for the decennial census. 22. Change in real government expenditures on consumption and investment, 2004–10 Federal debt held by the public is projected to reach more than 65 percent of nominal GDP by the end of this year, the highest ratio seen in more than 50 years (ﬁ g ure 23). Despite the increase in ﬁ nancing needs, Treasury auctions have been mostly well received so far this year, and bid-to-cover ratios at those auctions were generally strong. Demand for Treasury securities was likely boosted by a desire for relatively safe and liq- uid assets in light of concerns about the consequences of ﬁ scal strains in a number of European countries. Indicators of foreign demand for U.S. Treasury debt remained solid. 23. Federal government debt held by the public, 1960–2010 NOTE: The data for debt are as of year-end; the observation for 2010 is an estimate. The corresponding values for gross domestic product (GDP) are for Q4 at an annual rate. Excludes securities held as investments of federal government accounts. State and local governments, facing difﬁ cult situations, have continued to reduce expenditures on consumption and gross investment. Over the ﬁ rst six months of 2010, these governments cut roughly 100,000 jobs after a similar reduction in the second half of 2009 and kept a tight rein on operating expenditures to satisfy balanced budget requirements. Real construction expenditures dropped in the fourth quarter of 2009 and remained low in the ﬁ rst half of 2010 despite the availability of federal stimulus funds and supportive conditions in municipal bond markets. Capital expenditures are not typically subject to balanced budget requirements; however, debt service payments on the bonds used to ﬁ nance capital projects are generally made out of oper- ating budgets (and thus must compete with Medicaid and other high-priority programs for scarce funding), which may be deterring governments from undertaking new infrastructure projects. As is the case at the federal level, the hemorrhag- ing of revenues that took a heavy toll on state and local budgets in 2008 and 2009 seems to be easing, and governments will continue to receive signiﬁ cant amounts of federal stimulus aid through the end of the year. Still, total state tax collections are well below their pre-recession levels, and available balances in reserve funds are low. At the local level, property taxes held up well through the ﬁ rst quarter, likely in part because lower real estate assessments have been offset by hikes in statutory tax rates in some areas; however, further increases in tax rates may encounter resistance, and many local governments are facing steep cutbacks in state aid. Moreover, many state and local governments will need to set aside money in coming years to rebuild their employee pension funds after the ﬁ nancial losses experienced over the past couple of years and to fund their ongoing obligations to provide health care to their retired employees. Despite concerns over the ﬁ scal positions and the ﬁ nan- cial health of state and local governments, the munici- pal bond market remained receptive to issuers over the ﬁ rst half of the year. Issuance of long-term municipal bonds was solid and continued to be supported by the Build America Bond program, which was authorized under ARRA.7 Short-term municipal bond issuance was 7. The Build America Bond program allows state and local gov- ernments to issue taxable bonds for capital projects and receive a subsidy payment from the Treasury for 35 percent of interest costs. Interest rates on long-term municipal bonds on bal- ance fell a bit less than those on comparable-maturity Treasury securities, leaving the ratio of their yields slightly elevated by historical standards. Downgrades of state and local government debt by credit agencies con- tinued to exceed upgrades. Following a substantial rebound in the second half of 2009, both real exports and imports continued to increase at a robust pace in the ﬁ rst quarter of this year (ﬁ gure 24). While the cyclical recovery in real exports of goods and services remained strong, growth slowed from its 20 percent annual rate in the second half of last year to an 11 percent rate in the ﬁ rst quarter of 2010. Exports in almost all major categories expanded, with sales of industrial supplies, high-tech equipment, and services registering large increases. Exports of aircraft were the exception, as they slumped after a siz- able increase in the fourth quarter of last year. Export demand from Mexico, Japan, Canada, and emerging Asia excluding China was especially vigorous, while exports to the European Union and China were ﬂ at. Data for April and May suggest that exports continued to rise at a solid pace in the second quarter. Real imports of goods and services rose at an annual rate of 15 percent in the ﬁ rst quarter, about the same pace as in the fourth quarter of last year. All major cat- egories of imports rose, especially industrial supplies (including petroleum), capital goods, and consumer 24. Change in real imports and exports of goods and services, 2004–10 goods. Data for April and May suggest that imports continued to climb robustly in the second quarter, with automotive products and computers registering notable increases. In the ﬁ rst quarter of 2010, the U.S. current account deﬁ cit reached an annual rate of $436 billion, approxi- mately 3 percent of GDP (ﬁ gure 25). The current account deﬁ cit has widened a little over the past few quarters, as imports have outpaced exports. The spot price of a barrel of West Texas Intermediate crude oil started the year at about $80 and had risen to $86 by early May, continuing the rebound from last year’s recession-induced lows as the global economic recovery progressed (ﬁ gure 26). The price has since moved back down to about $77 as a result of increased concerns about the sustainability of the global recovery. The prices of longer-term futures contracts for crude oil (that is, those expiring in December 2018) also fell, from $100 per barrel in early May to $92 per barrel in mid-July. The upward-sloping futures curve is consis- tent with the view that, despite mounting worries about the near-term growth outlook, oil prices will rise again as global demand strengthens over the medium term. Nonfuel commodity prices have been mixed in 2010. Food prices have been roughly ﬂ at so far this year. Prices for metals and agricultural raw materials have been volatile; prices for these commodities rose into early April, as the global recovery continued, but since then have fallen sharply, reﬂ ecting the stronger value of the dollar and growing uncertainty about the outlook for the global economy. Market commentary also suggests that prices for metals have fallen because of concerns that policy tightening in China may slow its demand for those commodities. 25. U.S. trade and current account balances, 2002–10 NOTE: The data are quarterly and extend through 2010:Q1. SOURCE: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis. 26. Prices of oil and nonfuel commodities, 2005–10 NOTE: The data are monthly. The oil price is the spot price of West Texas Intermediate crude oil, and the last observation is the average for July 1–14, 2010. The price of nonfuel commodities index of 45 is an primary-commodity prices and extends through May 2010. Prices of imported goods rose briskly in early 2010, boosted by the depreciation of the dollar in foreign exchange markets and the rise in commodity prices in late 2009. In the second quarter of this year, as com- modity prices declined and the dollar appreciated, import price inﬂ ation slowed. Prices for imports of ﬁ nished goods have, on average, been little changed in 2010. Total net national saving—that is, the saving of house- holds, businesses, and governments excluding deprecia- tion charges—remains very low by historical standards. After having reached 3¾ percent of nominal GDP in 2006, net national saving dropped steadily over the subsequent three years; since the start of 2009, it has averaged negative 2½ percent of nominal GDP (ﬁ gure 27). The widening of the federal budget deﬁ cit over the course of the recession has more than accounted for the downswing in net saving since 2006, and the large federal deﬁ cit will likely cause national saving to remain low in the near term. Because the demand for funds for capital investment is currently relatively meager, the low rate of national saving is not being translated into higher real interest rates or increased foreign borrowing. However, if not boosted over the longer term, persistent low levels of national saving will likely be associated with upward pressure on interest rates, low rates of capital formation, and heavy borrowing from abroad, which would limit the rise in the standard of living of U.S. residents over time 27. Net saving, 1990–2010 NOTE: The data are quarterly and extend through 2010:Q1. Nonfederal saving is the sum of personal and net business saving and the net saving of state and local governments. GDP is gross domestic product. and hamper the ability of the nation to meet the retire- ment needs of an aging population. The labor market bottomed out around the turn of the year and is now adding jobs across a range of indus- tries, albeit at a modest pace. After falling steeply through most of 2009, nonfarm private payroll employ- ment rose 100,000 per month, on average, over the ﬁ rst half of the year (ﬁ gure 28).8 Firms have also raised their labor input by increasing hours per worker. Indeed, the average workweek of employees, which had dropped sharply over the course of the recession, ticked up toward the end of 2009 and rose considerably over the ﬁ rst half of 2010; by June, it had recouped nearly one-half of its earlier decrease. The job gains to date have only been sufﬁ cient to about match the rise in the number of jobseekers, and the unemployment rate in the second quarter, at 9¾ percent on average, was only slightly below the recession high of 10 percent reached in the fourth quarter of last year (ﬁ gures 29 and 30). 8. Total employment—private plus government—has exhibited unusually sharp swings of late, mainly because of the hiring of tem- porary workers for the decennial census. Census hiring started in earnest in March and peaked at about 400,000 in May. In June, the winding down of the census subtracted 225,000 workers from govern- ment payrolls. Apart from the census, government employment fell slightly on net over the ﬁ rst half of the year because of cutbacks at state and local governments. 28. Net change in private payroll employment, 2004–10 NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through June 2010. SOURCE: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. Other indicators are also consistent with a gradual improvement in labor market conditions this year. Measures of hiring and job openings have moved up from the low levels of 2009, as have readings from pri- vate surveys of hiring plans. In addition, layoffs have come down, although the relatively ﬂ at proﬁ le of initial claims for unemployment insurance in recent months suggests that the pace of improvement may have slowed lately. The economy remains far from full employment. The job gains this year have reversed only a small por- tion of the nearly 8½ million jobs lost during 2008 and 2009, and the unemployment rate is still at its highest level since the early 1980s. Moreover, long-term unemployment has continued to worsen—in June, 6.8 million persons, 600,000 more than at the end of 29. Civilian unemployment rate, 1980–2010 NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through June 2010. SOURCE: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. 30. Labor force participation rate, 1980–2010 NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through June 2010. SOURCE: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2009 and nearly one-half of the total unemployed, had been out of work for six months or more. Also, the number of workers who are working part time for economic reasons—another indicator of the underuti- lization of labor—has fallen only slightly this year and stands at nearly twice its pre-recession level. Labor productivity has continued to rise briskly, although not as rapidly as in 2009. According to the latest published data, output per hour in the nonfarm business sector rose at an annual rate of 2¾ percent in the ﬁ rst quarter after a 5½ percent advance in 2009 (ﬁ gure 31). The continuing strong productivity gains reﬂ ect ongoing efforts by ﬁ rms to improve the efﬁ - ciency of their operations and their reluctance to increase their labor input in an uncertain economic environment. Increases in hourly compensation continue to be restrained by the wide margin of slack in the labor market. The 12-month change in the employment cost index for private industry workers, which measures both wages and the cost to employers of providing beneﬁ ts, has been 2 percent or less since the start of 2009 after several years of increases in the neighbor- hood of 3 percent (ﬁ gure 32). Compensation per hour in the nonfarm business sector—a measure derived from the labor compensation data in the NIPA—has also slowed noticeably over the past couple of years; though erratic from quarter to quarter, this measure rose just 1½ percent over the year ending in the ﬁ rst quarter of 2010. Similarly, average hourly earnings—the timeli- est measure of wage developments—rose 1¾ percent 31. Change in output per hour, 1948–2010 NOTE: Nonfarm business sector. Change for each multiyear period is measured to the fourth quarter of the final year of the period from the fourth quarter of the year immediately preceding the period. in nominal terms over the 12 months ending in June; as suggested earlier, this measure appears to have posted a modest increase in real terms over this period as a con- sequence of the low rate of consumer price inﬂ ation of late. Reﬂ ecting the small rise in hourly compensation and the sizable advance in labor productivity, unit labor costs in the nonfarm business sector declined 4¼ percent over the year ending in the ﬁ rst quarter of 2010. Over the preceding year, unit labor costs had been ﬂ at. 32. Measures of change in hourly compensation, 2000–10 NOTE: The data are quarterly and extend through 2010:Q1. For nonfarm business compensation, change is over four quarters; for the employment cost index (ECI), change is over the 12 months ending in the last month of each quarter. The nonfarm business sector excludes farms, government, nonprofit institutions, and households. The sector covered by the ECI used here is the nonfarm business sector plus nonprofit institutions. Inﬂ ation diminished further in the ﬁ rst half of 2010. After rising 2 percent over the 12 months of 2009, the overall PCE chain-type price index increased at an annual rate of just ¾ percent between December 2009 and May 2010 as energy prices fell (ﬁ gure 33). The core PCE price index—which excludes the prices of energy items as well as those of food and beverages—rose at an annual rate of 1 percent over the ﬁ rst 5 months of the year, compared with a rate of 1½ percent over the 12 months of 2009. This moderation was also evident in the appreciable slowing of inﬂ ation measures such as trimmed means and medians, which exclude the most extreme price movements in each period. Longer-run inﬂ ation expectations have been stable this year, with most survey-based measures remaining within the nar- row ranges that have prevailed for the past few years. Consumer energy prices continued to increase in January after a steep rise in the second half of 2009, but they turned down in February and fell further through midyear. Gasoline prices registered sizable decreases—especially in May and June—reﬂ ecting the ample inventories and drop in the price of crude oil in May. Although spot prices for natural gas were pushed up during the winter by unusually cold weather in some major consuming regions, they too fell on net over the spring and early summer as inventories remained high. Retail prices for electricity have ﬂ uctuated this year in response to movements in the cost of fossil fuel inputs, but on net they have changed little since the end of 2009. 33. Change in the chain-type price index for personal consumption expenditures, 2004–10 33. Change in the chain-type price index for personal consumption expenditures, 2004–10 NOTE: Through 2009, change is from December to December; for 2010, change is from December to May. Consumer food prices rose at an annual rate of 1¾ percent between December 2009 and May 2010, boosted by higher prices for meats and for fruits and vegetables. Farm prices drifted down through the end of June as reports on crop production pointed to an abun- dant harvest, though they have moved up a bit in recent weeks. The slowdown in core PCE inﬂ ation has been cen- tered in prices of core goods, which declined at an annual rate of 1½ percent, on net, over the ﬁ rst ﬁ ve months of 2010 after rising 1½ percent in 2009. The deceleration in core goods prices was widespread and occurred despite sizable increases in prices for some industrial commodities and materials. Meanwhile, prices of services other than energy posted only a small increase over this period, as the softness in the housing market continued to put downward pressure on housing costs and as prices of other services were restrained by the wide margin of economic slack. Survey measures of inﬂ ation expectations have been relatively stable this year. In the preliminary Thomson Reuters/University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers for July, median year-ahead inﬂ ation expectations stood at 2.9 percent. Median 5- to 10-year inﬂ ation expectations were also at 2.9 percent in early July—a reading that is in line with the average value for 2009 and the ﬁ rst half of 2010. In the Survey of Professional Forecasters, conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, expectations for the increase in the consumer price index over the next 10 years remained around 2½ percent in the second quarter, a level that has been essentially unchanged for many years. The recovery of the ﬁ nancial system that began in the spring of 2009 generally continued through the early spring of 2010, but in recent months concerns about spillovers from the ﬁ scal pressures in a number of European countries and the durability of the global recovery have led to the reemergence of strains in some markets. On balance over the ﬁ rst half of 2010, market partici- pants pushed back their expected timing of the ﬁ rst increase in the target federal funds rate from its cur- rent range of 0 to ¼ percent, and they scaled back their expectations of the pace with which monetary policy accommodation would be removed. Quotes on money market futures contracts imply that, as of mid-July 2010, investors’ expected trajectory for the federal funds rate rises above the current target range in the ﬁ rst quarter of 2011, two quarters later than the quotes implied at the start of 2010. Investors also expect, on average, that the effective federal funds rate will be around 1 percent by the middle of 2012, about 1¼ per- centage points lower than anticipated at the beginning of this year. The expected path for monetary policy appeared to move lower in response to the mount- ing ﬁ scal strains in Europe and weaker-than-expected U.S. economic data releases. The drop probably also reﬂ ected Federal Reserve communications, includ- ing the repetition in the statement released after each meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee that economic conditions are likely to warrant exception- ally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period. Yields on longer-term nominal Treasury securities fell noticeably, on net, over the ﬁ rst half of the year, while two-year yields fell somewhat less (ﬁ gure 34). Yields were generally little changed during the ﬁ rst quarter but dropped in the second quarter along with the decline in the expected path for monetary policy. Increased demand for Treasury securities by investors looking for a haven from volatility in other markets has likely contributed to the decline in yields. On balance, over the ﬁ rst half of the year, yields on 2-year Treasury notes decreased about ½ percentage point to about ¾ percent, and yields on 10-year notes fell about ¾ percentage point to about 3 percent. Yields on Treasury inﬂ ation-protected securities, or TIPS, declined substantially less than those on their NOTE: The data are daily and extend through July 14, 2010. SOURCE: Department of the Treasury. nominal counterparts over the ﬁ rst half of the year, resulting in lower medium- and long-term inﬂ ation compensation. The decline in inﬂ ation compensation may have partly reﬂ ected a drop in inﬂ ation expec- tations given the subdued rates of growth in major price indexes over the period and indications that eco- nomic slack would remain substantial for some time. However, inferences about investors’ inﬂ ation expecta- tions based on TIPS have been complicated over recent years by special factors such as the safe-haven demands for nominal Treasury securities and changes over time in the relative liquidity of TIPS and nominal Treasury securities. In the commercial paper market, over the ﬁ rst half of 2010, yields on lower-quality A2/P2-rated paper and on AA-rated asset-backed commercial paper rose a bit from low levels, pushing up spreads over higher-quality AA-rated nonﬁ nancial commercial paper (ﬁ gure 35). Even so, spreads on both types of assets remain near the low end of the range observed since the fall of 2007. Yields on corporate bonds rated AA and BBB fell by less than those on comparable-maturity Treasury securities over the ﬁ rst half of the year, resulting in a noticeable increase in risk spreads (ﬁ gure 36). Yields on speculative-grade corporate bonds fell during much of the ﬁ rst quarter but rose sharply during the second, leaving yields higher on net over the period and spreads somewhat more elevated. The widening of spreads 35. Commercial paper spreads, 2007–10 NOTE: The data are weekly and extend through July 14, 2010. Commercial paper yield spreads are for an overnight maturity and are expressed relative to the AA nonfinancial rate. 36. Spreads of corporate bond yields over comparable off-the-run Treasury yields, by securities rating, 1997–2010 NOTE: The data are daily and extend through July 14, 2010. The spreads shown are the yields on 10-year bonds less the 10-year Treasury yield. SOURCE: Derived from smoothed corporate yield curves using Merrill appears to reﬂ ect a decrease in demand for risky assets stemming from concerns about developments in Europe and the outlook for the global economy. Similarly, broad equity price indexes, which rose in the ﬁ rst quarter, owing both to relatively strong earn- ings reports and to some better-than-expected economic data releases, fell back in the second quarter (ﬁ gure 37). The second-quarter decline was broad based, encom- passing most major equity market categories, and was consistent with movements in the prices of a wide variety of other asset classes. Implied volatility of the S&P 500, as calculated from option prices, spiked 37. Stock price index, 1995–2010 NOTE: The data are daily and extend through July 14, 2010. SOURCE: Dow Jones Indexes. NOTE: The data are weekly and extend through the week ending July 16, 2010. The final observation is an estimate based on data through July 14, 2010. The series shown—the VIX—is the implied 30-day volatility of the S&P 500 stock price index as calculated from a weighted average of options prices. upward in May before receding somewhat, then ended the ﬁ rst half of the year at a still-elevated level (ﬁ gure 38). Against a backdrop of declining equity prices and increases in equity market volatility, equity mutual funds experienced outﬂ ows in the second quarter; they had posted modest inﬂ ows in the ﬁ rst quarter after having been nearly ﬂ at for much of 2009 (ﬁ gure 39). Most categories of bond funds and hybrid funds (which invest in a mix of bonds and equities) continued to show sizable inﬂ ows in the ﬁ rst half of 2010, although high-yield bond funds registered outﬂ ows as spreads widened in the second quarter. Money market mutual funds recorded large outﬂ ows, likely reﬂ ecting the very 39. Net flows into mutual funds, 2006–10 NOTE: The data exclude reinvested dividends and are not seasonally adjusted. The data for 2010:Q2 are estimated. SOURCE: Investment Company Institute. low yields on those assets relative to other short-term investments. Financial market functioning continued to improve, on balance, during the ﬁ rst half of 2010. However, strains emerged in some markets. For example, the spread between the London interbank offered rate (Libor) and the rate on comparable-maturity overnight index swaps (OIS)—a measure of stress in short-term bank funding markets—widened over the ﬁ rst half of the year (ﬁ gure 40). The increases in Libor-OIS spreads were more pronounced at longer maturities. In securi- ties ﬁ nancing markets, bid-asked spreads and haircuts applied to collateral fell slightly. In order to expand the availability of information on developments with respect to credit and leverage out- side the traditional banking sector, the Federal Reserve initiated a Senior Credit Ofﬁ cer Opinion Survey on Dealer Financing Terms (SCOOS). The SCOOS sur- veys senior credit ofﬁ cers at about 20 U.S. and foreign dealers that, in the aggregate, provide the vast major- ity of the ﬁ nancing of dollar-denominated securities to nondealers and are the most active intermediaries in over-the-counter (OTC) derivative instruments. The survey will be conducted on a quarterly basis. In the ﬁ rst survey, conducted in late May and early June, dealers generally reported that the terms at which 40. Libor minus overnight index swap rate, 2007–10 NOTE: The data are daily and extend through July 14, 2010. An overnight index swap (OIS) is an interest rate swap with the floating rate tied to an index of daily overnight rates, such as the effective federal funds rate. At maturity, two parties exchange, on the basis of the agreed notional amount, the difference between interest accrued at the fixed rate and interest accrued by averaging the floating, or index, rate. Libor is the London interbank offered rate. they provided credit were tight relative to those at the end of 2006.9 However, they noted some loosening of terms for both securities ﬁ nancing and OTC derivative transactions, on net, over the previous three months for certain classes of clients—including hedge funds, institutional investors, and nonﬁ nancial corporations— and intensiﬁ ed pressures by those clients to negotiate more-favorable terms. At the same time, they reported a pickup in demand for ﬁ nancing across several collateral types over the past three months. The SCOOS results are consistent with market commentary suggesting that ﬁ nancial system leverage had begun to pick up in early 2010. However, lever- age reportedly fell back in May against the backdrop of heightened market volatility. Hedge funds, which had earned solid returns on average during the ﬁ rst few months of the year, posted a sharp decline in May. Conditions in the leveraged loan market continued to improve on balance over the ﬁ rst half of 2010. Gross issuance of such loans picked up slightly during that period from very low levels in 2009, as loan pools issuing collateralized loan obligations (CLOs) moved to reinvest the cash received from companies that had paid down older loans with the proceeds of bond issues. New CLO issuance, which had nearly ceased in the second half of 2009, also began to pick up in the second quarter of 2010. The recovery in investor demand for syndicated loans was evident in the secondary market as well, where average bid-asked spreads declined, on net, over the ﬁ rst half of 2010, and bid prices moved closer to par (ﬁ gure 41). 9. The SCOOS is available on the Federal Reserve Board’s web- 41. Secondary-market pricing for syndicated loans, 2007–10 NOTE: The data are daily and extend through July 14, 2010. SOURCE: LSTA/Thomson Reuters Mark-to-Market Pricing. 42. Equity price index for banks, 2007–10 NOTE: The data are daily and extend through July 14, 2010. SOURCE: Standard & Poor’s. Investor sentiment regarding the outlook for commer- cial banks, which had generally improved during the ﬁ rst quarter, became more pessimistic during the second quarter. Equity prices of commercial banks generally outperformed the broader market over the ﬁ rst quar- ter, before declining about in line with equity market indexes during the second (ﬁ gure 42). Bank equity prices were likely boosted slightly by modest improve- ments in returns on equity and assets in the ﬁ rst quarter, although both proﬁ tability measures remained near the bottom end of their ranges of the past 20 years (ﬁ gure 43). After adjusting for the effects of changes in the accounting treatment of securitized assets, net interest margins rose noticeably in the ﬁ rst quarter, while provisions for loan losses declined, consistent with responses to the January SLOOS that pointed to an improvement in banks’ outlook on credit quality.10 Smaller commercial banks collectively registered their ﬁ rst proﬁ table quarter in more than a year in the ﬁ rst quarter. 10. The Financial Accounting Standards Board’s Statements of Financial Accounting Standards Nos. 166 and 167 (FAS 166 and 167) modiﬁ ed the basis for determining whether a ﬁ rm must consolidate securitized assets (as well as the associated liabilities and equity) onto its balance sheet. Most banking institutions were required to imple- ment the standards in the ﬁ rst quarter of 2010. Banks are estimated to have brought $435 billion of loans back onto their books, of which about three-fourths were credit card loans, and increased their allow- ance for loan and lease losses by about $36 billion. For additional detail on the effects of FAS 166 and 167 on banks’ balance sheets, see the “Notes on the Data” portion of Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Statistical Release H.8, “Assets and Liabilities of Commercial Banks in the United States,” www.federalreserve.gov/releases/h8/h8notes.htm. 43. Commercial bank profitability, 1988–2010 NOTE: The data are quarterly and extend through 2010:Q1. SOURCE: Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council, Consolidated Credit default swap (CDS) spreads for banking insti- tutions—which primarily reﬂ ect investors’ assessments of and willingness to bear the risk that those institutions will default on their debt obligations—increased on net over the ﬁ rst half of the year, particularly for larger banking organizations (ﬁ gure 44). The widening in CDS spreads reportedly reﬂ ected uncertainty about the outcome of legislation to reform the ﬁ nancial system as well as concerns about developments in Europe and their implications for the robustness of the U.S. and global economic recovery. The overall delinquency rate on loans held by commercial banks increased somewhat in the ﬁ rst quarter of 2010, as continued deterioration in the credit quality of residential mortgages offset 44. Spreads on credit default swaps for selected U.S. banks, 2007–10 Large bank holding companies NOTE: The data are daily and extend through July 14, 2010. Median spreads for six bank holding companies and nine other banks. 45. Change in total bank loans, 1990–2010 NOTE: The data, which are seasonally adjusted, are quarterly and extend through 2010:Q2. Data have been adjusted for banks’ implementation of certain accounting rule changes (including the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s Statements of Financial Accounting Standards Nos. 166 and 167) and for the effects of large nonbank institutions converting to commercial banks or merging with a commercial bank. decreases in delinquency rates on most other categories of loans. With loan demand reportedly continuing to be weak and credit conditions remaining tight, total loans on banks’ books contracted during the ﬁ rst half of the year, though less rapidly than they had during the second half of 2009 (ﬁ gure 45). After adjusting for the effects of changes in the accounting treatment of securitizations, all major categories of loans posted sizable declines. Securities holdings rose, on balance, reﬂ ecting substan- tial accumulation of Treasury securities. Cash assets also posted noticeable increases. However, total and risk-weighted assets shrank even as banks continued to raise capital, resulting in increases in regulatory capital ratios to historical highs. The M2 monetary aggregate rose only modestly in the ﬁ rst half of 2010 (ﬁ gure 46).11 Liquid deposits expanded 11. M2 consists of (1) currency outside the U.S. Treasury, Federal Reserve Banks, and the vaults of depository institutions; (2) traveler’s checks of nonbank issuers; (3) demand deposits at commercial banks (excluding those amounts held by depository institutions, the U.S. government, and foreign banks and ofﬁ cial institutions) less cash items in the process of collection and Federal Reserve ﬂ oat; (4) other checkable deposits (negotiable order of withdrawal, or NOW, accounts and automatic transfer service accounts at depository institutions; credit union share draft accounts; and demand deposits at thrift institutions); (5) savings deposits (including money market 46. M2 growth rate, 1990–2010 NOTE: The data extend through 2010:Q1 and are estimated for 2010:Q2. Through 2009, the data are annual on a fourth-quarter over fourth-quarter basis; the final observation refers to 2010:Q2 relative to 2009:Q4 at an annual rate. For definition of M2, see text note 11. moderately, likely reﬂ ecting heightened household demand for safe and liquid assets. That increase was only partially offset by continued large outﬂ ows from small time deposits and retail money market mutual funds that likely reﬂ ected the very low rates of return offered on those products compared with other assets. The currency component of the money stock expanded moderately in the ﬁ rst half of the year. The monetary base—roughly equal to the sum of currency in circula- tion and the reserve balances of depository institutions held at the Federal Reserve—increased at a 3½ percent annual rate in the ﬁ rst half of 2010, well below the 30 percent rate posted in the second half of 2009. The slower growth rate was largely attributable to the more gradual expansion in reserve balances as the Federal Reserve’s program of large-scale asset purchases came to an end. The size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet remained at a historically high level in mid-2010 (table 1). Total Federal Reserve assets on July 7, 2010, stood at about $2.3 trillion, about $100 billion more than at the end of 2009. The increase is largely attrib- utable to the completion on March 31 of the Federal Reserve’s program to purchase agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities. Securities holdings, the vast majority of Federal Reserve assets, increased from about $1.8 trillion to about $2.1 trillion over the ﬁ rst half of the year. deposit accounts); (6) small-denomination time deposits (time depos- its issued in amounts of less than $100,000) less individual retirement account (IRA) and Keogh balances at depository institutions; and (7) balances in retail money market mutual funds less IRA and Keogh balances at money market mutual funds. 1. Selected components of the Federal Reserve balance sheet, 2009–10 Millions of dollars 1. Selected components of the Federal Reserve balance sheet, 2009–10 Millions of dollars Selected assets Credit extended to depository institutions Credit extended to other market participants Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Money NOTE: LLC is a limited liability company. 1. The Federal Reserve has extended credit to several LLCs in conjunction with efforts to support critical institutions. Maiden Lane LLC was formed to acquire certain assets of The Bear Stearns Companies, Inc. Maiden Lane II LLC was formed to purchase residential mortgage-backed securities from the U.S. securities lending reinvestment portfolio of subsidiaries of American Interna- tional Group, Inc. (AIG). Maiden Lane III LLC was formed to purchase multi- sector collateralized debt obligations on which the Financial Products group of AIG has written credit default swap contracts. 2. Includes only MBS purchases that have already settled. 3. The Federal Reserve retains ownership of securities lent through the Term On February 1, 2010, in light of improved function- ing in ﬁ nancial markets, the Federal Reserve closed the Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility, the Commercial Paper Funding Facility, the Primary Dealer Credit Facility, and the Term Securities Lending Facility. On March 8, the Federal Reserve conducted the ﬁ nal auc- tion under the Term Auction Facility. With the closure of these facilities, the amount of credit extended by these programs fell to zero from roughly $100 billion at year-end. In addition, the terms on the primary credit facility were adjusted to increase the cost of funds to ¾ percent and to reduce the typical maturity of these loans to one day.12 In response, primary credit declined from about $19 billion to about $17 million over the ﬁ rst half of the year. On June 30, the Federal Reserve closed the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF). About $42 billion in TALF loans, which have maturities of three or ﬁ ve years, remain on the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. These broad-based programs, which were introduced during the crisis to provide liquidity to ﬁ nancial institu- tions and markets, contributed to the stabilization of ﬁ nancial markets and helped support the ﬂ ow of credit to the economy—at no loss to the taxpayer. All of the loans extended through these programs that have come due have been repaid in full, with interest. The credit provided to American International Group, Inc. (AIG), increased slightly, on net, over the ﬁ rst half of the year, in part because additional bor- rowing through this facility was used to pay down out- standing commercial paper that had been issued to the Commercial Paper Funding Facility LLC (limited lia- bility company). The net portfolio holdings of Maiden Lane LLC—which was created in conjunction with efforts to avoid a disorderly failure of The Bear Stearns Companies, Inc.—increased as the recovery in ﬁ nancial markets boosted the fair value of the assets held in that LLC. Consistent with the terms of the transaction, the distribution of the proceeds realized on the asset portfo- lio held by Maiden Lane LLC will occur on a monthly basis going forward unless otherwise directed by the Federal Reserve. The monthly distributions will cover the expenses and repay the obligations of the LLC, including the principal and interest on the loan from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, according to the priority established in the terms of the transaction. The portfolio holdings of Maiden Lane II LLC and Maiden Lane III LLC—which were created in conjunction with efforts to avoid the disorderly failure of AIG— decreased as prepayments and redemptions of some of the securities held in those portfolios were used to pay down the loans extended by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. The Federal Reserve does not expect to incur a net loss on any of the secured loans provided during the crisis to help prevent the disorderly failure of systemically signiﬁ cant ﬁ nancial institutions. 12. The primary credit rate had been ½ percent, and the maximum maturity of primary credit loans had been 90 days. On the liabilities side of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet, reserve balances averaged just over $1 trillion over the ﬁ rst six months of 2010. The Federal Reserve made preparations to conduct small-scale reverse repurchase operations to ensure its ability to use agency MBS collateral for such transactions, and the ﬁ rst small-value auctions in the Term Deposit Facility program were conducted in June and July. Reverse repurchase operations and the Term Deposit Facility are among the tools that the Federal Reserve will have at its disposal to drain reserves from the banking system at the appropriate time. The Treasury’s supplementary ﬁ nancing account, which had fallen to about $5 billion when the statutory debt ceiling was approached last year, returned to its previous level of about $200 billion after the statutory debt ceiling was raised in early 2010. On April 21, the Federal Reserve System released the 2009 annual comparative ﬁ nancial statements for the combined Federal Reserve Banks, the 12 individual Federal Reserve Banks, the LLCs that were created as part of the Federal Reserve’s response to strains in ﬁ nancial markets, and the Board of Governors. The statements showed that the Reserve Banks’ comprehen- sive income was just over $53 billion for the year ending December 31, 2009, an increase of nearly $18 billion from 2008. The increase in earnings was primarily attributable to the increase in the Federal Reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency MBS. The consolidated LLCs also contributed to the increase in the Reserve Banks’ comprehensive income. The Reserve Banks transferred more than $47 billion of their $53 billion in comprehensive income to the U.S. Treasury in 2009, an increase of more than $15 bil- lion—or about 50 percent—from the amount trans- ferred in 2008. In recent months, global ﬁ nancial markets have been roiled by the Greek ﬁ scal crisis and the resultant con- cerns about the European outlook more broadly (see box on European ﬁ scal stress). Fears about the exposure of euro-area ﬁ nancial institutions to Greece and other vulnerable euro-area countries also resulted in pressure in dollar funding markets (see box on dollar funding pressures). Risk-related ﬂ ows into safe investments lifted the value of the dollar and lowered yields on the sovereign bonds of most major advanced economies, including the United States. On net for the ﬁ rst half of The ﬁ scal crisis in Greece and its ramiﬁ cations for Europe have been a source of anxiety in global ﬁ nancial markets in recent months. Concerns about Greece began mounting around the turn of the year after announcements revealed the government’s deﬁ cit to be considerably larger than initially estimated. Despite the announce- ment by the Greek government of plans to implement signiﬁ cant ﬁ scal consolidation, the spread of yields on Greek sovereign bonds over those of German bonds soared during the spring, as market conﬁ dence in the ability of Greece to meet its ﬁ scal obligations dimin- ished (ﬁ gure A). At the same time, concerns also spread to other euro-area countries with high debt and deﬁ cit ratios, including Portugal, Spain, and Ireland. On May 2, with the Greek government and banking sectors having dif- ﬁ culty obtaining market ﬁ nance, the European Union and International Monetary Fund (IMF) announced a joint €110 billion ﬁ nancial support package for Greece. Disbursement of the sup- port, in the form of loans to be distributed over three years, is contingent on aggressive ﬁ scal consolidation, which would bring the country’s The announcement of the May 2 pack- age assuaged investor concerns only brieﬂ y. Spreads on Greek sovereign debt and that of other vulnerable euro-area economies moved up sharply in the week after the announcement, and dollar funding strains for many euro-area institutions intensiﬁ ed. In response, European leaders announced much broader stabilization measures on May 10. One set of initiatives addressed sovereign risk, providing up to €500 billion in funds—€60 billion through a European Financial Stabilization Mechanism and €440 billion from a special purpose vehicle, the European Financial Stabilization Facility, which is authorized to raise funds in capital markets backed by guarantees from euro-area member states. These funds may also be augmented with bilateral loans from the IMF. The European Central Bank (ECB) simultaneously announced that it was prepared to purchase government and private debt securities to ensure the depth and liquidity of euro-area debt markets that were considered dysfunctional. In addition, the ECB expanded its liquidity provision facilities. Finally, to forestall an emerging shortage of dol- lar liquidity, the Federal Reserve reopened tem- porary U.S. dollar liquidity swap lines with the ECB and four other major central banks. NOTE: The data are weekly. The last observation for each series is July 9, 2010. The spreads shown are the yields on 10-year bonds less the 10-year German bond yield. the subsequent purchases of sovereign debt by the ECB led to an improvement in market sentiment and a considerable drop in spreads, but spreads have since moved up. This renewed increase is due, at least in part, to market con- cerns about the growth implications of the sig- niﬁ cant and synchronized ﬁ scal consolidation efforts being implemented across the euro area. Considerable uncertainties also remain about the exposure of ﬁ nancial institutions to vulnerable countries and about the ﬁ nancial position of these institutions more generally. European governments are currently working to address these uncertainties through a coordi- nated set of bank stress tests. 47. U.S. dollar exchange rate against selected major Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July NOTE: The data, which are in foreign currency units per dollar, are daily. The last observation for each series is July 14, 2010. the year, the dollar has appreciated, and foreign stock markets and the yields on benchmark sovereign bonds have moved down. In the ﬁ rst quarter of this year, a sense that the U.S. recovery was proceeding more rapidly than the recovery in Europe led the dollar to appreciate against the euro and sterling (ﬁ gure 47), while strong growth in emerging Asia led the dollar to depreciate against many emerging market currencies. These divergent 48. U.S. dollar nominal exchange rate, broad index, 2005–10 NOTE: The data, which are in foreign currency units per dollar, are daily. The last observation for the series is July 14, 2010. The broad index is a weighted average of the foreign exchange values of the U.S. dollar against the currencies of a large group of the most important U.S. trading partners. The index weights, which change over time, are derived from U.S. export shares and from U.S. and foreign import shares. 49. Equity indexes in selected advanced foreign economies, 2008–10 49. Equity indexes in selected advanced foreign economies, 2008–10 Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July NOTE: The data are daily. The last observation for each series is July 14, 2010. Because the Tokyo Stock Exchange was closed on December 31, 2007, the Japan index is scaled so that the December 28, 2007, closing value equals 100. For euro area, Dow Jones Euro STOXX Index; for Canada, Toronto Stock Exchange 300 Composite Index; for Japan, Tokyo Stock Exchange (TOPIX); and for the United Kingdom, London Stock Exchange (FTSE 350). movements left the Federal Reserve’s broadest measure of the nominal trade-weighted foreign exchange value of the dollar little changed by the end of the ﬁ rst quarter (ﬁ gure 48). Foreign equity indexes generally rose mod- estly during the ﬁ rst quarter, as the effect of improving growth prospects in some regions was only partly offset by concerns about Greece (ﬁ gures 49 and 50). Those concerns led yields on the sovereign bonds of Germany 50. Aggregate equity indexes for emerging market economies, 2008–10 Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July NOTE: The data are daily. The last observation for each series is July 14, 2010. The Latin American economies are Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, and Peru; the emerging Asian economies are China, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Pakistan, the Philippines, South Korea, Taiwan, and Thailand. In March, dollar funding pressures began to reemerge in the euro area as uncertainties about the condition of some euro-area ﬁ nancial insti- tutions were ampliﬁ ed by concerns about their possible exposures to Greece and other periph- eral euro-area economies. The London interbank offered rate, or Libor, for U.S. dollars increased sharply in late April. In response to the intensiﬁ cation of these dollar funding strains, the Federal Open Market Committee reestablished dollar liquidity swap lines on May 9 and 10 with the European Central Bank (ECB), the Bank of England, the Bank of Canada, the Bank of Japan, and the Swiss National Bank. So far, drawings on the lines have been limited, with only the ECB and the Bank of Japan attracting any bidders in their dollar tender operations. Draws on these lines have been limited because the central banks are offering dol- lar liquidity in their markets at rates equal to the overnight index swap rate plus 100 basis points—rates that have exceeded the cost of dollar funding available to most institutions from alternative sources. However, these facili- ties were designed to provide a backstop, and as such, even with limited credit extensions, they are supporting the functioning of dollar funding markets and helping to curtail uncer- tainties in those markets. and France to drift down, as investors shifted into those assets (ﬁ gure 51). By late April, the problems in Greece were exacer- bating concerns about ﬁ scal sustainability in Europe and growth in the region more broadly. The increase in perceived risk caused the dollar to appreciate notice- ably from mid-April to the end of May and led to sharp declines in foreign stock markets. The yields on the sovereign bonds of France and Germany fell further, and yields on the sovereign bonds of other advanced economies began falling as well, driven by ﬂ ight-to- safety ﬂ ows and expectations that policy tightening would occur later than had previously been expected. Steps taken by European countries in early May to provide assistance to Greece and other countries with ﬁ scal vulnerabilities supported some improvement in market sentiment; equity prices temporarily halted their decline by early June and the dollar depreciated somewhat, likely reﬂ ecting a modest reversal of ﬂ ight- to-safety ﬂ ows. Over the past month, however, worries about global growth prospects have intensiﬁ ed, and yields on advanced economy sovereign bonds have drifted down further. 51. Yields on benchmark government bonds in selected advanced foreign economies, 2007–10 July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July NOTE: The data, which are for 10-year bonds, are daily. The last Financial ﬂ ows in the ﬁ rst quarter of this year reﬂ ected a growing imprint of the strains in Europe. Data for the ﬁ rst quarter and indicators for the second quarter point to unusually large purchases of U.S. Treasury securities by private foreigners so far this year, likely indicating a ﬂ ight to quality as ﬁ scal problems in Europe mounted (ﬁ gure 52). Foreign demand for other U.S. securities remained mixed. Net purchases of U.S. agency debt stayed weak, while net purchases of U.S. equities, which were strong in the ﬁ rst quarter, appear to have weakened in the second quarter. Foreign private investors continued to sell U.S. corporate debt securi- ties, on net, but at a slower pace in the second quarter. Conversely, U.S. residents continued to purchase siz- able amounts of foreign bonds and equities, including both emerging market and European securities (ﬁ gure 53). observation for each series is July 14, 2010. 52. Net foreign purchases of U.S. securities, 2005–10 NOTE: Other U.S. securities include corporate equities and bonds, agency Banks located in the United States sharply increased net lending abroad, generating net private capital outﬂ ows (ﬁ gure 54). These outﬂ ows were spurred in part by the reemergence of dollar funding pressures in European interbank markets; such pressures had been acute at the height of the global ﬁ nancial crisis in late 2008 but had subsided by the middle of last year. Inﬂ ows from foreign ofﬁ cial institutions remained strong through the ﬁ rst quarter. Most of these inﬂ ows were from countries seeking to counteract upward pres- sure on their currencies by purchasing U.S. dollars on foreign currency markets. These countries then used the proceeds to acquire U.S. assets, primarily Treasury securities. Available data for the second quarter indi- cate that foreign ofﬁ cial purchases of U.S. Treasury 53. Net U.S. purchases of foreign securities, 2005–10 indicate a balance of payments outflow associated with positive U.S. purchases of foreign securities. 54. U.S. net financial inflows, 2005–10 Private (including banking) U.S. official Foreign official NOTE: U.S. official flows include the foreign currency acquired when foreign central banks draw on their swap lines with the Federal Reserve. SOURCE: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis. securities slowed in line with the strengthening of the dollar. Notwithstanding the ongoing strains on the European economy, the data on economic activity abroad that we have received to date do not show signiﬁ cant effects of these strains and suggest that a moderate recovery is under way. In the ﬁ rst quarter, the recovery from last year’s recession gathered momentum in the advanced foreign economies, driven by a rebound in world trade and continuing improvement in business senti- ment. Growth was particularly robust in Japan, which beneﬁ ted from rising exports to emerging Asia, and in Canada, where private domestic demand remained strong. Economic growth was less vigorous in the euro area, where consumption and investment spending declined again, and in the United Kingdom, where con- sumption was held back by the hike in the value-added tax in January. Monthly indicators of economic activity across the advanced foreign economies suggest widespread growth in the second quarter. Industrial production has continued to rebound, business conﬁ dence has improved further, and purchasing managers indexes remain at levels consistent with solid expansion. However, indicators of household spending showed considerable variation across countries, with retail sales expanding rapidly in Canada but declining in the euro area. Such variation in part reﬂ ected differences in labor market developments. Canadian employment has rebounded this year, while euro-area employment has stagnated. As described earlier, increasing con- cerns about sovereign debt and banking systems in some euro-area countries have affected a wide array of ﬁ nancial markets. However, while these stresses are materially restraining economic activity in Greece and several other European countries, they have not yet had a broader effect on economic indicators in the other major advanced foreign economies. Twelve-month consumer price inﬂ ation picked up a bit in the advanced foreign economies early this year, largely owing to increases in the prices of energy and other commodities, but inﬂ ation remained below target in the euro area and Canada and continued to be nega- tive in Japan (ﬁ gure 55). Core consumer price inﬂ ation, excluding food and energy, remained subdued in these economies, as considerable economic slack persisted. In contrast, headline inﬂ ation in the United Kingdom rose above 3 percent this year, driven by exchange rate depreciation and the increase in the value-added tax. After cutting policy rates to very low levels in 2009, most major foreign central banks have kept rates unchanged so far this year (ﬁ gure 56). The Bank of Canada, however, tightened monetary policy in June, raising its target for the overnight rate 25 basis points to ½ percent, amid signs of strong growth and dimin- ishing excess capacity in the Canadian economy. The European Central Bank kept its main reﬁ nancing rate at 1 percent and, in the second quarter, took additional measures to provide liquidity: extending the period over which it promised to provide ﬁ xed-rate reﬁ nancing with full allotment, adjusting its collateral requirements on 55. Change in consumer prices for major foreign economies, 2006–10 NOTE: The data are monthly, and the percent change is from one year earlier. The data extend through June 2010 for the euro area and United Kingdom, and through May 2010 for Canada and Japan. 56. Official or targeted interest rates in selected advanced foreign economies, 2006–10 NOTE: The data are daily and extend through July 14, 2010. The data shown are, for Canada, the target for the overnight rate; for the euro area, the minimum bid rate on main refinancing operations; for Japan, the target for the call rate; and, for the United Kingdom, the official bank rate. SOURCE: The central bank of each area or country shown. repurchase agreements to ensure that Greek govern- ment debt would remain eligible, and buying the debt of some euro-area countries in the secondary market. The Bank of Japan kept its targeted rate near zero and added a new lending facility aimed at encouraging private- bank lending to businesses. The emerging market economies, which have led the recovery from the global ﬁ nancial crisis, have contin- ued to grow strongly thus far this year. In emerging Asia, aggregate real GDP growth picked up to an impressive double-digit pace in the ﬁ rst quar- ter. Indicators suggest that growth likely slowed to a more sustainable but still-rapid pace in the second quarter. In China, domestic demand has been strong, with retail sales registering signiﬁ cant gains. The accompanying rapid growth of imports has provided a boost to other economies in the region and to com- modity exporters around the world. However, Chinese real GDP decelerated in the second quarter, reﬂ ecting a slowdown in ﬁ xed investment and tighter credit condi- tions. Rising property prices and concerns about the volume and quality of lending led authorities to clamp down on bank lending through a variety of prudential measures. Authorities also began to tighten monetary policy and have raised required reserve ratios for banks a cumulative 150 basis points since January. In late June, Chinese authorities announced that they would take steps to increase the ﬂ exibility of the renminbi. The renminbi has subsequently appreciated about 1 per- cent against the dollar. In Latin America, real GDP growth dipped in the ﬁ rst quarter, with output declines in Mexico, Chile, and Venezuela offsetting rapid growth in Brazil. The fall in output in Mexico reﬂ ected both a sharp decline in Mexico’s agricultural sector and deceleration in the manufacturing sector, but other indicators, including very strong exports, were more upbeat. Brazilian eco- nomic activity continued to show strength in the ﬁ rst quarter, with real GDP expanding at a double-digit rate, boosted by ﬁ scal stimulus and strong demand for the country’s commodity exports. Brazil’s central bank has recently tightened monetary policy, raising the policy rate a cumulative 150 basis points since late April. Inﬂ ation in emerging market economies rose at the end of 2009 and into 2010, reﬂ ecting increases in food and energy prices and, particularly in the case of Mexico, special factors such as tax increases. Consumer price readings from recent months suggest that these price pressures are waning. The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) main- tained a target range for the federal funds rate of 0 to ¼ percent throughout the ﬁ rst half of 2010 in order to continue to promote economic recovery and price sta- bility (ﬁ gure 57). In the statement accompanying each regularly scheduled FOMC meeting, the Committee noted that economic conditions, including low rates of resource utilization, subdued inﬂ ation trends, and stable inﬂ ation expectations, were likely to warrant exception- ally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period. At the end of March, the Federal Reserve con- cluded its purchases of agency mortgage-backed securi- ties (MBS) and agency debt under its large-scale asset purchase programs, which were undertaken to provide support to mortgage lending and housing markets and to improve overall conditions in private credit markets. Also, in light of improved functioning of ﬁ nancial mar- kets, by the end of June the Federal Reserve had closed all of the special liquidity facilities that it had created to support markets during the crisis. However, in response to the reemergence of strains in U.S. dollar short- term funding markets in Europe, the Federal Reserve and ﬁ ve foreign central banks announced in May the reestablishment of temporary U.S. dollar liquidity swap facilities. At its January 26–27 meeting, the Committee agreed that the incoming information, though mixed, indicated that overall economic activity had strength- ened in recent months, about in line with expectations. Consumer spending was well maintained in the fourth quarter, and business expenditures on equipment and software appeared to expand substantially. However, the improvement in the housing market had slowed, and spending on nonresidential structures continued to fall. Available data suggested that the pace of inven- tory liquidation had diminished considerably in the fourth quarter, providing a sizable boost to economic activity, and especially to industrial production. In the labor market, layoffs subsided noticeably in the ﬁ nal months of 2009, but the unemployment rate remained elevated and hiring stayed quite limited. The weakness in labor markets continued to be an important concern for the Committee; moreover, the prospects for job growth remained a signiﬁ cant source of uncertainty in the economic outlook, particularly for consumer spending. Financial market conditions were supportive of economic growth. Nonetheless, net debt ﬁ nancing by nonﬁ nancial businesses was near zero in the fourth 57. Selected interest rates, 2007–10 NOTE: The data are daily and extend through July 14, 2010. The 10-year Treasury rate is the constant-maturity yield based on the most actively traded securities. The dates on the horizontal axis are those of regularly scheduled Federal Open Market Committee meetings. quarter after being negative in the third, consistent with sluggish demand for credit and tight lending standards and terms at banks. Increases in energy prices pushed up headline consumer price inﬂ ation, but core consumer price inﬂ ation remained subdued. ahead, Committee members agreed that neither the economic outlook nor ﬁ nancial conditions had changed appreciably since the December meeting and that no changes to the Committee’s large-scale asset purchase programs or to its target range for the federal funds rate of 0 to ¼ percent were called for. Further, policymak- ers reiterated their anticipation that economic condi- tions were likely to warrant exceptionally low rates for an extended period. The Committee afﬁ rmed its intention to purchase a total of $1.25 trillion of agency MBS and about $175 billion of agency debt by the end of the ﬁ rst quarter and to gradually slow the pace of these purchases to promote a smooth transition in mar- kets. Committee members agreed that with substantial improvements in most ﬁ nancial markets, including interbank markets, the statement following the meeting would indicate that on February 1, 2010, the Federal Reserve would close several special liquidity facilities and that the temporary swap lines with foreign central banks would expire. In addition, the statement would say that the Federal Reserve was in the process of wind- ing down the Term Auction Facility (TAF) and that the ﬁ nal auction would take place in March 2010. As had been announced, on February 1, 2010, the Federal Reserve closed the Primary Dealer Credit Facility, the Term Securities Lending Facility, the Commercial Paper Funding Facility, and the Asset- Backed Commercial Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility. The temporary swap lines with foreign central banks expired on the same day. On February 18, 2010, the Federal Reserve announced a further normalization of the terms of loans made under the primary credit facility. The rate charged on these loans was increased from ½ percent to ¾ percent, effec- tive on February 19, and the typical maximum maturity for such loans was shortened to overnight, effective on March 18, 2010. The Federal Reserve also announced on February 18 that the minimum bid rate on the ﬁ nal TAF auction on March 8 had been raised to 50 basis points, ¼ percentage point higher than in previous auc- tions. The Federal Reserve noted that the modiﬁ cations were not expected to lead to tighter ﬁ nancial conditions for households and businesses and did not signal any change in the outlook for the economy or for monetary policy. The data reviewed at the March 16 FOMC meet- ing suggested that economic activity expanded at a moderate pace in early 2010. Business investment in equipment and software seemed to have picked up, and consumer spending increased further in January. Private employment would likely have turned up in February but for the snowstorms that affected the East Coast. Meeting participants agreed that available indi- cators suggested that the labor market appeared to be stabilizing. Output in the manufacturing sector con- tinued to trend higher as ﬁ rms increased production to meet strengthening ﬁ nal demand and to slow the pace of inventory liquidation. On the downside, housing activity remained ﬂ at and nonresidential construction weakened further. Meanwhile, a sizable increase in energy prices had pushed up headline consumer price inﬂ ation in recent months; in contrast, core consumer price inﬂ ation was quite low. Participants agreed that ﬁ nancial market conditions remained supportive of eco- nomic growth. Spreads in short-term funding markets were near pre-crisis levels, and risk spreads on corpo- rate bonds and measures of implied volatility in equity markets were broadly consistent with historical norms given the outlook for the economy. Participants were also reassured by the absence of any signs of renewed strains in ﬁ nancial market functioning as a consequence of the Federal Reserve’s winding down of its special liquidity facilities. However, bank lending was still con- tracting, and interest rates on many bank loans had risen further in recent months. Against this backdrop, Committee members agreed that it would be appropriate to maintain the target range of 0 to ¼ percent for the federal funds rate and to com- plete the Committee’s previously announced purchases of $1.25 trillion of agency MBS and about $175 bil- lion of agency debt by the end of March. Nearly all members judged that it was appropriate to reiterate in the Committee’s statement the expectation that eco- nomic conditions—including low levels of resource utilization, subdued inﬂ ation trends, and stable inﬂ ation expectations—were likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period. In light of the improved functioning of ﬁ nancial markets, Committee members agreed that it would be appropriate for the statement to indicate that the previ- ously announced schedule for closing the Term Asset- Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) was being maintained. On March 31, the TALF closed for loans backed by collateral other than newly issued commer- cial MBS. The information reviewed at the April 27–28 FOMC meeting suggested that, on balance, the economic recovery was proceeding at a moderate pace and that the deterioration in the labor market was likely coming to an end. Consumer spending continued to post solid gains in the ﬁ rst three months of the year, and busi- ness investment in equipment and software appeared to have increased signiﬁ cantly further in the ﬁ rst quarter. In addition, growth of manufacturing output remained brisk, and gains became more broadly based across industries. However, residential construction, while having edged up, was still depressed, construction of nonresidential buildings remained on a steep downward trajectory, and state and local governments continued to retrench. Consumer price inﬂ ation remained low. Meeting participants expected that business investment would be supported by improved conditions in ﬁ nancial markets. Large ﬁ rms with access to capital markets appeared to be having little difﬁ culty in obtaining credit, and in many cases they also had ample retained earnings with which to fund their operations and invest- ment. However, many participants noted that, while ﬁ nancial market conditions had generally improved, bank lending was still contracting and that smaller ﬁ rms in particular continued to face substantial difﬁ culty in obtaining bank loans. Members saw an escalation of ﬁ nancial strains in Europe as a risk to the outlook, although the attendant effects on global market condi- tions were only beginning to be felt. Members agreed that no adjustments to the federal funds rate target range were warranted at the meet- ing. On balance, the economic outlook had changed little since the March meeting. Even though the recovery appeared to be continuing and was expected to strengthen gradually over time, most members projected that economic slack would continue to be elevated for some time, with inﬂ ation remaining below rates that would be consistent in the longer run with the Federal Reserve’s dual objectives of maximum employ- ment and price stability. In addition, nearly all members judged that it was appropriate to reiterate the expecta- tion that economic conditions were likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period. In light of the improved functioning of ﬁ nancial markets, Committee members again agreed that it would be appropriate for the statement to indicate that the previously announced schedule for closing the TALF was being maintained. On May 9, 2010, the Committee met by conference call to discuss developments in global ﬁ nancial markets and possible policy responses. Over the previous sev- eral months, ﬁ nancial market concerns about the ability of Greece and some other euro-area countries to contain their sizable budget deﬁ cits and ﬁ nance their debt had increased. Conditions in short-term funding markets in Europe had deteriorated, and global ﬁ nancial markets more generally had been volatile and less supportive of economic growth. In connection with the possible implementation by the European authorities of a number of measures to promote ﬁ scal sustainability and support ﬁ nancial market functioning, some major central banks had requested that dollar liquidity swap lines with the Federal Reserve be reestablished. The Committee agreed that such arrangements could be helpful in limiting the strains in dollar funding markets and the adverse implications of recent developments for the U.S. economy. In order to promote the transparency of these arrangements, participants also agreed that it would be appropriate for the Federal Reserve to publish the swap contracts and to release on a weekly basis the amounts of draws under the swap lines by central bank counterparty. It was recognized that the Committee would need to consider the implications of swap lines for bank reserves and overall management of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. Participants noted the importance of appropriate consultation with U.S. gov- ernment ofﬁ cials and emphasized that a reestablishment of the lines should be contingent on strong and effective actions by authorities in Europe to address ﬁ scal sus- tainability and support ﬁ nancial markets. At the conclusion of its discussion, the Committee voted unanimously to authorize the Chairman to agree to reestablish swap lines with the European Central Bank (ECB), the Bank of England, the Swiss National Bank, the Bank of Japan, and the Bank of Canada. The arrangements with the Bank of England, the ECB, the Swiss National Bank, and the Bank of Japan would provide those central banks with the capacity to conduct tenders of U.S. dollars in their local markets at ﬁ xed rates for full allotment, similar to arrangements that had been in place previously. The arrangement with the Bank of Canada would support draws of up to $30 billion, as was the case previously. The swap arrangements were authorized through January 2011. The information reviewed at the June 22–23 FOMC meeting suggested that the economic recovery was proceeding at a moderate pace in the second quarter. Businesses continued to increase employment and lengthen workweeks in April and May, but the unem- ployment rate remained elevated. Industrial production registered strong and widespread gains, and business investment in equipment and software rose rapidly. Consumer spending appeared to have moved up further in April and May. However, housing starts dropped in May, and nonresidential construction remained depressed. Falling energy prices held down headline consumer prices in April and May, while core consumer prices edged up. Financial markets had become somewhat less sup- portive of economic growth since the April meeting, with developments in Europe a leading cause of greater global ﬁ nancial market tensions. Risk spreads for many corporate borrowers had widened noticeably, equity prices had fallen appreciably, and the dollar had risen in value against a broad basket of other currencies. Participants saw these changes as likely to weigh to some degree on household and business spending over coming quarters. The Committee agreed to make no change in its target range for the federal funds rate at the meeting. Although the economic outlook had softened some- what, and a number of meeting participants saw the risks to the outlook as having shifted to the downside, all saw the economic expansion as likely to be strong enough to continue raising resource utilization, albeit more slowly than they had previously anticipated. In addition, they saw inﬂ ation as likely to stabilize near recent low readings in coming quarters and then gradu- ally rise toward more desirable levels. Nearly all mem- bers again judged that it was appropriate to indicate in the statement released following the meeting that economic conditions were likely to warrant exception- ally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period. Participants noted that in addition to continuing to develop and test instruments to exit from the period of unusually accommodative monetary policy, the Committee would need to consider whether further pol- icy stimulus might become appropriate if the economic outlook were to worsen appreciably. Although the FOMC continues to anticipate that eco- nomic conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period, ultimately the Federal Reserve will need to begin to tighten monetary conditions to prevent the development of inﬂ ation pressures as the economy recovers. That tightening will be accomplished partly through changes that will affect the composition and size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. The Federal Reserve has developed a number of tools that will facilitate the removal of policy accom- modation and reduce the quantity of reserves held by the banking system at the appropriate time. These tools encompass (1) raising the interest rate paid on excess reserve balances (the IOER rate), (2) executing term reverse repurchase agreements (RRPs) with the pri- mary dealers and other counterparties, (3) issuing term deposits to depository institutions through the Term Deposit Facility (TDF), (4) redeeming maturing and prepaid securities held by the Federal Reserve without reinvesting the proceeds, and (5) selling securities held by the Federal Reserve. All but the ﬁ rst of these tools would shrink the supply of reserve balances; the last two would also reduce the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. In their discussion of the IOER rate at the January meeting, all participants agreed that raising that rate and the target for the federal funds rate would be a key element of a move to less-accommodative monetary policy. Most participants thought that it likely would be appropriate to reduce the supply of reserve balances, to some extent, before raising the IOER rate and the target for the federal funds rate, in part because reduc- ing the supply of reserve balances would tighten the link between short-term market rates and the IOER rate. However, several participants noted that draining operations might be seen as a precursor to tightening and should be undertaken only when the Committee judged that an increase in its target for the federal funds rate would soon be appropriate. For the same reason, a few believed that it would be better to drain reserves concurrently with the eventual increase in the IOER and target rates. With respect to longer-run approaches to imple- menting monetary policy, most policymakers saw beneﬁ ts in continuing to use the federal funds rate as the operating target for implementing monetary policy, so long as other money market rates remained closely linked to the federal funds rate. Many thought that an approach in which the primary credit rate was set above the Committee’s target for the federal funds rate and the IOER rate was set below that target—a corridor system—would be beneﬁ cial. Participants recognized, however, that the supply of reserve balances would need to be reduced considerably to lift the federal funds rate above the IOER rate. Participants noted that their judgments were tentative, that they would continue to discuss the ultimate operating regime, and that they might well gain useful information about longer-run approaches during the eventual withdrawal of policy accommodation. At the January meeting, staff reported on success- ful tests of the Federal Reserve’s ability to conduct term RRPs with primary dealers by arranging several small-scale transactions using Treasury securities and agency debt as collateral; staff anticipated that the Federal Reserve would be able to execute term RRPs against MBS later in the year and would have the capability to conduct RRPs with an expanded set of counterparties shortly thereafter. The staff updated the Committee on the status of work on RRPs at subse- quent meetings. In late December 2009, the Federal Register published a notice requesting the public’s input on a proposal for a TDF. At the January FOMC meeting, Federal Reserve staff indicated that they would analyze comments from the public in the coming weeks and then prepare a ﬁ nal proposal for the Board’s consideration. On April 30, the Federal Reserve Board announced that it had approved amendments to Regulation D (Reserve Requirements of Depository Institutions) authorizing the Reserve Banks to offer term deposits to institutions that are eligible to receive earnings on their balances at Reserve Banks. On May 10, the Federal Reserve Board authorized up to ﬁ ve small-value offerings of term deposits under the TDF, which were designed to ensure the effectiveness of TDF operations and to provide eligible institutions with an opportunity to gain familiarity with the pro- cedures. The ﬁ rst of these offerings, for $1 billion in 14-day term deposits, was conducted on June 14. The auction had a stop-out rate of 27 basis points and a bid- to-cover ratio of slightly more than 6. The second offer- ing, for $2 billion in 28-day deposits, was conducted on June 28. That auction had a stop-out rate of about 27 basis points and a bid-to-cover ratio of about 5½. The third, for $2 billion in 84-day term deposits, was conducted on July 12. That auction had a stop-out rate of 31 basis points and a bid-to-cover ratio of about 3¾. Over the course of the FOMC meetings conducted in the ﬁ rst half of 2010, participants discussed the even- tual size and composition of the Federal Reserve’s bal- ance sheet and longer-run strategies for asset redemp- tions and sales. Participants agreed that any longer-run strategy for asset sales and redemptions should be consistent with the achievement of the Committee’s objectives of maximum employment and price stabil- ity. Policymakers were also unanimous in the view that it will be appropriate to shrink the supply of reserve balances and the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet substantially over time. Moreover, they agreed that it will eventually be appropriate for the System Open Market Account to return its domestic holdings to only securities issued by the U.S. Treasury, as was the case before the ﬁ nancial crisis. Meeting participants also agreed that sales of agency debt and agency MBS should be implemented in accordance with a frame- work communicated well in advance and be conducted at a gradual pace that potentially could be adjusted in response to developments in economic and ﬁ nancial conditions. Most participants favored deferring asset sales for some time, and a majority preferred beginning asset sales after the ﬁ rst increase in the FOMC’s target for short-term interest rates. Such an approach would post- pone any asset sales until the economic recovery was well established and would maintain short-term inter- est rates as the Committee’s key monetary policy tool. Participants agreed that the current policy of redeem- ing and not replacing agency debt and agency MBS as those securities mature or are prepaid helped make progress toward the Committee’s goals regarding the size and composition of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. Many policymakers saw beneﬁ ts to eventually adopting an approach of reinvesting maturing Treasury securities in bills and shorter-term coupon issues to shift the maturity composition of the Federal Reserve’s portfolio toward the structure that had prevailed prior to the ﬁ nancial crisis. Several meeting participants thought the Federal Reserve should eventually hold a portfolio composed largely of shorter-term Treasury securities. Participants expressed a range of views about the appropriate timing and pace of asset sales and redemp- tions, and Committee members did not reach ﬁ nal decisions about those issues over the course of the meetings in the ﬁ rst half of 2010. Participants agreed that it would be important to maintain ﬂ exibility regard- ing these issues given the uncertainties associated with the unprecedented size and composition of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet and its effects on ﬁ nancial conditions. For the time being, meeting participants agreed that the Federal Reserve should continue the interim approach of allowing all maturing agency debt and all prepayments of agency MBS to be redeemed without replacement while rolling over all maturing Treasury securities. At the June meeting, participants recognized that in light of the increased downside risks to an already gradual recovery from a deep recession, the Committee also needed to review its options for providing additional monetary stimulus should doing so become necessary. Participants will continue to con- sider the Committee’s portfolio management strategy at future meetings. The following material appeared as an addendum to the minutes of the June 22–23, 2010, meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee. In conjunction with the June 22–23, 2010, FOMC meet- ing, the members of the Board of Governors and the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks, all of whom participate in deliberations of the FOMC, submitted projections for output growth, unemployment, and inﬂ a- tion for the years 2010 to 2012 and over the longer run. The projections were based on information available through the end of the meeting and on each participant’s assumptions about factors likely to affect economic outcomes, including his or her assessment of appropri- ate monetary policy. “Appropriate monetary policy” is deﬁ ned as the future path of policy that the participant deems most likely to foster outcomes for economic activity and inﬂ ation that best satisfy his or her interpre- tation of the Federal Reserve’s dual objectives of maxi- mum employment and stable prices. Longer-run projec- tions represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge over time under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks. FOMC participants’ forecasts for economic activity and inﬂ ation suggested that they expected the recovery to continue and inﬂ ation to remain subdued, but with, on balance, slightly weaker real activity and a bit lower inﬂ ation than in the projections they made in conjunc- tion with the April 2010 FOMC meeting. As depicted in ﬁ gure 1, the economic recovery was anticipated to be gradual, with real gross domestic product (GDP) expanding at a pace only moderately above the partici- pants’ assessment of its longer-run sustainable growth rate and the unemployment rate slowly trending lower over the next few years. Most participants also antici- pated that inﬂ ation would remain relatively low over the forecast period. As indicated in table 1, participants generally made modest downward revisions to their projections for real GDP growth for the years 2010 to 2012, as well as modest upward revisions to their pro- jections for the unemployment rate for the same period. Participants also revised down a little their projections for inﬂ ation over the forecast period. Several partici- pants noted that these revisions were largely the result of the incoming economic data and the anticipated effects of developments abroad on U.S. ﬁ nancial mar- kets and the economy. Overall, participants continued to expect the pace of the economic recovery to be held back by a number of factors, including household and business uncertainty, persistent weakness in real estate markets, only gradual improvement in labor market Longer run Longer run NOTE: Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP) and in inﬂ ation are from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. PCE inﬂ ation and core PCE inﬂ ation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index for personal consumption expendi- tures (PCE) and the price index for PCE excluding food and energy. Projections for the unemployment rate are for the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. Each participant’s projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy. Longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. The April projections were made in conjunction with the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on April 27–28, 2010. 1. The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections 2. The range for a variable in a given year consists of all participants’ projec- 3. Longer-run projections for core PCE inﬂ ation are not collected. Figure 1. Central tendencies and ranges of economic projections, 2010–12 and over the longer run NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the notes to table 1. The data for the actual values of the variables are annual. Longer run Longer run Longer run conditions, waning ﬁ scal stimulus, and slow easing of credit conditions in the banking sector. Participants generally anticipated that, in light of the severity of the economic downturn, it would take some time for the economy to converge fully to its longer-run path as characterized by sustainable rates of output growth, unemployment, and inﬂ ation consistent with par- ticipants’ interpretation of the Federal Reserve’s dual objectives; most expected the convergence process to take no more than ﬁ ve to six years. About one-half of the participants now judged the risks to the growth outlook to be tilted to the downside, while most con- tinued to see balanced risks surrounding their inﬂ ation projections. Participants generally continued to judge the uncertainty surrounding their projections for both economic activity and inﬂ ation to be unusually high relative to historical norms. Participants’ projections for real GDP growth in 2010 had a central tendency of 3.0 to 3.5 percent, slightly lower than in April. Participants noted that the eco- nomic recovery was proceeding. Consumer spending was increasing, supported by rising disposable income as labor markets gradually improved. Business outlays on equipment and software were also rising, driven by replacement spending, the low cost of capital, and increased production. Participants pointed to a num- ber of factors that would provide ongoing support to economic activity, including accommodative monetary policy and still generally supportive conditions in ﬁ nan- cial markets. Fiscal policy was also seen as currently contributing to economic growth, although participants expected that the effects of ﬁ scal stimulus would dimin- ish going forward and also anticipated that budgetary pressures would continue to weigh on spending at the state and local levels. Participants noted that ﬁ nancial conditions had tightened somewhat because of develop- ments abroad. The effects of a stronger dollar, a lower stock market, and wider corporate credit spreads were expected to be offset only partially by lower oil and commodity prices and a decline in Treasury yields. Many participants anticipated that the economic expan- sion would be held back by ﬁ rms’ caution in hiring and spending in light of the considerable uncertainty regard- ing the economic outlook, by households’ focus on repairing balance sheets weakened by equity and house price declines, and by tight credit conditions for small businesses and households. Looking further ahead, the central tendencies of participants’ projections for real GDP growth were 3.5 to 4.2 percent in 2011 and 3.5 to 4.5 percent in 2012. Participants generally expected a rebound in spending on housing, consumer durables, and business capital equipment as household income and balance sheets strengthen, credit becomes more widely avail- able, and the recovery is seen by households and ﬁ rms as more ﬁ rmly established. Nevertheless, participants cited several factors that could restrain the pace of expansion over the next two years, including a ris- ing household saving rate as households seek to make further progress in repairing balance sheets, persistent uncertainty on the part of households and businesses about the strength of the recovery, spillovers from ﬁ s- cal strains abroad to U.S. ﬁ nancial markets and the U.S. economy, and continued weakness in residential construction. Moreover, despite improvements in the condition of banking institutions, strains in the commer- cial real estate sector were seen as posing risks to the balance sheets of such institutions for some time. Terms and standards on bank loans continued to be restrictive, and participants anticipated only a gradual loosening of credit conditions for many households and smaller ﬁ rms. In the absence of further shocks, participants generally expected that real GDP growth would eventually settle down at an annual rate of 2.5 to 2.8 percent, a pace that appeared to be sustainable in view of expected long-run trends in the labor force and labor productivity. Participants anticipated that labor market conditions would improve slowly over the next several years. The central tendency of their projections for the average unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of 2010 was 9.2 to 9.5 percent. Consistent with their expectations of a gradual economic recovery, participants generally anticipated that the unemployment rate would decline to 7.1 to 7.5 percent by the end of 2012, remaining well above their assessments of its longer-run sustainable rate. Although a few participants were concerned about a possible decrease in the sustainable level of employ- ment resulting from ongoing structural adjustments in product and labor markets, participants’ longer-term unemployment projections had a central tendency of 5.0 to 5.3 percent, the same as in April. Participants noted that prices of energy and other commodities declined somewhat in recent months, and underlying inﬂ ation trended lower. They gener- ally expected inﬂ ation to remain subdued over the next several years. Indeed, most of the participants marked down a bit their projections for inﬂ ation over the fore- cast period. The central tendency of their projections for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inﬂ ation was 1.0 to 1.1 percent for 2010, 1.1 to 1.6 percent for 2011, and 1.0 to 1.7 percent for 2012, generally about ¼ percentage point lower than in April. The central ten- dencies of participants’ projections for core PCE inﬂ a- tion followed a broadly similar path, although headline PCE inﬂ ation was expected to run slightly above core PCE inﬂ ation over the forecast period, reﬂ ecting some- what more rapid increases in food and energy prices. Most participants anticipated that, with appropriate monetary policy, inﬂ ation would rise gradually toward the inﬂ ation rate that they individually consider most consistent with the Federal Reserve’s dual mandate for maximum employment and stable prices. The central tendency of participants’ projections of the longer-run, mandate-consistent inﬂ ation rate was 1.7 to 2.0 percent, unchanged from April. A majority of participants antici- pated that inﬂ ation in 2011 and 2012 would continue to be below their assessments of the mandate-consistent inﬂ ation rate. Most participants judged that their projections of future economic activity and unemployment continued to be subject to greater-than-average uncertainty, while a few viewed the uncertainty surrounding their outlook for growth and unemployment as in line with typical levels.13 About one-half of the participants saw the risks to their growth outlook as tilted to the downside; in contrast, in April a large majority of participants saw the risks to growth as balanced. In the current sur- vey, a substantial number of participants also viewed the risks to unemployment as tilted to the upside. The remaining participants saw the risks to the projections for economic growth and unemployment as roughly balanced. Participants pointed to developments abroad and their possible ramiﬁ cations for U.S. ﬁ nancial mar- kets and the U.S. economy as suggesting somewhat greater uncertainty about the path of economic growth. In addition, some participants cited the unusual rise in the unemployment rate last year, which was associated with rapid growth in labor productivity, as contribut- ing to increased uncertainty regarding the outlook for employment and economic activity. Participants who judged that the risks to their growth outlook were tilted to the downside pointed to recent developments abroad and the risk of further contagion, together with the 13. Table 2 provides estimates of forecast uncertainty for the change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, and total consumer price inﬂ ation over the period from 1990 to 2009. At the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty” discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty in economic forecasts and explains the approach used to assess the uncertainty and risk attending partici- pants’ projections. Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges Percentage points NOTE: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root mean squared error of projections for 1990 through 2009 that were released in the summer by various private and government forecasters. As described in the box titled “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain assumptions, there is about a 70 percent probability that actual outcomes for real GDP, unemployment, and consumer prices will be in ranges implied by the average size of projection errors made in the past. Further information is in David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip (2007), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook from Historical Forecasting Errors,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2007-60 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November). 1. For deﬁ nitions, refer to general note in table 1. 2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure that has been most widely used in government and private economic forecasts. Projection is percent change, fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. potential for an increase in risk aversion among inves- tors, as important factors contributing to their assess- ment. Participants noted that problems in the com- mercial real estate market and the effects of ﬁ nancial regulatory reform could lead to greater constraints on credit availability, thereby restraining growth of output and employment. However, some participants viewed the downside risks to the growth outlook as roughly balanced by upside risks; they saw the possibility that monetary policy might remain accommodative for too long as one reason that growth could prove stronger than expected. As in April, most participants continued to see the uncertainty surrounding their inﬂ ation projections as above average. Still, a few judged that uncertainty in the outlook for inﬂ ation was about in line with or lower than typical levels. Most participants judged the risks to the inﬂ ation outlook as roughly balanced. As fac- tors accounting for elevated uncertainty regarding the outlook for inﬂ ation, participants pointed to the extraor- dinary degree of monetary policy accommodation, the uncertain timing of the exit from accommodation, and the unusually large gap between expected inﬂ ation, as measured by surveys of households and businesses, and current inﬂ ation. Participants noted that, despite the downward trend in underlying inﬂ ation in recent months, inﬂ ation expectations continued to be well anchored. Nonetheless, the possibility that inﬂ ation expectations might start to decline in response to per- sistently low levels of actual inﬂ ation and the potential effects of continued weakness of the economy on price trends were seen by a few participants as posing some downside risks to the inﬂ ation outlook. Figures 2.A and 2.B provide further details on the diversity of participants’ views regarding the likely outcomes for real GDP growth and the unemployment rate. The distribution of participants’ projections for real GDP growth this year was slightly narrower than the distribution in April, but the distributions for real GDP growth in 2011 and 2012 were about unchanged. As in earlier projections, the dispersion in forecasts for output growth appeared to reﬂ ect the diversity of their assessments regarding the current degree of underly- ing momentum in economic activity, the evolution of consumer and business sentiment, the degree of support to economic growth provided by ﬁ nancial markets, the effects of monetary policy accommodation, and other factors. Regarding participants’ projections for the unemployment rate, the distributions shifted somewhat higher for the years 2010 to 2012. The distributions of their estimates of the longer-run sustainable rates of output growth and unemployment were little changed from April. Corresponding information about the diversity of participants’ views regarding the inﬂ ation outlook is provided in ﬁ gures 2.C and 2.D. The distributions of projections for overall and core PCE inﬂ ation for 2010 shifted lower relative to the distributions in April, and the distributions were noticeably more tightly con- centrated. The distributions of overall and core inﬂ a- tion for 2011 and 2012, however, were generally little changed and remained fairly wide. The dispersion in participants’ projections over the next few years was mainly due to differences in their judgments regarding the determinants of inﬂ ation, including their estimates of prevailing resource slack and their assessments of the extent to which such slack affects actual and expected inﬂ ation. In contrast, the relatively tight distribution of participants’ projections for longer-run inﬂ ation illus- trates their substantial agreement about the measured rate of inﬂ ation that is most consistent with the Federal Reserve’s dual objectives of maximum employment and stable prices. Figure 2.A. Distribution of participants’ projections for the change in real GDP, 2010–12 and over the longer run Longer run NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. Figure 2.B. Distribution of participants’ projections for the unemployment rate, 2010–12 and over the longer run Longer run NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. Figure 2.C. Distribution of participants’ projections for PCE inflation, 2010–12 and over the longer run Longer run NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. The economic projections provided by the members of the Board of Governors and the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks inform discussions of monetary policy among policy- makers and can aid public understanding of the basis for policy actions. Considerable uncer- tainty attends these projections, however. The economic and statistical models and relation- ships used to help produce economic forecasts are necessarily imperfect descriptions of the real world. And the future path of the economy can be affected by myriad unforeseen develop- ments and events. Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, participants consider not only what appears to be the most likely economic outcome as embodied in their projections, but also the range of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of their occurring, and the potential costs to the economy should they occur. Table 2 summarizes the average historical accuracy of a range of forecasts, including those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports and those prepared by Federal Reserve Board staff in advance of meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee. The projection error ranges shown in the table illustrate the considerable uncertainty associated with economic forecasts. For example, suppose a participant projects that real gross domestic product (GDP) and total consumer prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty attending those projections is similar to that experienced in the past and the risks around the projections are broadly bal- anced, the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a probability of about 70 percent that actual GDP would expand within a range of 2.0 to 4.0 percent in the current year, 1.4 to 4.6 percent in the second year, and 1.2 to 4.8 percent in the third year. The corresponding 70 percent conﬁ dence intervals for overall inﬂ a- tion would be 1.1 to 2.9 percent in the current year, 1.0 to 3.0 percent in the second year, and 0.9 to 3.1 percent in the third year. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over history, participants provide judgments as to whether the uncertainty attached to their projections of each variable is greater than, smaller than, or broadly similar to typical levels of forecast uncer- tainty in the past as shown in table 2. Participants also provide judgments as to whether the risks to their projections are weighted to the upside, are weighted to the downside, or are broadly bal- anced. That is, participants judge whether each variable is more likely to be above or below their projections of the most likely outcome. These judgments about the uncertainty and the risks attending each participant’s projections are distinct from the diversity of participants’ views about the most likely outcomes. Forecast uncer- tainty is concerned with the risks associated with a particular projection rather than with diver- gences across a number of different projections. asset-backed securities American International Group, Inc. American Recovery and Reinvestment Act credit default swap commercial and industrial collateralized loan obligation commercial mortgage-backed securities commercial real estate Credit Card Accountability Responsibility and Disclosure Act disposable personal income European Central Bank equipment and software Financial Accounting Standards Federal Open Market Committee; also, the Committee gross domestic product government-sponsored enterprise International Monetary Fund interest on excess reserves individual retirement account information technology London interbank offered rate limited liability company mortgage-backed securities national income and product accounts negotiable order of withdrawal overnight index swap over the counter personal consumption expenditures reverse repurchase agreement Senior Credit Ofﬁ cer Opinion Survey on Dealer Financing Terms Senior Loan Ofﬁ cer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices Term Auction Facility Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility Troubled Asset Relief Program Term Deposit Facility Treasury inﬂ ation-protected securities The Board of Governors is pleased to submit its Monetary Policy Report to the Congress pursuant to section 2B of the Federal Reserve Act. After declining for a year and a half, economic activ- ity in the United States turned up in the second half of 2009, supported by an improvement in ﬁ nancial condi- tions, stimulus from monetary and ﬁ scal policies, and a recovery in foreign economies. These factors, along with increased business and household conﬁ dence, appear likely to boost spending and sustain the econom- ic expansion. However, the pace of the recovery prob- ably will be tempered by households’ desire to rebuild wealth, still-tight credit conditions facing some borrow- ers, and, despite some tentative signs of stabilization, continued weakness in labor markets. With substantial resource slack continuing to suppress cost pressures and with longer-term inﬂ ation expectations stable, inﬂ ation is likely to be subdued for some time. U.S. real gross domestic product (GDP) rose at about a 4 percent pace, on average, over the second half of 2009. Consumer spending—which was boosted by supportive monetary and ﬁ scal policies—posted solid increases, though it remained well below its pre- recession level. Meanwhile, activity in the housing mar- ket, which began to pick up last spring, ﬂ attened over the second half of 2009. In the business sector, invest- ment in equipment and software posted a sizable gain in the second half of last year, likely reﬂ ecting improved conditions in capital markets and brighter sales pros- pects. In addition, ﬁ rms reduced the pace of inventory liquidation markedly in the fourth quarter. In contrast, investment in nonresidential structures continued to contract. With the recovery in U.S. and foreign demand, U.S. trade ﬂ ows rebounded in the second half of 2009 after precipitous declines late in 2008 and early in 2009. Nevertheless, both exports and imports stayed considerably below their earlier peaks. Despite the pickup in output, employment continued to contract in the second half of 2009, albeit at a mark- edly slower pace than in the ﬁ rst half. The unemploy- ment rate rose further during the second half, reaching 10 percent by the end of the year—its highest level since the early 1980s—before dropping back in Janu- ary. Although job losses have slowed, hiring remains weak, and the median duration of unemployment has lengthened signiﬁ cantly. Headline consumer price inﬂ ation picked up in 2009 as energy prices rose sharply: Over the 12 months ending in December, prices for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) increased about 2 percent, up from ½ percent in 2008. In contrast, price increases for con- sumer expenditures other than food and energy items— so-called core PCE—slowed noticeably last year. After rising at an annual rate of about 1¾ percent in 2008 and the ﬁ rst half of 2009, core PCE prices increased at an annual rate of just over 1 percent in the second half of the year. The recovery in ﬁ nancial markets that began last spring continued through the second half of the year and into 2010. Broad equity price indexes increased further, on balance, and risk spreads on corporate bonds narrowed considerably. Conditions in short-term fund- ing markets returned to near pre-crisis levels; liquid- ity and pricing in bank funding markets continued to normalize, while risk spreads in the commercial paper market were stable at the low end of the range observed since the fall of 2007. The functioning of ﬁ nancial mar- kets more generally improved further. Investors became more optimistic about the outlook for ﬁ nancial institutions during the ﬁ rst half of last year. That development was bolstered by the release of the results of the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP), which were seen as helping clarify the ﬁ nan- cial conditions of the largest bank holding companies and provided investors with greater assurance about the health of the institutions. Sentiment rose further over the remainder of the year as investors became more optimistic about the economic outlook. Most of the 19 bank holding companies included in the SCAP issued equity, some to augment or improve the quality of their capital and some to repay investments made by the Treasury under the Troubled Asset Relief Program. Still, delinquency and charge-off rates at commercial banks increased further in the second half of the year, and loan losses remained very high. Nonﬁ nancial ﬁ rms with access to capital markets took advantage of the improvement in ﬁ nancial condi- tions to issue corporate bonds and equity shares at a sol- id pace; a signiﬁ cant portion of issuance likely reﬂ ected an effort by businesses to substitute attractively priced longer-term ﬁ nancing for shorter-term debt. In contrast, many small businesses and other ﬁ rms that depend largely on banks to meet their funding needs found their access to credit severely restricted; banks contin- ued to tighten their lending standards and terms, though to a more limited extent, during the second half of 2009 amid higher loan losses on their com- mercial loans and reports of lingering uncertainty about business credit quality. According to survey data, demand for business loans was also weak throughout 2009. Availability of credit for households remained con- strained in the second half of 2009, even as interest rates declined for mortgages and many consumer loans. Restrictive bank lending policies to individuals likely were due importantly to banks’ concerns about the abil- ity of households to repay loans in an environment of high unemployment and continued softness in house prices. In addition, senior bank loan ofﬁ cers reported weakening loan demand from households throughout 2009. However, in part because of support from the Federal Reserve’s Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility, the consumer asset-backed securities market, which is an important funding source for consumer loans, improved. All told, in 2009 nominal household debt experienced its ﬁ rst annual decline since the begin- ning of the data series in 1951. The Federal Reserve continued to support the func- tioning of ﬁ nancial markets and promote recovery in economic activity using a wide array of tools. The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) maintained a target range of 0 to ¼ percent for the federal funds rate throughout the second half of 2009 and early 2010 and indicated that economic conditions were likely to war- rant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period. Further, the Federal Reserve continued its purchases of Treasury securities, agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS), and agency debt in order to provide support to mortgage and housing mar- kets and to improve overall conditions in private credit markets. To promote a smooth transition in ﬁ nancial markets as the acquisitions are completed, the Federal Reserve gradually slowed the pace of these purchases in late 2009 and early 2010. The planned acquisitions of $300 billion of Treasury securities were completed by October, while the purchases of $1.25 trillion of MBS and about $175 billion of agency debt are expect- ed to be ﬁ nished by the end of the ﬁ rst quarter of this year. In light of the improved functioning of ﬁ nancial markets, the Federal Reserve removed some of the extraordinary support it had provided during the crisis and closed many of its special liquidity facilities and the temporary liquidity swap arrangements with other central banks in the fall of 2009 and early in 2010. The Federal Reserve also began to normalize its lend- ing to commercial banks through the discount window by reducing the maximum maturity of loans extended through the primary credit facility from 90 days to 28 days, effective on January 14, and by announcing that the maturity of those loans will be reduced further to overnight, effective on March 18. The rate charged on primary credit loans was increased from ½ percent to ¾ percent effective February 19. In addition, the Fed- eral Reserve announced that the ﬁ nal auction under the Term Auction Facility will occur in March and later noted that the minimum bid rate for that auction had been increased by ¼ percentage point to ½ percent. Overall, the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet increased from about $2 trillion in the summer of 2009 to about $2.3 trillion on February 17, 2010. The com- position of the balance sheet continued to shift as a considerable decline in credit extended through various facilities was more than offset by the increase in securi- ties held outright. The Federal Reserve continued to broaden its efforts to provide even more information to the public regarding its conduct of these programs and of monetary policy (see box in Part 3). The Federal Reserve is taking steps to ensure that it will be able to smoothly withdraw extraordinary policy accommodation when appropriate. Because the Federal Reserve, under the statutory authority provided by the Congress in October 2008, pays interest on the balances depository institutions hold at Reserve Banks, it can put upward pressure on short-term interest rates even with an extraordinarily large volume of reserves in the bank- ing system by raising the interest rate paid on such bal- ances. In addition, the Federal Reserve has continued to develop several other tools that it could use to reinforce the effects of increases in the interest rate on balances at Reserve Banks. In particular, the Federal Reserve has tested its ability to execute reverse repurchase agree- ments (reverse repos) in the triparty repo market with primary dealers using both Treasury and agency debt as collateral, and it is developing the capability to conduct such transactions with other counterparties and against agency MBS. The Federal Reserve has also announced plans for implementing a term deposit facility. In addi- tion, it has the option of redeeming or selling assets in order to reduce monetary policy accommodation. ing, the members of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks, all of whom participate in FOMC meet- ings, provided projections for economic growth, unem- ployment, and inﬂ ation; these projections are presented in Part 4 of this report. FOMC participants agreed that economic recovery from the recent recession was under way, but that they expected it to proceed at a gradual pace, restrained in part by household and business uncertainty regarding the economic outlook, modest improvement in labor markets, and slow easing of cred- it conditions in the banking sector. Participants expect- ed that real GDP would expand at a rate that was only moderately above its longer-run sustainable growth rate and that the unemployment rate would decline only slowly over the next few years. Most participants also anticipated that inﬂ ation would remain subdued over this period. Nearly all participants judged the risks to their growth outlook as generally balanced, and most also saw roughly balanced risks surrounding their inﬂ ation projections. Participants continued to judge the uncer- tainty surrounding their projections for economic activ- ity and inﬂ ation as unusually high relative to historical norms. Participants also reported their assessments of the rates to which key macroeconomic variables would be expected to converge in the longer run under appro- priate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. The central tendencies of these longer-run projections were 2.5 to 2.8 percent for real GDP growth, 5.0 to 5.2 percent for the unemployment rate, and 1.7 to 2.0 percent for the inﬂ ation rate. According to the advance estimate from the Bureau of Economic Analysis, real gross domestic product (GDP) increased at an annual rate of 4 percent in the second half of 2009, retracing part of the sharp decline in activ- ity that began in early 2008 (ﬁ gure 1). Nonetheless, labor market conditions, which tend to lag changes in economic activity, remain very weak: The unemploy- ment rate rose to 10 percent at the end of last year, 5 percentage points above its level at the start of 2008, before dropping back some in January. Conditions in many ﬁ nancial markets have improved signiﬁ cantly, but lending policies at banks remain stringent. Meanwhile, an increase in energy prices has boosted overall con- sumer price inﬂ ation; however, price inﬂ ation for other items has remained subdued, and inﬂ ation expectations have been relatively stable (ﬁ gure 2). Conditions in ﬁ nancial markets improved further in the second half of 2009, reﬂ ecting a more positive economic outlook as well as the effects of the policy initiatives implemented by the Federal Reserve, the Treasury, and other government agencies to support ﬁ nancial stability and promote economic recovery. Treasury yields, mortgage rates, and other market inter- est rates remained low while equity prices continued to rise, on net, amid positive earnings news, and corporate bond spreads narrowed substantially. As the function- 1. Change in real gross domestic product, 2003–09 2. Change in the chain-type price index for personal consumption expenditures, 2003–09 Excluding food and energy NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through December 2009; changes are from one year earlier. ing of short-term funding markets improved further, the usage of special liquidity facilities declined sharply, and the Federal Reserve closed several of those facilities on February 1, 2010.1 Investors also seemed to become more optimistic about the prospects for the banking sec- tor, and many of the largest banking institutions issued equity and repaid investments made by the Treasury under the Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP). Nevertheless, the credit quality of bank loan portfolios remained a concern, particularly for loans secured by commercial and residential real estate loans. Private domestic nonﬁ nancial sector debt contracted, on balance, in the second half of 2009. On the positive side, ﬁ rms with access to capital markets issued corpo- rate bonds at a robust pace, with many ﬁ rms reportedly seeking to lock in long-term, low-interest-rate debt or reﬁ nance other debt. By contrast, many small busi- nesses and other ﬁ rms that depend primarily on banks for their funding needs faced substantial constraints on their access to credit even as demand for such credit remained weak. In the household sector, demand for NOTE: Here and in subsequent figures, except as noted, change for a given period is measured to its final quarter from the final quarter of the preceding period. 1. Speciﬁ cally, the Primary Dealer Credit Facility, the Term Securities Lending Facility, the Commercial Paper Funding Facility, the Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility, and the temporary swap lines with foreign central banks were closed. credit was weak, and supply conditions remained tight, as banks maintained stringent lending standards for both consumer loans and residential real estate loans. However, issuance of asset-backed securities (ABS), which are an important source of funding for consumer loans, strengthened, supported in part by the Federal Reserve’s Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF). The housing market began to recover in the spring of 2009, but the pace of improvement slowed during the second half of the year. After having increased almost 30 percent through mid-2009, sales of new single- family homes retraced about one-half of that gain in the second half of the year. And, although sales of exist- ing single-family homes moved up noticeably through November, they fell back sharply in December, suggest- ing that some of the earlier strength reﬂ ected sales that had been pulled forward in anticipation of the expira- tion of the ﬁ rst-time homebuyer tax credit.2 The index of pending home sales, a leading indicator of sales of existing homes, leveled off in December after Novem- ber’s steep decline. The recovery in construction activity in the single- family sector also decelerated in the second half of 2009. After stepping up noticeably last spring from an exceptionally low level, starts of single-family homes were about ﬂ at, on average, from June to December (ﬁ gure 3). With the level of construction remain- ing quite low, the inventory of unsold new homes fell sharply and is now less than one-half of the peak reached in 2006. In the much smaller multifamily sec- tor—where tight credit conditions and high vacancies have depressed building—starts deteriorated a bit fur- ther in the second half of the year. After falling sharply for about two and a half years, house prices, as measured by a number of national indexes, were more stable in the second half of 2009 (ﬁ gure 4). One house price measure with wide geo- 2. The ﬁ rst-time homebuyer tax credit, which was enacted in February 2009 as part of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act, was originally scheduled to expire on November 30, 2009. In early November, however, the Congress extended the credit to sales occurring through April 30, 2010, and expanded it to include repeat homebuyers who have owned and occupied a house for at least ﬁ ve of the past eight years. 3. Private housing starts, 1996–2010 NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through January 2010. SOURCE: Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. graphic coverage—the LoanPerformance repeat-sales index—is up, on net, from its trough earlier in the year, even though the last few readings of that index fell back a bit. According to the Thomson Reuters/University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers, the number of respon- dents who expect house prices to increase over the next 12 months has moved up and now slightly exceeds the number of respondents who expect prices to decrease.3 3. The survey, formerly the Reuters/University of Michigan Sur- veys of Consumers, was renamed the Thomson Reuters/University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers as of January 1, 2010. 4. Change in prices of existing single-family houses, 1993–2009 NOTE: The data are monthly and extend into 2009:Q4; changes are from one year earlier. The LP price index includes purchase transactions only. The FHFA index (formerly calculated by the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight) also transactions only. The S&P/Case-Shiller index reflects all arm’s-length sales transactions in the metropolitan areas of Boston, Chicago, Denver, Las Vegas, Los Angeles, Miami, New York, San Diego, San Francisco, and Washington, D.C. includes purchase The earlier declines in house prices in combination with the low level of mortgage rates have made housing more affordable, and the apparent stabilization in prices may bring into the market buyers who were reluctant to purchase a home when prices were perceived to be fall- ing. That said, the still-substantial inventory of unsold homes, including foreclosed homes, has continued to weigh on the market. Even with house prices showing signs of stabiliza- tion, home values remained well below the remaining amount of principal on mortgages (so-called underwater loans) for many borrowers in the second half of 2009. Against this backdrop, and with a very high unemploy- ment rate, delinquency rates on all types of residential mortgages continued to move higher (ﬁ gure 5). As of December, serious delinquency rates on prime and near- prime loans had climbed to 16 percent for variable-rate loans and to over 5 percent for ﬁ xed rate loans.4 The delinquency rate on all subprime loans was about 35 percent in December. Loans backed by the Federal Housing Administration (FHA) also showed increasing strains, with delinquency rates moving up to 9 percent at the end of 2009. Foreclosures remained exceptionally elevated in the second half of 2009. About 1.4 million homes 4. A mortgage is deﬁ ned as seriously delinquent if the borrower is 90 days or more behind in payments or the property is in foreclosure. 5. Mortgage delinquency rates, 2001–09 Fixed rate Fixed rate NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through December 2009. Delinquency rate is the percent of loans 90 days or more past due or in foreclosure. entered foreclosure during that period, similar to the pace earlier in the year. Historically, about one-half of foreclosure starts have resulted in homeowners losing the home. The heightened level of foreclosures has been particularly notable among prime borrowers, for whom the number of foreclosure starts moved up a bit in the second half of the year; by contrast foreclosure starts for subprime borrowers dropped back somewhat. To address the foreclosure problem, the Treasury has intensiﬁ ed efforts through its Making Home Afford- able program to encourage loan modiﬁ cations and to allow borrowers to reﬁ nance into mortgages with more- affordable payments. Interest rates on 30-year ﬁ xed-rate conforming mortgages moved down in the second half of 2009, and despite a modest upturn around the start of 2010, they remained near the lowest levels on record (ﬁ gure 6).5 The low mortgage rates reﬂ ected the gener- ally low level of Treasury yields and the large purchases of agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) by the Federal Reserve, which were reportedly an important factor behind the narrow spread between these con- forming mortgage rates and yields on Treasury securi- ties. Interest rates on nonconforming mortgages, which are not included in the mortgage pools backing MBS that are eligible for purchase by the Federal Reserve, 5. Conforming mortgages are those eligible for purchase by Fan- nie Mae and Freddie Mac; they must be equivalent in risk to a prime mortgage with an 80 percent loan-to-value ratio, and they cannot exceed in size the conforming loan limit. The conforming loan limit for a ﬁ rst mortgage on a single-family home in the contiguous United States is currently equal to the greater of $417,000 or 115 percent of the area’s median house price, and it cannot exceed $729,750. 6. Mortgage interest rates, 1993–2010 Fixed rate NOTE: The data, which are weekly and extend through February 17, 2010, are contract rates on 30-year mortgages. also generally declined, but the spreads between non- conforming mortgage rates and rates on conforming mortgages remained wide by historical standards. Although mortgage rates fell to low levels, the avail- ability of mortgage ﬁ nancing continued to be sharply constrained. Respondents to the Senior Loan Ofﬁ cer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS) indicated throughout 2009 that banks continued to tighten their lending standards for all types of mortgage loans, though smaller net fractions reported doing so in the January 2010 survey than had been the case in earlier surveys. Lenders’ reluctance to extend mortgage credit in an environment of declining home values also likely held down reﬁ nancing activity, which remained subdued in the second half of 2009 even though mortgage rates decreased. The FHA announced that it was raising mortgage insurance premiums because its capital reserve ratio had fallen below the required threshold; at the same time, the FHA announced that it was increasing down-payment requirements for bor- rowers with very low credit scores. In recent years, the FHA has assumed a greater role in mortgage markets, especially for borrowers with high loan-to-value ratios or lower credit quality. Overall, residential mortgage debt outstanding contracted at an even faster pace in the second half than in the ﬁ rst half of the year. Net issu- ance of MBS by Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and Ginnie Mae, although brisk in the second half of 2009, was down a bit from the levels seen earlier in the year. The securitization market for mortgage loans not guaranteed by a housing-related government-sponsored enterprise (GSE) or the FHA remained closed. After having been roughly constant in the ﬁ rst half of last year, real personal consumption expenditures (PCE) rose at an annual rate of about 2½ percent in the sec- ond half (ﬁ gure 7). Sales of new light motor vehicles jumped from an average annual rate of 9½ million units in the ﬁ rst half of 2009 to a rate of 11¼ million units in the second half.6 Part of this rebound likely reﬂ ected the “cash for clunkers” program, but even after the expira- tion of that program, sales remained close to 11 million units, supported in part by improved credit conditions for auto buyers as the ABS market revived. Real spend- ing on goods excluding motor vehicles also increased at a robust pace in the second half of the year, while real outlays for services rose more modestly. 6. Sales dropped back in January, but the decline occurred largely at Toyota, which was confronted by widely publicized problems. 7. Real personal consumption expenditures, 2003–09 Billions of chained (2005) dollars NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through December 2009. SOURCE: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis. The rise in consumer spending in 2009 was buoyed by improvements in some of its underlying determi- nants: Equity prices moved up from their lows reached last March, a development that helped to rebuild household wealth, and household income was lifted by provisions in the ﬁ scal stimulus package. Accord- ingly, consumer sentiment has rebounded from the very low levels seen earlier in 2009, though it remains low by historical standards (ﬁ gure 8). Consumer spending appears to have been ﬁ nanced largely out of current income over the past year, and households were also able to increase their personal saving and begin 8. Consumer sentiment, 1996–2010 NOTE: The Conference Board data are monthly and extend through January 2010. The Thomson Reuters/Michigan data are monthly and extend through a preliminary estimate for February 2010; the survey in which the data are the Reuters/University of Michigan Surveys of collected, formerly Consumers, was renamed the Thomson Reuters/University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers as of January 1, 2010. 9. Personal saving rate, 1986–2009 NOTE: The data are quarterly and extend through 2009:Q4. SOURCE: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis. deleveraging their balance sheets. After increasing sharply in 2008, the saving rate moved up a bit further in 2009 (ﬁ gure 9). Real disposable personal income—after-tax income adjusted for inﬂ ation—increased about 1¾ percent last year, with the effects of the tax cuts and higher social beneﬁ t payments included in the 2009 ﬁ scal stimulus package accounting for most of the increase.7 Real labor income—that is, total wages, salaries, and employee beneﬁ ts, adjusted for inﬂ ation—fell sharply in the ﬁ rst half of the 2009, and edged down a bit further in the 7. The increases in beneﬁ t payments under the American Recov- ery and Reinvestment Act included an expansion of unemployment beneﬁ ts, increases in food stamps and Pell grants, subsidies for health insurance coverage for the unemployed, and a one-time $250 pay- ment to retirees and veterans. 10. Change in real income and in real wage and salary disbursements, 2003–09 11. Wealth-to-income ratio, 1986–2009 NOTE: The data are quarterly and extend through 2009:Q3. The wealth- to-income ratio is the ratio of household net worth to disposable personal income. second half, as the decline in total employee work hours more than offset an increase in real hourly compensa- tion (ﬁ gure 10). After dropping during the preceding 2½ years, household net worth turned up in the second and third quarters of 2009 and likely rose further in the fourth quarter. Much of the recovery reﬂ ected a rebound in equity prices, although the modest gain, on net, in the value of owner-occupied real estate also contributed. With the rise in net worth, the ratio of household wealth to disposable income increased in the second half of the year to about its historical average (ﬁ gure 11). Households began to deleverage around the third quarter of 2008, at the height of the ﬁ nancial crisis, and that process continued during the second half of 2009. The decline in nonmortgage consumer debt intensi- ﬁ ed during the latter part of last year. The contraction was most pronounced in revolving credit, which fell at about a 10 percent annual rate during the second half of 2009. Nonrevolving credit also decreased. Including the drop in mortgage debt, the Federal Reserve’s ﬂ ow of funds data indicate that total household debt declined in 2009 for the ﬁ rst time since the data series began in 1951. Reﬂ ecting these developments, debt service payments—the required principal and interest on exist- ing mortgages and consumer debt—fell as a share of disposable income. At the end of the third quarter, the ratio of debt service payments to disposable income had declined to its lowest level since 2001 (ﬁ gure 12). Results from the recent SLOOS suggest that the con- traction in consumer credit has been the result of both weak demand and tight supply. A net fraction of about one-third of the bank loan ofﬁ cers that responded to the 12. Household debt service, 1980–2009 NOTE: The data are quarterly and extend through 2009:Q3. Debt service payments consist of estimated required payments on outstanding mortgage and consumer debt. January SLOOS reported weaker demand for all types of consumer loans. The same survey also indicated that banks continued to tighten terms on credit card loans over the ﬁ nal three months of 2009 by reducing credit limits and raising interest rates charged, though smaller net fractions reported doing so than in previous surveys. After having been tightened signiﬁ cantly in the sum- mer and fall of 2009, standards and terms on consumer loans other than credit card loans were little changed, on balance, in the January survey. Changes in interest rates on consumer loans were mixed during the second half of 2009. Interest rates on new auto loans generally continued to trend lower, and spreads on these loans relative to comparable-maturity Treasury securities narrowed further. Interest rates on credit card loans, however, jumped near midyear and increased further toward year-end. According to the October SLOOS, some of the increases in credit card interest rates and the tightening of other lending terms reﬂ ected adjustments made by banks in anticipation of the imposition of new rules under the Credit Card Accountability Responsibility and Disclosure (Credit CARD) Act.8 Concerns about the ability of households to repay loans may also have contributed to the tightening of lending policies for consumer credit over the second half of 2009. Delinquency rates on auto loans at cap- tive ﬁ nance companies remained elevated, and credit card delinquency rates at commercial banks stayed high at around 6½ percent in the fourth quarter of 2009. In addition, the pace at which lenders were charging off these loans increased sharply in recent quarters. On a more positive note, respondents to the January SLOOS indicated that they expected the credit quality of their consumer loans, other than credit card loans, to stabilize during 2010. Prior to the crisis, a large portion of consumer credit was funded through the ABS market. After having essentially ground to a halt at the end of 2008, consum- er ABS markets recovered in 2009 with the important support of the TALF (ﬁ gure 13). Much of the ABS issu- ance through the summer relied heavily on the TALF for ﬁ nancing. By the end of the year, the yields on such securities dropped markedly, and issuance of ABS without TALF support increased accordingly. (Indeed, the interest rates on TALF loans were chosen so that they would become unattractive as market conditions improved.) Issuance of ABS backed by auto loans in the second half of 2009 was roughly on par with issuance prior to the ﬁ nancial crisis, and only a small portion was purchased using loans from the TALF. A renewed abil- ity to securitize auto loans may have contributed to the reduction in the interest rates on these loans. Similarly, ABS issuance backed by credit card receivables gained strength through most of the year, though it experienced a drop early in the fourth quarter because of uncertainty about how the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) would treat securitized receivables should a sponsoring bank fail. Issuance picked up slightly after 13. Gross issuance of selected asset-backed securities, 2007–10 8. The Credit CARD Act includes some provisions that place restrictions on issuers’ ability to impose certain fees and to engage in risk-based pricing. Some provisions took effect in August 2009, and others did so in February 2010. NOTE: Consumer ABS (asset-backed securities) are securities backed by credit card loans, nonrevolving consumer loans, and auto loans. Data for consumer ABS show gross issuance facilitated by the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) and such issuance outside the TALF. SOURCE: Bloomberg and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. the FDIC provided a temporary extension of safe- harbor rules for its handling of securitized assets in a receivership. By contrast, issuance of ABS backed by private student loans remained almost entirely depen- dent on ﬁ nancing from the TALF. After falling throughout 2008 and the ﬁ rst half of 2009, business spending on equipment and software (E&S) began to expand in the second half of last year, as sales prospects picked up, corporate proﬁ ts increased, and ﬁ nancial conditions for many businesses (especially those with direct access to capital markets) improved (ﬁ gure 14). Business outlays on transportation equip- ment rose sharply in the second half as ﬁ rms rebuilt their ﬂ eets of light motor vehicles and accelerated their purchases of large trucks in advance of new environ- 14. Change in real business fixed investment, 2003–09 High-tech equipment and software Other equipment excluding transportation NOTE: High-tech equipment consists of computers and peripheral equip- mental regulations on diesel engines. Real spending on information technology capital—computers, software, and communications equipment—also accelerated toward the end of 2009, likely boosted by the desire to replace older, less-efﬁ cient equipment. Investment in equipment other than information processing and transportation, which accounts for nearly one-half of E&S outlays, continued to fall during the second half of 2009, but much more slowly than earlier in the year. More recently, orders of nondefense capital goods other than transportation items posted a second strong month- ly increase in December, and recent surveys of business conditions have been more upbeat than in several years. In contrast to the upturn in equipment investment, real spending on nonresidential structures continued to decline steeply throughout 2009. Real outlays for con- struction of structures other than those used for drilling and mining fell at an annual rate of 25 percent in the second half of 2009, likely reﬂ ecting the drag from ris- ing vacancy rates and plunging property prices for com- mercial and ofﬁ ce buildings, as well as difﬁ cult ﬁ nanc- ing conditions for new projects. Following a steep drop in the ﬁ rst half of the year, real spending on drilling and mining structures increased sharply in the second half, likely in response to the rebound in oil prices. After running off inventories aggressively during the ﬁ rst three quarters of 2009, ﬁ rms moved to stem the pace of liquidation in the fourth quarter (ﬁ gure 15). Automakers added to their dealers’ stocks after cut- backs in production earlier in the year had reduced 15. Change in real business inventories, 2003–09 Billions of chained (2005) dollars, annual rate days’ supply of domestic light vehicles to below their preferred levels. Outside of motor vehicles, ﬁ rms con- tinued to draw down inventories in the fourth quarter, but at a much slower pace than earlier in the year. Indeed, purchasing managers in the manufacturing sec- tor report that their customers’ inventories are relatively lean, a development that could lead to some restocking in the coming months. 16. Delinquency rates on commercial real estate loans, 1991–2010 Overall, operating earnings per share for S&P 500 ﬁ rms rebounded over the course of 2009. Still, earnings were well below the levels experienced prior to the ﬁ nancial market turmoil and the accompanying recession. Within the S&P 500, earnings for ﬁ nancial ﬁ rms ﬂ uctuated around low levels, while earnings for nonﬁ nancial ﬁ rms rebounded sharply as the economic recovery began to take hold. Data from ﬁ rms that have reported for the fourth quarter suggest that earnings for nonﬁ nancial ﬁ rms continued to recover. The credit quality of nonﬁ nancial corporations improved somewhat over the second part of last year, although signs of stress persisted. Business leverage, as measured by the ratio of debt to assets, fell in the third quarter. Credit rating downgrades outpaced upgrades early in 2009, but the pace of downgrades moderated substantially in the second half of the year, and by the fourth quarter upgrades were outpacing downgrades. In addition, the corporate bond default rate dropped into the range that had prevailed before the ﬁ nancial crisis began in August 2007. Delinquency rates on loans to nonﬁ nancial business- es, however, rose throughout the year. For commercial and industrial (C&I) loans, delinquencies in the fourth quarter reached 4.5 percent. In response to a special question on the January 2010 SLOOS, a large net frac- tion of banks reported that in the fourth quarter, the credit quality of their existing C&I loans to small ﬁ rms was worse than the quality of their loans to larger ﬁ rms. While survey respondents generally expected the credit quality of their C&I loan portfolios to improve during 2010, banks’ outlook for C&I loans to larger ﬁ rms was more optimistic than it was for such loans to smaller ﬁ rms. Reﬂ ecting deterioration in commercial property markets, delinquency rates on commercial real estate (CRE) loans both in securitized pools and on banks’ books moved up sharply in the second half of 2009 (ﬁ gure 16). Delinquency rates on construction and land development loans climbed to especially high levels. In October 2009, the Federal Reserve joined with other banking regulators to provide guidelines to banks in NOTE: The data for commercial banks and life insurance companies are quarterly and extend through 2009:Q4 and 2009:Q3, respectively. The data for commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) are monthly and extend through January 2010. The delinquency rates for commercial banks and CMBS are the percent of loans 30 days or more past due or not accruing interest. The delinquency rate for life insurance companies is the percent of loans 60 days or more past due or not accruing interest. their efforts to work constructively with troubled CRE borrowers.9 The debt of domestic nonﬁ nancial businesses con- tracted slightly during the second half of 2009, and the composition of borrowing continued to shift toward longer-term debt (ﬁ gure 17). Net issuance of corporate bonds remained strong as businesses took advantage of favorable market conditions to issue longer-term debt; at the same time, bank loans to businesses—both C&I and CRE loans—contracted, as did commercial paper. 9. This statement updated and replaced existing supervisory guid- ance to assist examiners in evaluating institutions’ efforts to renew or restructure loans to creditworthy CRE borrowers. The statement was intended to promote supervisory consistency, enhance the transpar- ency of CRE workout transactions (that is, transactions intended to renew and restructure the loans), and ensure that supervisory policies and actions do not inadvertently curtail the availability of credit to sound borrowers. For more information, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, National Credit Union Administration, Ofﬁ ce of the Comptroller of the Currency, Ofﬁ ce of Thrift Supervision, and Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council State Liaison Committee (2009), “Policy Statement on Prudent Commercial Real Estate Loan Work- outs,” attachment to Supervision and Regulation Letter SR 09-7 (October 30), www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/srletters/2009/ sr0907a1.pdf. 17. Selected components of net financing for nonfinancial businesses, 2005–09 NOTE: The data for the components except bonds are seasonally adjusted. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Board, flow of funds data. The decline in bank lending to businesses was due partly to the weakness in loan demand. Many banks experiencing steep declines in C&I loans reported that existing loans were paid down across a wide swath of industries. Respondents to the January 2010 SLOOS indicated that weak demand for C&I loans during the second half of 2009 reﬂ ected their customers’ reduced need to use these loans to ﬁ nance investment in plant and equipment as well as to ﬁ nance accounts receiv- able, inventories, and mergers and acquisitions. In addi- tion, demand was reportedly low for CRE loans amid weak fundamentals in the sector. The weakness in bank lending to businesses in 2009 was also a consequence of a tightening in lending stan- dards. Responses to the SLOOS indicated that lending standards for C&I loans were tightened signiﬁ cantly in the summer and fall of 2009 and that they remained about unchanged in the ﬁ nal months of the year (ﬁ gure 18). In addition, many banks continued to tighten some terms throughout the year—for example, by increas- ing the interest rate premiums charged on riskier loans. Considerable net fractions of banks also continued to report tightening lending standards on CRE loans. Small businesses have been particularly affected by tight bank lending standards because of their lack of direct access to capital markets. In surveys conducted by the National Federation of Independent Business (NFIB), the net fraction of small businesses reporting that credit had become more difﬁ cult to obtain over the preceding three months remained at extremely elevated levels during the second half of 2009 (ﬁ gure 19). More- over, considerable net fractions of NFIB survey respon- dents expected lending conditions to tighten further in 18. Net percentage of domestic banks tightening standards and increasing premiums charged on riskier loans to large and medium-sized borrowers, 1998–2010 NOTE: The data are drawn from a survey generally conducted four times per year; the last observation is from the January 2010 survey, which covers 2009:Q4. Net percentage is the percentage of banks reporting a tightening of standards or an increase in premiums less the percentage reporting an easing or a decrease. The definition for firm size suggested for, and generally used by, survey respondents is that large and medium-sized firms have annual sales of $50 million or more. the near term. However, when asked about the most important problem they faced, small businesses most frequently cited poor sales, while only a small fraction cited credit availability. Recognizing that small busi- nesses play a crucial role in the economy and that some are experiencing difﬁ culty in obtaining or renewing credit, the federal ﬁ nancial regulatory agencies and the 19. Net percentage of small businesses that reported more difficulty in obtaining credit, 1989–2010 NOTE: The data are drawn from a survey conducted monthly and are seasonally adjusted; the last observation is from the January 2010 survey, which covers December 2009. The data reflect the proportion of borrowers who sought credit in the past three months that reported more difficulty in obtaining credit less the proportion that reported more ease in obtaining credit. Conference of State Bank Supervisors issued a state- ment on February 5, 2010, regarding lending to these businesses.10 The statement emphasized that ﬁ nancial institutions that engage in prudent small business lend- ing will not be subject to supervisory criticism for small business loans made on that basis. Further, the state- ment emphasized that regulators are working with the industry and supervisory staff to ensure that supervisory policies and actions do not inadvertently curtail the availability of credit to ﬁ nancially sound small business borrowers. In the equity market, both seasoned and initial offer- ings by nonﬁ nancial ﬁ rms were solid in the second half of 2009 (ﬁ gure 20). After nearly ceasing earlier in the year, cash-ﬁ nanced mergers picked up toward year-end, mostly as the result of a few large deals. Share repur- chases continued to be light. New issuance in the commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) market—which had ceased in the third quarter of 2008, thus eliminating an important source of ﬁ nancing for many lenders—resumed in November 2009 with a securitization supported by the Federal Reserve’s TALF program. A handful of sub- 10. For more information, see Federal Deposit Insurance Corpora- tion, Ofﬁ ce of the Comptroller of the Currency, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Ofﬁ ce of Thrift Supervision, National Credit Union Administration, and Conference of State Bank Supervisors (2010), “Interagency Statement on Meeting the Credit Needs of Creditworthy Small Business Borrowers,” attachment to “Regulators Issue Statement on Lending to Creditworthy Small Businesses,” joint press release, February 5, www.occ.treas.gov/ftp/ release/2010-14.htm. sequent small securitizations, with more-conservative underwriting and simpler structures than had prevailed during the credit boom, were brought to market and successfully completed without support from the TALF. Nevertheless, issuance of CMBS remains very light, and material increases in issuance appeared unlikely in the near term. Trading in existing CMBS picked up dur- ing the second half of 2009, and yield spreads relative to Treasury securities narrowed, although they remain very high by historical standards. Some of the improve- ment likely reﬂ ected support provided by the Federal Reserve through the part of the TALF program that pro- vides loans for the purchase of “legacy” CMBS. Issuance of leveraged loans, which often involves loan extensions by nonbank ﬁ nancial institutions, also remained weak throughout 2009 although market con- ditions reportedly improved. Prior to the crisis, this segment of the syndicated loan market provided con- siderable ﬁ nancing to lower-rated nonﬁ nancial ﬁ rms. However, issuance of leveraged loans fell to low levels when investors moved away from structured ﬁ nance products such as collateralized loan obligations, which had been substantial purchasers of such credits. The market began to show signs of recovery last year with secondary-market prices of loans moving higher, and, by late in the year, new loans had found increased investor interest amid some easing in loan terms. 20. Components of net equity issuance, 2005–09 NOTE: Net equity issuance is the difference between equity issued by domestic companies in public or private markets and equity retired through share repurchases, domestic cash-financed mergers, or foreign takeovers of U.S. firms. Equity issuance includes funds invested by private equity partnerships and stock option proceeds. The deﬁ cit in the federal uniﬁ ed budget rose markedly in ﬁ scal year 2009 and reached $1.4 trillion, about $1 trillion higher than in ﬁ scal 2008. The effects of the weak economy on revenues and outlays, along with the budget costs associated with the ﬁ scal stimulus legisla- tion enacted last February (the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA)), the Troubled Asset Relief Program, and the conservatorship of the mortgage- related GSEs, all contributed to the widening of the budget gap. The deﬁ cit is expected to remain sharply elevated in ﬁ scal 2010. Although the budget costs of the ﬁ nancial stabilization programs are expected to be lower than in the last ﬁ scal year, the spend-out from last year’s ﬁ scal stimulus package is expected to be higher, and tax revenues are anticipated to remain weak. The Congressional Budget Ofﬁ ce projects that the deﬁ cit will be about $1.3 trillion this ﬁ scal year, just a touch below last year’s deﬁ cit, and that federal debt held by the public will reach 60 percent of nominal GDP, the highest level recorded since the early 1950s. The steep drop in economic activity during 2008 and the ﬁ rst half of 2009 resulted in sharply lower tax receipts (ﬁ gure 21). After falling about 2 percent in ﬁ s- cal 2008, federal receipts plunged 18 percent in ﬁ scal 2009, and tax receipts over the ﬁ rst four months of the current ﬁ scal year have continued to decline relative to the comparable year-earlier period. The decline in rev- enues in ﬁ scal 2009 was particularly steep for corporate taxes, mostly as a result of the sharp contraction in cor- porate proﬁ ts in 2008.11 Individual income and payroll taxes also declined substantially, reﬂ ecting the effects of the weak labor market on nominal wage and salary income, a decline in capital gains realizations, and the revenue-reducing provisions of the 2009 ﬁ scal stimulus legislation. While the outlays associated with the TARP and the conservatorship of the GSEs contributed importantly to the rapid rise in federal spending in ﬁ scal 2009, outlays excluding these extraordinary costs rose a relatively steep 10 percent.12 Spending for Medicaid and income support programs jumped almost 25 percent in ﬁ scal 2009 as a result of the deterioration in the labor mar- ket as well as policy decisions to expand funding for a number of such programs. This category of spending 11. Because ﬁ nal payments on 2008 liabilities were not due until April of 2009 and because of the difference between ﬁ scal and calen- dar years, much of the contraction in 2008 corporate proﬁ ts did not show through to tax revenues until ﬁ scal 2009. 12. In the Monthly Treasury Statements, equity purchases and debt-related transactions under the TARP are recorded on a net pres- ent value basis, taking into account market risk, as are the Treasury’s purchases of the GSE’s MBS. However, equity purchases from the GSEs in conservatorship are recorded on a cash ﬂ ow basis. 21. Federal receipts and expenditures, 1989–2009 Expenditures excluding net interest NOTE: The receipts and expenditures data are on a unified-budget basis and are for fiscal years (October through September); gross domestic product (GDP) is for the four quarters ending in Q3. 22. Change in real government expenditures on consumption and investment, 2003–09 has continued to rise rapidly thus far in ﬁ scal 2010, and most other categories of spending have increased fairly briskly as well. As measured in the national income and product accounts (NIPA), real federal expenditures on consump- tion and gross investment—the part of federal spending that is a direct component of GDP—rose at a 4 percent pace in the second half of 2009 (ﬁ gure 22). Nondefense outlays increased rapidly, in part reﬂ ecting the boost in spending from the 2009 ﬁ scal stimulus legislation, while real defense outlays rose modestly. Federal debt expanded rapidly throughout 2009 and rose to more than 50 percent of nominal GDP by the end of 2009, up from around 35 percent earlier in the decade. To fund the increased borrowing needs, Treas- ury auctions grew to record sizes. However, demand for Treasury issues kept pace, and bid-to-cover ratios at these auctions were generally strong. Foreign demand was solid, and foreign custody holdings of Treasury securities at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York increased considerably over the year. Despite the substantial federal aid provided by the ARRA, the ﬁ scal situations of state and local govern- ments remain challenging. At the state level, revenues from income, business, and sales taxes continued to fall in the second half of last year, and many states are currently in the process of addressing shortfalls in their ﬁ scal 2010 budgets. At the local level, revenues have held up fairly well, as receipts from property taxes, on which these jurisdictions rely heavily, have continued to rise moderately, reﬂ ecting the typically slow response of property assessments to changes in home values. Nevertheless, the sharp fall in house prices over the past few years is likely to put some downward pressure on local revenues before long. Moreover, many state and local governments have experienced signiﬁ cant capital losses in their employee pension funds, and they will need to set aside resources in coming years to rebuild pension assets. These budget pressures showed through to state and local spending. As measured in the NIPA, real con- sumption expenditures of state and local governments declined over the second half of 2009.13 In particular, these jurisdictions began to reduce employment in mid- 2009, and those cuts continued in January. In contrast, investment spending by state and local governments rose moderately during the second half of 2009. The rise in investment spending was supported by infra- structure grants provided by the federal government as part of the ARRA, as well as by a recovery of activity in municipal bond markets that increased the availability and lowered the cost of ﬁ nancing. Also, because capital budgets are typically not encompassed within balanced budget requirements, states were under less pressure to restrain their investment spending. 23. Change in real imports and exports of goods and services, 2003–09 Interest rates on long-term municipal bonds declined during the year, but the ratio of their yields to those on comparable-maturity Treasury securities remained somewhat elevated by historical standards. Credit rat- ings of state and local governments deteriorated over 2009 as a consequence of budgetary problems faced by many of these governments. Borrowing by state and local governments picked up a bit in the second half of the year from its already solid pace in the ﬁ rst half. Gross issuance of long- term bonds, primarily to ﬁ nance new capital projects, was strong. Issuance was supported by the Build America Bonds program, which was authorized under the ARRA.14 Short-term issuance was more moderate and generally consistent with typical seasonal pat- terns. Market participants reported that the market for variable-rate demand obligations, which became severely strained during the ﬁ nancial crisis, had largely recovered.15 Both exports and imports rebounded in the second half of 2009 from precipitous falls earlier in the year (ﬁ gure 23). As foreign economic activity began to improve, real exports rose at an annual rate of nearly 20 percent in the second half of the year. Real imports increased at about the same pace, supported by the recovery under way in U.S. demand. The pickup in trade ﬂ ows was widespread across major types of products and U.S. trading partners but was particularly pronounced for both exports and imports of capital goods. Exports and imports of automotive products also picked up sharply in the second half of last year, reﬂ ecting the rise in motor vehicle production in North America, which depends importantly on ﬂ ows of parts and ﬁ n- ished vehicles between the United States, Canada, and Mexico. Despite the bounceback, trade ﬂ ows only par- 13. Consumption expenditures by state and local governments include all outlays other than those associated with investment projects. 14. The Build America Bonds program allows state and local governments to issue taxable bonds for capital projects and receive a subsidy payment from the Treasury for 35 percent of interest costs. 15. Variable-rate demand obligations (VRDOs) are taxable or tax- exempt bonds that combine long maturities with ﬂ oating short-term interest rates that are reset on a weekly, monthly, or other periodic basis. VRDOs also have a contractual liquidity backstop, typically provided by a commercial or investment bank, that ensures that bond- holders are able to redeem their investment at par plus accrued inter- est even if the securities cannot be successfully remarketed to other investors. 24. Prices of oil and nonfuel commodities, 2005–10 NOTE: The data are monthly. The oil price is the spot price of West Texas Intermediate crude oil, and the last observation is the average for February 1–17, 2010. The price of nonfuel commodities is an index of 45 primary-commodity prices and extends through January 2010. the Commodity Research Bureau; tially retraced the unusually steep declines registered in late 2008 and early 2009. This pattern was also true for global trade ﬂ ows, as discussed in the box “Develop- ments in Global Trade.” The strength of the recovery in global trade so far, however, differs substantially across countries and regions. Oil and nonfuel commodity prices increased sub- stantially over the year (ﬁ gure 24). After plunging from a daily high of about $145 per barrel in mid-2008 to a low of less than $40 per barrel early in 2009, the spot price of West Texas Intermediate crude oil rose rapidly to reach about $70 per barrel by the middle of 2009. The price of oil rose further over the second half of the year to reach about $80 per barrel in November and has ﬂ uctuated between $70 and $80 per barrel through mid- February 2010. The increase in the price of oil over the course of 2009 was driven in large measure by strength- ening global activity, particularly in the emerging mar- ket economies. The ongoing effects of earlier restric- tions in OPEC supply were another likely contributing factor. The prices of longer-term futures contracts (that is, those expiring in December 2018) for crude oil also moved up and, as of mid-February, were about $96 per barrel. The upward-sloping futures curve is consistent with a view by market participants that oil prices will continue to rise as global demand strengthens over the medium term. Broad indexes of nonfuel commodity prices also rose from lows near the start of 2009. As with the rise in oil prices, a key driver of the increase in commodity prices has been resurgent demand from emerging mar- ket economies, especially China. Market participants expect some further increases in commodity prices as 25. U.S. trade and current account balances, 2001–09 NOTE: The data are quarterly. For the trade account, the data extend through 2009:Q4; for the current account, they extend through 2009:Q3. SOURCE: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis. the economic recovery gains strength, albeit increases that are less pronounced than those recorded during last year’s rebound. The steep decline in commodity prices in late 2008 put considerable downward pressure on U.S. import prices for the ﬁ rst half of 2009. Overall for 2009, prices of imported goods fell 1 percent while prices for goods excluding oil fell 2½ percent. Recent upward moves in commodity prices suggest that some of this downward pressure on import prices will be reversed in 2010. The U.S. trade deﬁ cit narrowed considerably in the ﬁ rst half of 2009. Nominal imports fell more than nominal exports early in the year, partly reﬂ ecting a substantial decline in the value of oil imports. The trade deﬁ cit widened moderately over the remainder of the year, however, as both imports and exports picked up in subsequent quarters and oil prices moved higher. In the fourth quarter of 2009, the trade deﬁ cit was $440 billion (annual rate), or about 3 percent of nominal GDP, com- pared with a deﬁ cit of 4 percent of nominal GDP a year earlier (ﬁ gure 25). Total U.S. net national saving—that is, the saving of households, businesses, and governments, excluding depreciation charges—remained extremely low by historical standards in 2009, averaging about negative 2½ percent of nominal GDP over the ﬁ rst three quarters of the year (ﬁ gure 26). After having reached nearly 4 percent of nominal GDP in early 2006, net national saving dropped over the subsequent three years as the federal budget deﬁ cit widened substantially and the The downturn in global activity was accom- panied by a dramatic collapse in global trade. Measured in U.S. dollars, global exports fell about 35 percent between July 2008 and Febru- ary 2009.1 About one-third of the decline was a result of falling prices, notably for oil and other commodities. The volume of global exports is estimated to have contracted about 20 percent between mid-2008 and early 2009, a larger and more abrupt decline than has been observed in previous cycles (ﬁ gure A). The fall in global exports was also more widespread across countries and regions than has typically been the case in past recessions. The severity of the decline in trade was a major factor in the spread of the economic downturn to the emerging market economies in Asia and Latin America, which were generally less directly exposed to the ﬁ nancial crisis than were the advanced economies. Early on, ﬁ nancial and economic indicators in the emerging market economies appeared to be relatively resilient, raising the possibility that those economies had “decoupled” from developments in the advanced economies. However, the trade channel proved quite potent, and most of the emerging market economies experienced deep recessions. A major exception was China, which provided considerable ﬁ scal stimulus to its own economy. NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through December 2009. Real global exports are staff estimates expressed in billions of 2007 U.S. dollars. SOURCE: The nominal data are the sum of U.S. dollar exports from individual country sources via databases maintained by Haver Analytics, CEIC, and the IMF Direction of Trade Statistics, in some cases seasonally adjusted by Federal Reserve staff. Forty-four countries are included. The real data are calculated using trade prices from country sources via Haver Analytics (in some cases interpolated from quarterly or annual data), which are converted to U.S. dollar prices using each country’s dollar exchange rate and rebased to 2007. 1. The total includes 44 countries. The emerging Asian economies consist of China, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, Taiwan, Thai- land, and Vietnam; the Latin American economies consist of Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, and Venezuela; the other emerging market economies consist of Hungary, Israel, Poland, Russia, South Africa, and Turkey; and the advanced economies consist of Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and the United States. The primary explanation for the deep and abrupt collapse in global trade seems to be that the contraction in global demand was much more severe than in the past. Constraints on the supply of trade ﬁ nance related to the general credit crunch may have played a role at the beginning, but the fall in demand soon became the more important factor. The sensitivity of trade to the decline in gross domestic prod- uct also appears to have been stronger in this cycle than in past cycles, although there is no real agreement on why this might be the case. Greater integration of production across coun- ﬁ scal positions of state and local governments deterio- rated. In contrast, private saving rose considerably, on balance, over this period. National saving will likely remain relatively low this year in light of the continuing high federal budget deﬁ cit. If not raised over the longer run, persistent low levels of national saving will likely be associated with both low rates of capital formation and heavy borrowing from abroad, limiting the rise in the standard of living of U.S. residents over time. After falling sharply in the ﬁ rst half of 2009, employ- ment continued to contract through the remainder of the year, but at a gradually moderating pace. Nonfarm pri- vate payroll employment fell 725,000 jobs per month, on average, from January to April of 2009; the pace of (continued from preceding page) tries and an increase in exports of products for which there are shorter lags between changes in demand and changes in exports—such as elec- tronics—may also have added to the speed and synchronicity of the collapse. Exports appear to have stopped declining in most economies in the ﬁ rst half of 2009, but so far the strength of the recovery in trade has NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through December 2009. In this figure, the European economies are Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom. SOURCE: The nominal data are U.S. dollar exports from individual country sources via databases maintained by Haver Analytics and the IMF Direction of Trade Statistics, in some cases seasonally adjusted by Federal Reserve staff. The real data are calculated using trade prices from country sources via Haver Analytics (in some cases interpolated from quarterly or annual data), which are converted to U.S. dollar prices using each country’s dollar exchange rate and rebased to 2007. job loss slowed to about 300,000 per month from May to October, and to an average of 20,000 jobs per month from November to January (ﬁ gure 27). The modera- tion in the pace of job losses was relatively widespread across sectors, although cutbacks in employment in the construction industry continued to be sizable through January. After rising rapidly for more than a year, the unem- ployment rate stabilized at 10 percent in the fourth differed across countries. In particular, exports of the emerging Asian economies are much closer to their previous peaks than are exports of the advanced economies (ﬁ gures B and C), as the strength of the Chinese economy has so far been a key factor driving exports of the other emerging Asian economies. C. Real export indexes for emerging market NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through December 2009. In this figure, the emerging Asian economies are China, Hong Kong, the Philippines, Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, Singapore, Taiwan, Thailand, and Vietnam; the Latin American economies are Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, and Venezuela; and the other economies are Hungary, Israel, Poland, Russia, South Africa, and Turkey. SOURCE: The nominal data are U.S. dollar exports from individual country sources via databases maintained by Haver Analytics, CEIC, and the IMF Direction of Trade Statistics, in some cases seasonally adjusted by Federal Reserve staff. The real data are calculated using trade prices from country sources via Haver Analytics (in some cases interpolated from quarterly or annual data), which are converted to U.S. dollar prices using each country’s dollar exchange rate and rebased to 2007. quarter of 2009 (ﬁ gure 28). In January, the jobless rate dropped to 9.7 percent, though it remained 4.7 percent- age points higher than its level two years ago. The slowing in net job losses since mid-2009 pri- marily reﬂ ected a reduction in layoffs rather than an improvement in hiring. Both the number of new job losses and initial claims for unemployment insurance are down signiﬁ cantly from their highs in the spring of 2009, while most indicators of hiring conditions, such 26. Net saving, 1989–2009 28. Civilian unemployment rate, 1976–2010 NOTE: The data are quarterly and extend through 2009:Q3. Nonfederal saving is the sum of personal and net business saving and the net saving of state and local governments. GDP is gross domestic product. NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through January 2010. SOURCE: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. as the Bureau of Labor Statistics survey of job open- ings, remain weak. The average duration of an ongoing spell of unemployment continued to lengthen markedly in the second half of 2009, and joblessness became increasingly concentrated among the long-term unem- ployed. In January, 6.3 million individuals—more than 40 percent of the unemployed—had been out of work for at least six months. Furthermore, the labor force participation rate has declined steeply since last spring, a development likely related, at least in part, to the reac- tions of potential workers to the scarcity of employment opportunities (ﬁ gure 29). However, in recent months, labor market reports have included some encouraging signs that labor demand may be ﬁ rming. For example, employment in the temporary help industry, which frequently is one of the ﬁ rst to see an improvement in hiring, has been increasing since October. In addition, after steep declines in 2008 and the ﬁ rst quarter of 2009, the average workweek of production and nonsupervisory employees stabilized at roughly 33.1 hours per week through the remainder of the year, before ticking up to 33.2 hours in November and December and 33.3 hours in January. Another indicator of an improvement in work hours, the fraction of workers on part-time schedules for economic reasons, increased only slightly, on net, in the second half of the year after a sharp rise in the ﬁ rst half and then turned down noticeably in January. 27. Net change in private payroll employment, 2003–10 29. Labor force participation rate, 1976–2010 NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through January 2010. SOURCE: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. NOTE: The data are monthly and extend through January 2010. SOURCE: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. 30. Change in output per hour, 1948–2009 NOTE: Nonfarm business sector. Change for each multiyear period is measured to the fourth quarter of the final year of the period from the fourth quarter of the year immediately preceding the period. Labor productivity surged in 2009, reﬂ ecting, at least to some extent, the reluctance of ﬁ rms to increase hir- ing even as demand expanded. According to the latest available published data, output per hour in the nonfarm business sector increased at an annual rate of 6¾ per- cent in the second half of 2009, after rising 3½ percent in the ﬁ rst half, and about 1 percent in 2008 (ﬁ gure 30). Despite large gains in productivity, increases in hourly worker compensation have remained subdued. The employment cost index for private industry work- ers, which measures both wages and the cost to employ- ers of providing beneﬁ ts, rose only 1¼ percent in nominal terms in 2009 after rising almost 2½ percent in 2008. Compensation per hour in the nonfarm business sector—a measure derived from the worker compensa- tion data in the NIPA—showed less deceleration, ris- ing 2.2 percent in nominal terms in 2009, only slightly slower than the 2.6 percent rise recorded for 2008 (ﬁ gure 31). Real hourly compensation—that is, adjusted for the rise in consumer prices—increased only mod- estly. Reﬂ ecting the subdued increase in nominal hourly compensation, along with the outsized gain in labor productivity noted earlier, unit labor costs in the non- farm business sector declined 2¾ percent in 2009. Headline consumer price inﬂ ation picked up in 2009, as sharp increases in energy prices offset reductions in food prices and a deceleration in other prices. After ris- 31. Measures of change in hourly compensation, 1999–2009 31. Measures of change in hourly compensation, 1999–2009 NOTE: The data are quarterly and extend through 2009:Q4. For nonfarm business compensation, change is over four quarters; for the employment cost index (ECI), change is over the 12 months ending in the last month of each quarter. The nonfarm business sector excludes farms, government, nonprofit institutions, and households. The sector covered by the ECI used here is the nonfarm business sector plus nonprofit institutions. A new ECI series was introduced for data as of 2001, but the new series is continuous with the old. ing ½ percent over the 12 months of 2008, overall pric- es for personal consumption expenditures rose about 2 percent in 2009. In contrast, the core PCE price index—which excludes the prices of energy items as well as those of food and beverages—increased a little less than 1½ percent in 2009, compared with a rise of roughly 1¾ percent in 2008 (ﬁ gure 32). Data for PCE prices in January 2010 are not yet available, but information from the consumer price index and other sources suggests that inﬂ ation remained subdued. 32. Change in the chain-type price index for personal consumption expenditures, 2003–09 NOTE: Change is from December to December. SOURCE: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis. Consumer energy prices rose sharply in 2009, reversing much of the steep decline recorded in 2008. The retail price of gasoline was up more than 60 percent for the year as a whole, driven higher by a resurgence in the cost of crude oil. Reﬂ ecting the bur- geoning supplies from new domestic wells, consumer natural gas prices fell sharply over the ﬁ rst half of 2009, before increasing again in the last few months of the year as the economic outlook improved. Electricity prices also fell during the early part of 2009 before retracing part of that decline later in the year. Overall, natural gas prices were down almost 20 percent in 2009, while electricity prices were about unchanged. After posting sizable declines throughout much of 2009, food prices turned up modestly in the fourth quar- ter of last year. For the year as a whole, consumer food prices fell 1½ percent after rising 6¾ percent in 2008; these changes largely reﬂ ected the pass-through to retail of huge swings in spot prices of crops and livestock over the past two years. Excluding food and energy, PCE price inﬂ ation slowed last year. Core PCE prices rose at an annual rate of 1¾ percent in the ﬁ rst half of 2009, similar to the pace in 2008, and then increased at an annual rate of only a little above 1 percent over the ﬁ nal six months of the year. This slowdown in core inﬂ ation was cen- tered in a noticeable deceleration in the prices of non- energy services. For those prices, ﬁ rms’ widespread cost-cutting efforts over the past year and the continued weakness in the housing market that has put downward pressure on housing costs have likely been important factors. The prices of many core consumer goods con- tinued to rise only moderately in 2009; a notable excep- tion was tobacco, for which tax-induced price hikes were substantial. Survey-based measures of near-term inﬂ ation expec- tations, which were unusually low in the beginning of 2009, moved up, on average, over the remainder of the year. According to the Thomson Reuters/University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers, median expectations for year-ahead inﬂ ation stood at 2.8 percent in January, up from about 2 percent at the beginning of 2009. His- torically, this short-term measure has been inﬂ uenced fairly heavily by contemporaneous movements in ener- gy prices. Longer-term inﬂ ation expectations, by con- trast, have been relatively stable over the past year. For example, the Thomson Reuters/University of Michigan survey measure of median 5- to 10-year inﬂ ation expec- tations was 2.9 percent in January of this year, similar to the readings during most of 2009, and near the lower end of the narrow range that has prevailed over the past few years. The recovery in the ﬁ nancial sector that began in the ﬁ rst half of 2009 continued through the second half of the year and into 2010, as investor concerns about the health of large ﬁ nancial institutions subsided further. Credit default swap (CDS) spreads for banking institu- tions—which primarily reﬂ ect investors’ assessments of and willingness to bear the risk that those institutions will default on their debt obligations—fell considerably from their peaks early in 2009, although they remain above pre-crisis levels (ﬁ gure 33). Bank equity prices have increased signiﬁ cantly since spring 2009 (ﬁ gure 34). Many of the largest bank holding companies were able to issue equity and repurchase preferred shares that had been issued to the Treasury under the TARP. Nonetheless, conditions in many banking markets remain very challenging, with delinquency and charge- off rates still elevated, especially on commercial and residential real estate loans. Investor concerns about insurance companies—which had come under pres- sure in early 2009 and a few of which had received capital injections from the Treasury—also diminished, as indicated by narrowing CDS spreads for those ﬁ rms and increases in their equity prices. In December, the Treasury announced that it was amending the cap on its Preferred Stock Purchase Agreements with Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac to ensure that each ﬁ rm would main- tain positive net worth for the next three years, and it 33. Spreads on credit default swaps for selected U.S. banks, 2007–10 Large bank holding companies Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. 2008 NOTE: The data are daily and extend through February 18, 2010. Median spreads for six bank holding companies and nine other banks. 34. Equity price indexes for banks and insurance NOTE: The data are daily and extend through February 18, 2010. SOURCE: Standard & Poor’s. also announced that it was providing additional capital to GMAC under the TARP. Consistent with diminishing concerns about the conditions of banking institutions, functioning in bank funding markets has improved steadily since the spring of last year. A measure of stress in these markets—the spread between the London interbank offered rate (Libor) and the rate on comparable-maturity over- night index swaps (OIS)—narrowed at all maturities; spreads at shorter maturities reached pre-crisis levels, while those at longer maturities remained somewhat elevated by historical standards (ﬁ gure 35). Liquidity in term bank funding markets also improved at terms up to six months. Conditions improved in other money markets as well. Bid-asked spreads and haircuts applied to collateral in repurchase agreement (repo) markets retraced some of the run-ups that had occurred dur- ing the ﬁ nancial market turmoil, though haircuts on most types of collateral continued to be sizable relative to pre-crisis levels. In the commercial paper market, spreads between rates on lower-quality A2/P2 paper and on asset-backed commercial paper over higher-quality AA nonﬁ nancial paper fell to the low end of the range observed since the fall of 2007 (ﬁ gure 36). With improved conditions in ﬁ nancial markets, the Federal Reserve and other agencies removed some of the extraordinary support that had been provided during the crisis. Starting in the second half of 2009, the Federal Reserve began to normalize its lending to commercial banks. The amounts and maturity of credit auctioned through the Term Auction Facility (TAF) were reduced over time, and early in 2010 the Federal Reserve announced that the ﬁ nal TAF auction would be conducted in March 2010. Later, the Federal Reserve 35. Libor minus overnight index swap rate, 2007–10 NOTE: The data are daily and extend through February 19, 2010. An overnight index swap (OIS) is an interest rate swap with the floating rate tied to an index of daily overnight rates, such as the effective federal funds rate. At maturity, two parties exchange, on the basis of the agreed notional amount, the difference between interest accrued at the fixed rate and interest accrued by averaging the floating, or index, rate. Libor is the London interbank offered rate. noted that the minimum bid rate for the ﬁ nal auction would be 50 basis points, ¼ percentage point higher than in recent auctions. The Federal Reserve also short- ened the maximum maturity of loans provided under the primary credit program from 90 days to 28 days, effective on January 14, and announced a further reduc- tion of the maximum maturity of those loans to over- night effective March 18. In addition, the rate charged on primary credit loans was increased from ½ percent to ¾ percent effective February 19. Amounts out- standing under many of the Federal Reserve’s special 36. Commercial paper spreads, 2007–10 NOTE: The data are weekly and extend through February 17, 2010. Commercial paper yield spreads are for an overnight maturity and are expressed relative to the AA nonfinancial rate. liquidity facilities had dwindled to zero (or near zero) over the second half of 2009 as functioning of funding markets, both in the United States and abroad, continued to normalize. The Primary Dealer Credit Facility, the Term Securities Lending Facility, the Commercial Paper Funding Facility, the Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility, and the temporary liquidity swap lines with foreign central banks were all allowed to expire on February 1, 2010. Other government agencies also reduced their support to ﬁ nancial institutions. For instance, to buttress the liquidity of ﬁ nancial institutions, the FDIC had established in October 2008 a program to provide, in exchange for a fee, a guarantee on short- and medium- term debt issued by banking institutions. Financial insti- tutions issued about $300 billion under this program, but use of the program declined after the summer of 2009 as ﬁ nancial institutions were able to successfully issue nonguaranteed debt. In light of these develop- ments, the FDIC announced in late October 2009 that the guarantee program would be extended but with sig- niﬁ cant restrictions; no debt has been issued under the extended program. Asset prices in longer-term capital markets have also staged a noticeable recovery since the spring of 2009, and risk premiums have narrowed noticeably as inves- tors’ appetite for risk appears to be recovering. In the corporate bond market, risk spreads on both investment- and speculative-grade bonds—the difference between the yields on these securities and those on comparable- 38. Net flows into mutual funds, 2006–09 NOTE: The data exclude reinvested dividends and are not seasonally adjusted. maturity Treasury securities—dropped, and by the end of last year those spreads were within ranges observed during the recoveries from previous recessions (ﬁ gure 37). During the second half of 2009, the decline in risk spreads was accompanied by considerable inﬂ ows into mutual funds that invest in corporate bonds (ﬁ g- ure 38). In the leveraged loan market, the average bid price climbed back toward par, and bid-asked spreads narrowed noticeably as trading conditions reportedly improved (ﬁ gure 39). Equity markets rebounded signiﬁ - cantly over the past few quarters, leaving broad equity market indexes about 65 percent above the low point reached in March 2009 (ﬁ gure 40). 37. Spreads of corporate bond yields over comparable off-the-run Treasury yields, by securities rating, 1998–2010 39. Secondary-market pricing for syndicated loans, 2007–10 39. Secondary-market pricing for syndicated loans, 2007–10 NOTE: The data are daily and extend through February 18, 2010. The spreads shown are the yields on 10-year bonds less the 10-year Treasury yield. SOURCE: Derived from smoothed corporate yield curves using Merrill NOTE: The data are daily and extend through February 18, 2010. SOURCE: LSTA/Thomson Reuters Mark-to-Market Pricing. 40. Stock price index, 1998–2010 NOTE: The data are daily and extend through February 18, 2010. SOURCE: Dow Jones Indexes. Overall, the rebound in asset prices likely reﬂ ected corporate earnings that were generally above market expectations, improved measures of corporate credit quality, and brighter economic prospects. Apparently, investors also became somewhat less concerned about the downside risks to the economic outlook, as suggest- ed by declines in measures of uncertainty and risk pre- miums. Implied volatility on the S&P 500, as calculated from option prices, held at moderate levels during the second half of 2009 and was well off the peak reached in November 2008 (ﬁ gure 41). Moreover, a measure of the premium that investors require for holding equity shares—the difference between the ratio of 12-month forward expected earnings to equity prices for S&P NOTE: The data are weekly and extend through the week ending February 19, 2010. The final observation is an estimate based on data through February 18, 2010. The series shown—the VIX—is the implied 30-day volatility of the S&P 500 stock price index as calculated from a weighted average of options prices. 500 ﬁ rms and the long-term real Treasury yield—nar- rowed in 2009, though it remains elevated by historical standards. The proﬁ tability of the commercial banking sector, as measured by the return on equity, continued to be quite low during the second half of 2009 (ﬁ gure 42). Elevated loan loss provisioning continued to be the largest factor restraining earnings; however, provisioning decreased signiﬁ cantly in the second half of the year, suggesting that banks believe that credit losses may be stabilizing. While some banks saw earnings boosted earlier last year by gains in trading and investment banking activi- ties, revenue from these sources is reported to have dropped back in the fourth quarter. Although delinquen- cy and charge-off rates for residential mortgages and commercial real estate loans continued to climb in the second half of 2009, for most other types of loans these metrics declined or showed signs of leveling out. During the year, bank holding companies issued substantial amounts of common equity. Signiﬁ cant issu- ance occurred in the wake of the release of the Super- visory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) results, which indicated that some ﬁ rms needed to augment or improve the quality of their capital in order to assure that, even under a macroeconomic scenario that was more adverse than expected, they would emerge from the subsequent two-year period still capable of meet- ing the needs of creditworthy borrowers. The 19 SCAP ﬁ rms issued about $110 billion in new common equity; combined with conversions of preferred stock, asset 42. Commercial bank profitability, 1988–2009 NOTE: The data are quarterly and extend through 2009:Q4. SOURCE: Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council, Consolidated sales, and other capital actions, these steps have added more than $200 billion to common equity since the beginning of 2009. Equity offerings were also undertak- en by other ﬁ nancial ﬁ rms, and some used the proceeds to repay funds received as part of the Capital Purchase Program. Against a backdrop of weak loan demand and tight credit policies throughout 2009, total loans on banks’ books contracted even more sharply in the last two quarters taken together than in the ﬁ rst half of the year (ﬁ gure 43). Outstanding unused loan commitments to both businesses and households also declined, albeit at a slower pace than in early 2009. The decline in loans was partially offset by an increase in holdings of securi- ties, particularly Treasury securities and agency MBS, and a further rise in balances at the Federal Reserve. On balance, total industry assets declined. The decline in assets combined with an increase in capital to push regulatory capital ratios considerably higher. The Financial Accounting Standards Board pub- lished Statements of Financial Accounting Standards Nos. 166 and 167 (FAS 166 and 167) in June 2009. The new standards modiﬁ ed the basis for determining whether a ﬁ rm must consolidate securitized assets (as well as the associated liabilities and equity) onto its balance sheet; most banking organizations must imple- ment the standards in the ﬁ rst quarter of 2010. Industry analysts estimate that banking organizations will con- solidate approximately $600 billion of additional assets as a result of implementing FAS 166 and 167. A small number of institutions with large securitization 43. Change in total bank loans and unused bank loan commitments to businesses and households, 1990–2009 programs will be most affected. While the regulatory capital ratios of the affected banking organizations may decrease after implementation of FAS 166 and 167, the ratios of organizations most affected by the accounting change are expected to remain substantially in excess of regulatory minimums. The federal banking agencies recently published a related risk-based capital rule that includes an optional one-year phase-in of certain risk- based capital impacts resulting from implementation of FAS 166 and 167.16 In July 2009, market participants had expected the tar- get federal funds rate to be close to the current target range of 0 to ¼ percent in early 2010, but they had also anticipated that the removal of policy accommodation would be imminent. Over the second half of 2009, how- ever, investors marked down their expectations for the path of the federal funds rate. Quotes on futures con- tracts imply that, as of mid-February 2010, market par- ticipants anticipate that policy will be tightened begin- ning in the third quarter of 2010, and that the tightening will proceed at a pace slower than was expected last summer. However, uncertainty about the size of term premiums and potential distortions created by the zero lower bound for the federal funds rate continue to make it difﬁ cult to obtain a deﬁ nitive reading on the policy expectations of market participants from futures prices. The downward revision in policy expectations since July likely has reﬂ ected incoming economic data point- ing to a somewhat weaker trajectory for employment and a lower path for inﬂ ation than had been anticipated. Another contributing factor likely was Federal Reserve communications, including the reiteration in the state- ment released after each meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee that economic conditions are likely 16. For more information and the text of the ﬁ nal rule, see Ofﬁ ce NOTE: The data, which are not seasonally adjusted, are quarterly and extend through 2009:Q4. Total loans are adjusted to remove the effects of large thrifts converting to commercial banks or merging with a commercial bank. of the Comptroller of the Currency, Board of Governors of the Fed- eral Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Ofﬁ ce of Thrift Supervision (2010), “Agencies Issue Final Rule for Regulatory Capital Standards Related to Statements of Financial Accounting Standards Nos. 166 and 167,” press release, January 21, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/bcreg/20100121a.htm. The ﬁ nal rule was also published in the Federal Register; see Ofﬁ ce of the Comptroller of the Currency, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Ofﬁ ce of Thrift Supervision (2010), “Risk-Based Capital Guidelines; Capital Adequacy Guidelines; Capital Maintenance: Regulatory Capital; Impact of Modiﬁ cations to Generally Accepted Accounting Prin- ciples; Consolidation of Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Programs; and Other Related Issues,” ﬁ nal rule, Federal Register, vol. 75 (Janu- ary 28), pp. 4636–54. NOTE: The data are daily and extend through February 18, 2010. SOURCE: Department of the Treasury. to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period. Yields on shorter-maturity Treasury securities have edged lower since last summer, consistent with the downward shift in the expected policy path (ﬁ gure 44). However, yields on longer-maturity nominal Treasury securities have increased slightly, on net, likely in response to generally positive news about the economy and declines in the weight investors had placed on extremely adverse economic outcomes. The gradual tapering and the completion of the Federal Reserve’s large-scale asset purchases of Treasury securities in October 2009 appeared to put little upward pressure on Treasury yields. Yields on Treasury inﬂ ation-protected securities (TIPS) declined somewhat in the second half of 2009 and into 2010. The result was an increase in inﬂ ation compensation—the difference between comparable- maturity nominal yields and TIPS yields. The increase was concentrated at shorter-maturities and was partly a response to rising prices of oil and other commodities. Inﬂ ation compensation at more distant horizons was somewhat volatile and was little changed on net. Infer- ences about investors’ inﬂ ation expectations have been more difﬁ cult to make since the second half of 2008 because special factors, such as safe-haven demands and an increased preference of investors for liquid assets, appear to have signiﬁ cantly affected the relative demand for nominal and inﬂ ation-indexed securities. These special factors began to abate in the ﬁ rst half of 2009 and receded further in the second half of the year, and the resulting changes in nominal and inﬂ ation- adjusted yields may have accounted for part of the recent increase in inﬂ ation compensation. On net, sur- vey measures of longer-run inﬂ ation expectations have remained stable. After a brisk increase in the ﬁ rst half of the year, the M2 monetary aggregate expanded slowly in the sec- ond half of 2009 and in early 2010 (annual growth rate shown in ﬁ gure 45).17 The rise in the latter part of the year was driven largely by increases in liquid deposits, as interest rates on savings deposits were reduced more slowly than rates on other types of deposits, and house- holds and ﬁ rms maintained some preference for safe and liquid assets. Outﬂ ows from small time deposits and retail money market mutual funds intensiﬁ ed dur- ing the second half of 2009, likely because of ongoing declines in the interest rates offered on these products. The currency component of the money stock expanded 17. M2 consists of (1) currency outside the U.S. Treasury, Federal Reserve Banks, and the vaults of depository institutions; (2) traveler’s checks of nonbank issuers; (3) demand deposits at commercial banks (excluding those amounts held by depository institutions, the U.S. government, and foreign banks and ofﬁ cial institutions) less cash items in the process of collection and Federal Reserve ﬂ oat; (4) other checkable deposits (negotiable order of withdrawal, or NOW, accounts and automatic transfer service accounts at depository institutions; credit union share draft accounts; and demand deposits at thrift institutions); (5) savings deposits (including money market deposit accounts); (6) small-denomination time deposits (time depos- its issued in amounts of less than $100,000) less individual retirement account (IRA) and Keogh balances at depository institutions; and (7) balances in retail money market mutual funds less IRA and Keogh balances at money market mutual funds. 45. M2 growth rate, 1991–2009 NOTE: The data extend through 2009 and are annual on a fourth-quarter over fourth-quarter basis. For definition of M2, see text note 17. modestly in the second half of the year. The monetary base—essentially the sum of currency in circulation and the reserve balances of depository institutions held at the Federal Reserve—expanded rapidly for much of the second half of 2009, as the increase in reserve balances 1. Selected components of the Federal Reserve balance sheet, 2008–10 Millions of dollars Selected assets Credit extended to depository institutions Credit extended to other market Net portfolio holdings of LLCs funded through the Money Market Investor Funding Facility .................................... Credit extended to American Securities held outright U.S. Treasury securities ............................ Agency debt securities.............................. Agency mortgage-backed securities Selected liabilities Federal Reserve notes in circulation ........ Reserve balances of depository resulting from the large-scale asset purchases more than offset the decline caused by reduced usage of the Fed- eral Reserve’s credit programs. However, the monetary base increased more slowly toward the end of 2009 and early 2010 as these purchases were tapered and as use of Federal Reserve liquidity facilities declined. The nontraditional monetary policy actions taken by the Federal Reserve since the onset of the ﬁ nancial crisis expanded the size of the Federal Reserve’s bal- ance sheet considerably during 2008, and it remained very large throughout 2009 and into 2010 (table 1). Total Federal Reserve assets on February 17, 2010, stood at about $2.3 trillion. The compositional shifts that had been under way in the ﬁ rst half of 2009 con- tinued during the remainder of the year. Lending to depository institutions as well as credit extended under special liquidity facilities and the temporary liquidity swaps with foreign central banks contracted sharply. By contrast, the large-scale asset purchases conducted by the Federal Reserve boosted securities held outright. Holdings of agency MBS surpassed $1 trillion early this year, up from about $525 billion in mid-July 2009. For other types of securities, the increases were more mod- est, with holdings of agency debt expanding from about $100 billion in July 2009 to $165 billion in February and holdings of Treasury securities rising from nearly $700 billion to approximately $775 billion over the same period. The revolving credit provided to American International Group, Inc. (AIG), declined near year-end, as the outstanding balance was reduced in exchange for preferred interests in AIA Aurora LLC and ALICO Holdings LLC, which are life insurance holding com- pany subsidiaries of AIG. Loans related to the Maiden Lane facilities—which represent credit extended in con- junction with efforts to avoid disorderly failures of The Bear Stearns Companies, Inc., and AIG—stayed rough- ly steady. On the liability side of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet, reserve balances increased from slightly more than $800 billion in July to about $1.2 trillion as of February 17, 2010, while the Treasury’s supplemen- tary ﬁ nancing account fell to $5 billion; the decline in the supplementary ﬁ nancing account occurred late in 2009 as part of the Treasury’s efforts to retain ﬂ exibility in debt management as federal debt approached the debt ceiling. NOTE: LLC is a limited liability company. 1. The Federal Reserve has extended credit to several LLCs in conjunction with efforts to support critical institutions. Maiden Lane LLC was formed to acquire certain assets of The Bear Stearns Companies, Inc. Maiden Lane II LLC was formed to purchase residential mortgage-backed securities from the U.S. securities lending reinvestment portfolio of subsidiaries of American Interna- tional Group, Inc. (AIG). Maiden Lane III LLC was formed to purchase multi- sector collateralized debt obligations on which the Financial Products group of AIG had written credit default swap contracts. 2. Includes only MBS purchases that have already settled. 3. The Federal Reserve retained ownership of securities lent through the Global ﬁ nancial markets recovered considerably in 2009 as the effectiveness of central bank and govern- ment actions in stabilizing the ﬁ nancial system became more apparent and as signs of economic recovery began to take hold. Stock markets in the advanced foreign economies registered gains of about 50 percent from their troughs in early March, although they remain below their levels at the start of the ﬁ nancial crisis in August 2007 (ﬁ gure 46). Stock markets in the emerging market economies rebounded even more impressively over the year. Most Latin American and many emerging Asian stock markets are now close to their levels at the start of the crisis (ﬁ gure 47). As global prospects improved, investors shifted away from the safe-haven investments in U.S. securi- ties they had made at the height of the crisis. As a result, the dollar, which had appreciated sharply in late 2008, depreciated against most other currencies in the second and third quarters of 2009. The dollar depreci- ated particularly sharply against the currencies of major commodity-producing nations, such as Australia and Brazil, as rising commodity prices supported economic recovery in those countries. In the fourth quarter, the dollar stabilized and has since appreciated somewhat, on net, as investors began to focus more on economic news and prospects for the relative strength of the eco- nomic recoveries in the United States and elsewhere (ﬁ gure 48). Chinese authorities held the renminbi steady against the dollar throughout the year. For 2009 as a whole, the dollar depreciated roughly 4½ percent on a trade-weighted basis against the major foreign currencies (ﬁ gure 49) and 3½ percent against the cur- 46. Equity indexes in selected advanced foreign economies, 2007–10 July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. NOTE: The data are daily. The last observation is February 18, 2010, for the euro area, Japan, and the United Kingdom and February 17, 2010, for Canada. 47. Equity indexes in selected emerging market economies, 2007–10 July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. NOTE: The data are daily. The last observation is February 17, 2010, for Latin America and emerging Asia and February 12, 2010, for China. In this figure, the Latin American economies are Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, and Peru; the emerging Asian economies are China, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Pakistan, the Philippines, South Korea, Taiwan, and Thailand. rencies of the other important trading partners of the United States. Sovereign bond yields in the advanced economies rose over most of 2009 as investors moved out of safe investments in government securities and became more willing to purchase riskier securities. Concerns about rising budget deﬁ cits in many countries and the asso- 48. U.S. dollar nominal exchange rate, broad index, 2005–10 NOTE: The data, which are in foreign currency units per dollar, are daily. The last observation for the series is February 18, 2010. The broad index is a weighted average of the foreign exchange values of the U.S. dollar against the currencies of a large group of the most important U.S. trading partners. The index weights, which change over time, are derived from U.S. export shares and from U.S. and foreign import shares. 49. U.S. dollar exchange rate against selected major 50. Yields on benchmark government bonds in selected advanced foreign economies, 2007–10 50. Yields on benchmark government bonds in selected advanced foreign economies, 2007–10 July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. NOTE: The data, which are in foreign currency units per dollar, are daily. NOTE: The data, which are for 10-year bonds, are daily. The last The last observation for each series is February 18, 2010. observation for each series is February 18, 2010. ciated borrowing needs also likely contributed to the increase in yields. Late in the year, the announcement of a substantial upward revision to the budget deﬁ cit in Greece led to a sharp rise in spreads of Greece’s sov- ereign debt over comparable yields on Germany’s sov- ereign debt. These spreads remained elevated in early 2010 and also increased in other euro-area countries with sizable budget deﬁ cits, especially Portugal and Spain. Sovereign yields in most of the advanced econo- mies, however, remained signiﬁ cantly lower than prior to the ﬁ nancial crisis, as contained inﬂ ation, expecta- tions of only slow economic recovery, and easing of monetary policy by central banks have all worked to keep long-term nominal interest rates low (ﬁ gure 50). Conditions in global money markets have continued to improve. One-month Libor-OIS spreads in euros and sterling are now less than 10 basis points, near their levels before the crisis. Dollar funding pressures abroad have also substantially abated, and foreign ﬁ rms are more easily able to obtain dollar funding through private markets such as those for foreign exchange swaps. As a result, drawings on the Federal Reserve’s temporary liquidity swap lines by foreign central banks declined in the second half of 2009 to only about $10 billion by the end of the year, and funding markets continued to function without disruption as these swap lines expired on February 1, 2010. under way in global markets. As the ﬁ nancial crisis eased, net bank lending abroad resumed, but the recov- ery in portfolio ﬂ ows was mixed. Total private ﬁ nancial ﬂ ows reversed from the large net inﬂ ows that had characterized the second half of 2008 to large net outﬂ ows in the ﬁ rst half of 2009 (ﬁ g- ure 51). This reversal primarily reﬂ ected changes in net bank lending. Banks located in the United States had sharply curtailed their lending abroad as the ﬁ nancial crisis intensiﬁ ed in the third and fourth quarters of 2008, and they renewed their net lending as function- ing of interbank markets improved in the ﬁ rst half of 2009. During the second half of 2009, interbank market 51. U.S. net financial inflows, 2005–09 Private (including banking) U.S. official Foreign official The pattern of ﬁ nancial ﬂ ows between the United States and the rest of the world in 2009 reﬂ ected the recovery NOTE: U.S. official flows include foreign central banks’ drawings on their conditions continued to normalize, and net bank lend- ing proceeded at a moderate pace. The increased avail- ability of funding in private markets also led to reduced demand from foreign central banks for drawings on the liquidity swap lines with the Federal Reserve. Repay- ment of the drawings in the ﬁ rst half of 2009 generated sizable U.S. ofﬁ cial inﬂ ows that offset the large private banking outﬂ ows. Foreign ofﬁ cial institutions continued purchasing U.S. Treasury securities at a strong pace throughout 2009, as they had during most of the crisis (ﬁ gure 52). Foreign exchange intervention by several countries to counteract upward pressure on their currencies gave a boost to these purchases. Countries conducting such intervention bought U.S. dollars in foreign currency markets and acquired U.S. assets, primarily Treasury securities, with the proceeds. During the height of the crisis, private foreign inves- tors had also purchased record amounts of U.S. Trea- sury securities, likely reﬂ ecting safe-haven demands. Starting in April 2009, as improvement in ﬁ nancial conditions became more apparent, private foreigners began to sell U.S. Treasury securities, but net sales in the second and third quarters were modest compared with the amounts acquired in previous quarters. The recovery in foreign demand for riskier U.S. securi- ties was mixed. Foreign investment in U.S. equities picked up briskly after the ﬁ rst quarter of 2009, nearly reaching a pre-crisis pace. However, foreign investors continued small net sales of U.S. corporate and agency debt. Meanwhile, U.S. investment in foreign securities bounced back quickly and remained strong throughout 2009 (ﬁ gure 53). 52. Net foreign purchases of U.S. securities, 2005–09 NOTE: Other U.S. securities include corporate equities and bonds, agency 53. Net U.S. purchases of foreign securities, 2005–09 indicate a balance of payments outflow associated with positive U.S. purchases of foreign securities. Economic activity in the advanced foreign econo- mies continued to fall sharply in early 2009 but began to recover later in the year as ﬁ nancial conditions improved and world trade rebounded. The robust recov- ery in emerging Asia helped the Japanese economy to turn up in the second quarter, and other major foreign economies returned to positive economic growth in the second half. Nevertheless, performance has been mixed. Spurred by external demand and a reduction in the pace of inventory destocking, industrial production has risen in most countries but remains well below pre-crisis levels. Business conﬁ dence has shown considerable improvement, and survey measures of manufacturing activity have risen as well. Consumer conﬁ dence also has improved as ﬁ nancial markets have stabilized, but household ﬁ nances remain stressed, with unemploy- ment at high levels and wage gains subdued. Although government incentives helped motor vehicle purchases to bounce back from the slump in early 2009, other household spending has remained sluggish in most countries. Housing prices have recovered somewhat in the United Kingdom and more in Canada but have continued to decline in Japan and in some euro-area countries. Twelve-month consumer price inﬂ ation moved lower through the summer, with headline inﬂ ation turning negative in all the major advanced foreign countries except the United Kingdom. However, higher energy prices in the second half of 2009 pushed inﬂ ation back into positive territory except in Japan (ﬁ gure 54). Core consumer price inﬂ ation, which excludes food and energy, has ﬂ uctuated less. 54. Change in consumer prices for major foreign economies, 2006–10 record low 0.25 percent until at least mid-2010. In addi- tion to their interest rate moves, foreign central banks pursued unconventional monetary easing. The Bank of England continued its purchases of British treasury securities, increasing its Asset Purchase Facility from £50 billion to £200 billion over the course of the year. Amid concerns about persistent deﬂ ation, the Bank of Japan announced a new ¥10 trillion three-month secured lending facility at an unscheduled meeting on December 1. The ECB has continued its planned pur- chases of up to €60 billion in covered bonds, but it has also taken some initial steps toward scaling back its enhanced credit support measures, as it sees reduced need for special programs to provide liquidity. NOTE: The data are monthly, and the percent change is from one year earlier. The data extend through January 2010 for the euro area, Japan, and the United Kingdom and through December 2009 for Canada. Foreign central banks cut policy rates aggressively during the ﬁ rst half of 2009 and left those rates at historically low levels through year-end (ﬁ gure 55). The European Central Bank (ECB) has held its main policy rate at 1 percent since May and has made sig- niﬁ cant amounts of long-term funding available at this rate, allowing overnight interest rates to fall to around 0.35 percent. The Bank of Canada has indicated that it expects to keep its target for the overnight rate at a 55. Official or targeted interest rates in selected advanced foreign economies, 2006–10 Recovery from the global ﬁ nancial crisis has been more pronounced in the emerging market economies than in the advanced foreign economies. In aggregate, emerg- ing market economies continued to contract in the ﬁ rst quarter of 2009, but economic activity in many coun- tries, particularly in emerging Asia, rebounded sharply in the second quarter and remained robust in the second half of the year. The upturn in economic activity was driven largely by domestic demand, which received strong boosts from monetary and ﬁ scal stimulus. By the end of 2009, the level of real GDP in several emerging market economies had recovered to or was approach- ing pre-crisis peaks. With signiﬁ cant spare capacity as a result of the earlier steep contraction in activity in these economies, inﬂ ation remained generally subdued through the ﬁ rst half of last year but moved up in the fourth quarter as adverse weather conditions led to a sharp rise in food prices. NOTE: The data are daily and extend through February 18, 2010. The data shown are, for Canada, the overnight rate; for the euro area, the minimum bid rate on main refinancing operations; for Japan, the uncollateralized overnight call rate; and, for the United Kingdom, the official bank rate paid on commercial reserves. In China, the ﬁ scal stimulus package enacted in November 2008, combined with a surge in bank lend- ing, led to a sharp rise in investment and consumption. Strong domestic demand contributed to a rebound in imports, which helped support economic activity in the rest of Asia and in commodity-exporting countries. Chi- nese authorities halted the modest appreciation of their currency against the dollar in the middle of 2008, and the exchange rate between the renminbi and the dol- lar has been unchanged since then. In the second half of 2009, authorities acted to slow the increase in bank lending to a more sustainable pace after the level of out- standing loans rose in the ﬁ rst half of the year by nearly one-fourth of nominal GDP. With the economy boom- ing and inﬂ ation picking up, the People’s Bank of China (the central bank) increased the required reserve ratio for banks ½ percentage point in January 2010 and again SOURCE: The central bank of each area or country shown. in February, the country’s ﬁ rst signiﬁ cant monetary pol- icy tightening moves since the ﬁ nancial crisis. In China and elsewhere in Asia, asset prices have rebounded sharply after falling steeply in the second half of 2008. In Latin America, the rebound in activity has lagged that in Asia. Economic activity in Mexico, which is more closely tied to U.S. production and was adversely affected by the outbreak of the H1N1 virus last spring, did not turn up until the third quarter of 2009, but it then grew rapidly. In Brazil, the recession was less severe than in Mexico, and economic growth has been fairly strong since the second quarter of last year, sup- ported in part by government stimulus and rising com- modity prices. Russia and many countries in emerging Europe suffered severe output contractions in the ﬁ rst half of 2009 and, in some cases, further ﬁ nancial stresses. In particular, Latvia faced difﬁ culties meeting the ﬁ scal conditions of its international assistance package, which heightened concerns about the survival of the Latvian currency regime. However, economic and ﬁ nancial conditions in emerging Europe began to recover in the second half of the year. In order to provide monetary stimulus to support a sus- tainable economic expansion, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) maintained a target range for the federal funds rate of 0 to ¼ percent throughout 2009 and into early 2010 (ﬁ gure 56). The Federal Reserve also continued its program of large-scale asset purchas- es, completing purchases of $300 billion in Treasury securities and making considerable progress toward completing its announced purchases of $1.25 trillion of agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) and about $175 billion of agency debt. However, with ﬁ nancial market conditions improv- ing, the Federal Reserve took steps to begin winding down many of its special credit and liquidity programs in 2009. On June 25, the Federal Reserve announced that it was extending the authorizations of several of these programs from October 30, 2009, to February 1, 2010. However, the terms of some of these facilities were tightened somewhat, the amounts to be offered under the Term Auction Facility (TAF) were reduced, and the authorization for the Money Market Investor Funding Facility was not extended.18 Over the sum- mer, the Federal Reserve continued to trim the amounts offered through the TAF. The information reviewed at the August 11–12 FOMC meeting suggested that overall economic activ- ity was stabilizing after having contracted during 2008 and early 2009. Nonetheless, meeting participants gen- erally saw the economy as likely to recover only slowly during the second half of 2009 and as still vulnerable to adverse shocks. Although housing activity apparently was beginning to turn up, the weak labor market contin- ued to restrain household income, and earlier declines in net worth were still holding back spending. Develop- 18. In particular, the Federal Reserve began requiring money mar- ket mutual funds to have experienced redemptions exceeding a certain threshold before becoming eligible to borrow from the Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility. The Federal Reserve also suspended auctions conducted under the Term Securities Lending Facility (TSLF) involving only Schedule 1 collateral and reduced the frequency of TSLF auctions involving Schedule 2 collateral. Schedule 1 collateral refers to securities eligible for the open market operations arranged by the Federal Reserve’s Open Market Trading Desk—generally Treasury securities, agency debt, or agency MBS. Schedule 2 collateral includes all Schedule 1 collateral as well as investment-grade corporate, municipal, mortgage- backed, and asset-backed securities. 56. Selected interest rates, 2007–10 NOTE: The data are daily and extend through February 18, 2010. The 10-year Treasury rate is the constant-maturity yield based on the most actively traded securities. The dates on the horizontal axis are those of regularly scheduled Federal Open Market Committee meetings. ments in ﬁ nancial markets leading up to the meeting were broadly positive, and the cumulative improvement in market functioning since the spring was signiﬁ cant. However, the pickup in ﬁ nancial markets was seen as due, in part, to support from various government programs. Moreover, credit remained tight, with many banks reporting that they continued to tighten loan stan- dards and terms. Overall prices for personal consump- tion expenditures (PCE) rose in June after changing little in each of the previous three months. Excluding food and energy, PCE prices moved up moderately in June. Given the prospects for an initially modest economic recovery, substantial resource slack, and subdued inﬂ a- tion, the Committee agreed at its August meeting that it should maintain its target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent. FOMC participants expected only a gradual upturn in economic activity and subdued inﬂ ation and thought it most likely that the federal funds rate would need to be maintained at an exception- ally low level for an extended period. With the down- side risks to the economic outlook now considerably reduced but the economic recovery likely to be sub- dued, the Committee also agreed that neither expansion nor contraction of its program of asset purchases was warranted at the time. The Committee did, however, decide to gradually slow the pace of the remainder of its purchases of $300 billion of Treasury securities and extend their completion to the end of October to help promote a smooth transition in ﬁ nancial markets. Poli- cymakers noted that, with the programs for purchases of agency debt and MBS not due to expire until the end of the year, they did not need to make decisions at the meeting about any potential modiﬁ cations to those programs. By the time of the September 22–23 FOMC meet- ing, incoming data suggested that overall economic activity was beginning to pick up. Factory output, particularly motor vehicle production, rose in July and August. Consumer spending on motor vehicles during that period was boosted by government rebates and greater dealer incentives. Household spending outside of motor vehicles appeared to rise in August after hav- ing been roughly ﬂ at from May through July. Sales data for July indicated further increases in the demand for both new and existing single-family homes. Although employment continued to contract in August, the pace of job losses had slowed noticeably from earlier in the year. Developments in ﬁ nancial markets were again regarded as broadly positive; meeting participants saw the cumulative improvement in market functioning and pricing since the spring as substantial. Despite these positive factors, participants still viewed the economic recovery as likely to be quite restrained. Credit from banks remained difﬁ cult to obtain and costly for many borrowers; these conditions were expected to improve only gradually. Many regional and small banks were vulnerable to the deteriorating performance of com- mercial real estate loans. In light of recent experience, consumers were likely to be cautious in spending, and business contacts indicated that their ﬁ rms would also be cautious in hiring and investing even as demand for their products picked up. Some of the recent gains in economic activity probably reﬂ ected support from gov- ernment policies, and participants expressed consider- able uncertainty about the likely strength of the upturn once those supports were withdrawn or their effects waned. Core consumer price inﬂ ation remained sub- dued, while overall consumer price inﬂ ation increased in August, boosted by a sharp upturn in energy prices. Although the economic outlook had improved fur- ther and the risks to the forecast had become more bal- anced, the recovery in economic activity was likely to be protracted. With substantial resource slack likely to persist and longer-term inﬂ ation expectations stable, the Committee anticipated that inﬂ ation would remain subdued for some time. Under these circumstances, the Committee judged that the costs of the economic recov- ery turning out to be weaker than anticipated could be relatively high. Accordingly, the Committee agreed to maintain its target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and to reiterate its view that economic conditions were likely to warrant an exceptionally low level of the federal funds rate for an extended period. With respect to the large-scale asset purchase programs, the Committee indicated its intention to purchase the full $1.25 trillion of agency MBS that it had previously established as the maximum for this program. With respect to agency debt, the Committee agreed to reiter- ate its intention to purchase up to $200 billion of these securities. To promote a smooth transition in markets as these programs concluded, the Committee decided to gradually slow the pace of both its agency MBS and agency debt purchases and to extend their completion through the end of the ﬁ rst quarter of 2010. To keep inﬂ ation expectations well anchored, policymakers agreed on the importance of the Federal Reserve con- tinuing to communicate that it has the tools and willing- ness to begin withdrawing monetary policy accommo- dation at the appropriate time and pace to prevent any persistent increase in inﬂ ation. On September 24, the Board of Governors announced a gradual reduction in amounts to be auc- tioned under the TAF through January and indicated that auctions of credit with maturities longer than 28 days would be phased out by the end of 2009. Usage of the TAF had been declining in recent months as ﬁ nancial market conditions had continued to improve. The Money Market Investor Funding Facility, which had been established in October 2008 to help arrest a run on money market mutual funds, expired as sched- uled on October 30, 2009. At the November 3–4 FOMC meeting, participants agreed that the incoming information suggested that economic activity was picking up as anticipated, with output continuing to expand in the fourth quarter. Busi- ness inventories were being brought into better align- ment with sales, and the pace of inventory runoff was slowing. The gradual recovery in construction of single- family homes from its extremely low level earlier in the year appeared to be continuing. Consumer spend- ing appeared to be rising even apart from the effects of ﬁ scal incentives to purchase autos. Financial market developments over recent months were generally regarded as supportive of continued economic recovery. Further, the outlook for growth abroad had improved since earlier in the year, especially in Asia, auguring well for U.S. exports. Meanwhile, consumer price inﬂ a- tion remained subdued. In spite of these largely positive developments, participants at the November meeting noted that they were unsure how much of the recent ﬁ rming in ﬁ nal demand reﬂ ected the effects of tempo- rary ﬁ scal programs. Downside risks to economic activ- ity included continued weakness in the labor market and its implications for the growth of household income and consumer conﬁ dence. Bank credit remained tight. Nonetheless, policymakers expected the recovery to continue in subsequent quarters, although at a pace that would be rather slow relative to historical experience after severe downturns. FOMC participants noted the possibility that some negative side effects might result from the maintenance of very low short-term interest rates for an extended period, including the possibility that such a policy stance could lead to excessive risk- taking in ﬁ nancial markets or an unanchoring of inﬂ a- tion expectations. The Committee agreed that it was important to remain alert to these risks. Based on this outlook, the Committee decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and noted that economic conditions, including low levels of resource utilization, subdued inﬂ ation trends, and stable inﬂ ation expectations, were likely to warrant exceptionally low rates for an extend- ed period. With respect to the large-scale asset purchase programs, the Committee reiterated its intention to pur- chase $1.25 trillion of agency MBS by the end of the ﬁ rst quarter of 2010. Because of the limited availability of agency debt and concerns that larger purchases could impair market functioning, the Committee also agreed to specify that its agency debt purchases would cumu- late to about $175 billion by the end of the ﬁ rst quarter, $25 billion less than the previously announced maxi- mum for these purchases. The Committee also decided to reiterate its intention to gradually slow the pace of purchases of agency MBS and agency debt to promote a smooth transition in markets as the announced pur- chases are completed. On November 17, the Board of Governors announced that, in light of continued improvement in ﬁ nancial mar- ket conditions, in January 2010 the maximum matur- ity of primary credit loans at the discount window for depository institutions would be reduced to 28 days from 90 days. The information reviewed at the December 15–16 FOMC meeting suggested that the recovery in eco- nomic activity was gaining momentum. Although the unemployment rate remained very elevated and capac- ity utilization low, the pace of job losses had slowed noticeably since the summer, and industrial production had sustained the broad-based expansion that began in the third quarter. Consumer spending expanded solidly in October. Sales of new homes had risen in October after two months of little change, while sales of existing homes continued to increase strongly. Financial market conditions were generally regarded as having become more supportive of continued economic recovery during the intermeeting period. A jump in energy prices pushed up headline inﬂ ation somewhat, but core consumer price inﬂ ation remained subdued. Although some of the recent data had been better than anticipated, policymakers gen- erally saw the incoming information as broadly in line with their expectations for a moderate economic recov- ery and subdued inﬂ ation. Consistent with experience following previous ﬁ nancial crises here and abroad, FOMC participants broadly anticipated that the pickup in output and employment would be rather slow relative to past recoveries from deep recessions. The Committee made no changes to either its large- scale asset purchase programs or its target range for the federal funds rate of 0 to ¼ percent and, based on the outlook for a relatively sluggish economic recovery, decided to reiterate its anticipation that economic condi- tions, including low levels of resource utilization, sub- dued inﬂ ation trends, and stable inﬂ ation expectations, were likely to warrant exceptionally low rates for an extended period. Committee members and Board mem- bers agreed that substantial improvements in the func- tioning of ﬁ nancial markets had occurred; accordingly, they agreed that the statement to be released following the meeting should note the anticipated expiration of most of the Federal Reserve’s special liquidity facilities on February 1, 2010. At the January 26–27 meeting, the Committee agreed that the incoming information, though mixed, indicated that overall economic activity had strength- ened in recent months, about as expected. Consumer spending was well maintained in the fourth quarter, and business expenditures on equipment and soft- ware appeared to expand substantially. However, the improvement in the housing market slowed, and spending on nonresidential structures continued to fall. Recent data suggested that the pace of inventory liqui- dation diminished considerably last quarter, providing a sizable boost to economic activity. Indeed, industrial production advanced at a solid rate in the fourth quarter. In the labor market, layoffs subsided noticeably in the ﬁ nal months of last year, but the unemployment rate remained elevated and hiring stayed quite limited. The weakness in labor markets continued to be an important concern for the Committee; moreover, the prospects for job growth remained a signiﬁ cant source of uncertainty in the economic outlook, particularly in the outlook for consumer spending. Financial market conditions were supportive of economic growth. However, net debt ﬁ nancing by nonﬁ nancial businesses was near zero in the fourth quarter after declining in the third, con- sistent with sluggish demand for credit and tight credit standards and terms at banks. Increases in energy prices pushed up headline consumer price inﬂ ation even as core consumer price inﬂ ation remained subdued. ing down the TAF and that the ﬁ nal auction would take place in March 2010. On February 1, 2010, given the overall improve- ment in funding markets, the Federal Reserve allowed the Primary Dealer Credit Facility, the Term Securities Lending Facility, the Commercial Paper Funding Facil- ity, and the Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility to expire. The temporary swap lines with foreign central banks were closed on the same day. On February 18, 2010, the Fed- eral Reserve announced a further normalization of the terms of loans made under the primary credit facility: The rate charged on these loans was increased from ½ percent to ¾ percent, effective on February 19, and the typical maximum maturity for such loans was short- ened to overnight, effective on March 18, 2010. On the same day, the Federal Reserve also announced that the minimum bid rate on the ﬁ nal TAF auction on March 8 had been raised to 50 basis points, ¼ percentage point higher than in previous auctions. The Federal Reserve noted that the modiﬁ cations are not expected to lead to tighter ﬁ nancial conditions for households and busi- nesses and do not signal any change in the outlook for the economy or for monetary policy. Over the course of 2009, the Federal Reserve contin- ued to undertake initiatives to improve communications about its policy actions. These initiatives are described in detail in the box “Federal Reserve Initiatives to Increase Transparency.” In their discussion of monetary policy for the period ahead, the Committee agreed that neither the economic outlook nor ﬁ nancial conditions had changed apprecia- bly since the December meeting and that no changes to the Committee’s large-scale asset purchase programs or to its target range for the federal funds rate of 0 to ¼ percent were warranted at this meeting. Further, policymakers reiterated their anticipation that economic conditions, including low levels of resource utilization, subdued inﬂ ation trends, and stable inﬂ ation expecta- tions, were likely to warrant exceptionally low rates for an extended period. The Committee afﬁ rmed its intention to purchase a total of $1.25 trillion of agency MBS and about $175 billion of agency debt by the end of the current quarter and to gradually slow the pace of these purchases to promote a smooth transition in mar- kets. Committee members and Board members agreed that with substantial improvements in most ﬁ nancial markets, including interbank markets, the statement would indicate that on February 1, 2010, the Federal Reserve was closing several special liquidity facilities and that the temporary swap lines with foreign central banks would expire. In addition, the statement would say that the Federal Reserve was in the process of wind- The actions taken by the Federal Reserve to support ﬁ nancial market functioning and provide extraordinary monetary stimulus to the economy have led to a rapid expansion of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet, from less than $900 billion before the crisis began in 2007 to about $2.3 trillion currently. The expansion of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet has been accompanied by a comparable increase in the quantity of reserve bal- ances held by depository institutions. Bank reserves are currently far above their levels prior to the crisis. Even though, as noted in recent statements of the FOMC, economic conditions are likely to warrant exception- ally low rates for an extended period, in due course, as the expansion matures, the Federal Reserve will need to begin to tighten monetary conditions to prevent the development of inﬂ ation pressures. That tightening will be accomplished partly through changes that will affect the composition and size of the Federal Reserve’s bal- ance sheet. Eventually, the level of reserves and the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet will be reduced substantially. The Federal Reserve has a number of tools that will enable it to ﬁ rm the stance of policy at the appropriate time and to the appropriate degree, some of which do not affect the size of the balance sheet or the quantity of reserves. Most importantly, in October 2008 the Congress gave the Federal Reserve statutory authority to pay interest on banks’ holdings of reserve balances at Federal Reserve Banks. By increasing the interest rate paid on reserves, the Federal Reserve will be able to put signiﬁ cant upward pressure on all short-term interest rates, because banks will not supply short-term funds to the money markets at rates signiﬁ cantly below what they can earn by simply leaving funds on deposit at the Federal Reserve Banks. Actual and prospective increases in short-term interest rates will be reﬂ ected, in turn, in longer-term interest rates and in ﬁ nancial conditions more generally through standard transmis- sion mechanisms, thus preventing inﬂ ationary pressures from developing. The Federal Reserve has also been developing a number of additional tools that will reduce the quantity of reserves held by the banking system and lead to a tighter relationship between the interest rate that the Federal Reserve pays on banks’ holdings of reserve bal- ances and other short-term interest rates. Reverse repur- chase agreements (reverse repos) are one such tool; in a reverse repo, the Federal Reserve sells a security to a counterparty with an agreement to repurchase it at some speciﬁ ed date in the future. The counterparty’s pay- ment to the Federal Reserve has the effect of draining an equal quantity of reserves from the banking system. Recently, by developing the capacity to conduct such transactions in the triparty repo market, the Federal Reserve has enhanced its ability to use reverse repos to absorb very large quantities of reserves. The capabil- ity to carry out these transactions with primary dealers, using the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury and agency debt securities, has already been tested and is currently available if and when needed. To further increase its capacity to drain reserves through reverse repos, the Federal Reserve is also in the process of expanding the set of counterparties with which it can transact and is developing the infrastructure neces- sary to use its MBS holdings as collateral in these transactions. As a second means of draining reserves, the Federal Reserve is also developing plans to offer to depository institutions term deposits, which are roughly analo- gous to certiﬁ cates of deposit that the institutions offer to their customers. The Federal Reserve would likely offer large blocks of such deposits through an auction mechanism. The effect of these transactions would be to convert a portion of depository institutions’ holdings of reserve balances into deposits that could not be used to meet depository institutions’ very short-term liquidity needs and could not be counted as reserves. The Federal Reserve published in the Federal Register a proposal for such a term deposit facility and is in the process of reviewing the public comments received. After a revised proposal is approved by the Board, the Federal Reserve expects to be able to conduct test transactions in the spring and to have the facility available if neces- sary shortly thereafter. Reverse repos and the deposit facility would together allow the Federal Reserve to drain hundreds of billions of dollars of reserves from the banking system quite quickly should it choose to do so. The Federal Reserve also has the option of redeem- ing or selling securities as a means of applying mon- etary restraint. A reduction in securities holdings would have the effect of further reducing the quantity of reserves in the banking system as well as reducing the overall size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. It would likely also put at least some direct upward pres- sure on longer-term yields. The Treasury’s temporary Supplementary Financ- ing Program (SFP)—through which the Treasury issues Treasury bills to the public and places the proceeds in a special deposit account at the Federal Reserve—could also be used to drain reserves and support the Federal Reserve’s control of short-term interest rates. However, the use of the SFP must be compatible with the Trea- sury’s debt-management objectives. The SFP is not a necessary element in the Federal Reserve’s set of tools to achieve an appropriate monetary policy stance in the future; still, any amount outstanding under the SFP will result in a corresponding decrease in the quantity of reserves in the banking system, which could be helpful in the Federal Reserve’s conduct of policy. The exact sequence of steps and combination of tools that the Federal Reserve chooses to employ as it exits from its current very accommodative policy stance will depend on economic and ﬁ nancial develop- ments. One possible trajectory would be for the Federal Reserve to continue to test its tools for draining reserves on a limited basis in order to further ensure prepared- ness and to give market participants a period of time to become familiar with their operation. As the time for the removal of policy accommodation draws near, those operations could be scaled up to drain more-signiﬁ cant volumes of reserve balances to provide tighter control over short-term interest rates. The actual ﬁ rming of policy would then be implemented through an increase in the interest rate paid on reserves. If economic and Transparency is a key tenet of modern central banking both because it contributes importantly to the accountability of central banks to the government and the public and because it can enhance the effectiveness of central banks in achieving their macroeconomic objectives. In recognition of the importance of transparency, the Federal Reserve has provided detailed infor- mation on the nontraditional policy actions taken to address the ﬁ nancial crisis, and generally aims to maximize the amount of information it can provide to the public consistent with its broad policy objectives. The Federal Reserve has signiﬁ cantly enhanced its transparency in a number of impor- tant dimensions over recent years. On matters related to the conduct of monetary policy, the Federal Reserve has long been one of the most transparent central banks in the world. Following each of its meetings, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) releases statements that provide a rationale for the policy decision, along with a record of the Committee’s vote and expla- nations for any dissents. In addition, detailed minutes of each FOMC meeting are made public three weeks following the meeting. The minutes provide a great deal of information about the range of policymakers’ views on the economic situation and outlook as well as on their delibera- tions about the appropriate stance of monetary policy. Recently, the Federal Reserve further advanced transparency by initiating a quarterly Summary of Economic Projections of Federal Reserve Board members and Reserve Bank presi- dents. These projections and the accompanying summary analysis contain detailed information regarding policymakers’ views about the future path of real gross domestic product, inﬂ ation, and unemployment, including the long-run val- ues of these variables assuming appropriate mon- etary policy.1 During the ﬁ nancial crisis, the Federal Reserve implemented a number of credit and liquidity programs to support the functioning of key ﬁ nancial markets and institutions and took complementary steps to ensure appropriate transparency and accountability in operating these programs. The Board’s weekly H.4.1 statistical release has been greatly expanded to provide detailed information on the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet and the oper- ation of the various credit and liquidity facilities.2 The release is closely watched in ﬁ nancial mar- kets and by the public for nearly real-time infor- mation on the evolution of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. The Federal Reserve also developed a public website focused on its credit and liquidity pro- grams that provides background information on all the facilities.3 In addition, starting in December 2008 the Federal Reserve has issued bimonthly reports to the Congress in fulﬁ llment of section 129 of the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act 1. FOMC statements and minutes, the Summary of Economic Projections, and other related information are available on the Federal Reserve Board’s website. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Federal Open Market Committee,” webpage, www.federalreserve. gov/monetarypolicy/fomc.htm. 2. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Statistical Release H.4.1, “Factors Affecting Reserve Balances,” webpage, www.federalreserve.gov/releases/h41. 3. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Credit and Liquidity Programs and the Balance Sheet,” web- page, www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/bst.htm. ﬁ nancial developments were to require a more rapid exit from the current highly accommodative policy, however, the Federal Reserve could increase the interest rate on reserves at about the same time it commences draining operations. The Federal Reserve currently does not anticipate that it will sell any of its securities holding in the near term, at least until after policy tightening has gotten under way and the economy is clearly in a sustainable recovery. However, to help reduce the size of its bal- ance sheet and the quantity of reserves, the Federal Reserve is allowing agency debt and MBS to run off as they mature or are prepaid. The Federal Reserve is rolling over all maturing Treasury securities, but in the future it might decide not to do so in all cases. In the long run, the Federal Reserve anticipates that its bal- ance sheet will shrink toward more historically normal levels and that most or all of its securities holdings will be Treasury securities. Although passively redeeming agency debt and MBS as they mature or are prepaid will move the Federal Reserve in that direction, the Federal Reserve may also choose to sell securities in the future when the economic recovery is sufﬁ ciently advanced and the FOMC has determined that the asso- ciated ﬁ nancial tightening is warranted. Any such sales would be gradual, would be clearly communicated to market participants, and would entail appropriate con- sideration of economic conditions. (continued from preceding page) of 2008; in October 2009, the Federal Reserve began incorporating these reports into its monthly report on credit and liquidity programs and the balance sheet.4 The monthly report, which is available on the Federal Reserve’s web- site, provides more-detailed information on the full range of credit and liquidity programs imple- mented during the crisis. This report includes data on the number and types of borrowers using various facilities and on the types and value of collateral pledged; information on the assets held in the so-called Maiden Lane facilities—cre- ated to acquire certain assets of The Bear Stearns Companies, Inc., and of American International Group, Inc. (AIG)—and in other special lending facilities; and quarterly ﬁ nancial statements for the Federal Reserve System. Furthermore, the monthly reports provide detailed information on all of the programs that rely on emergency lend- ing authorities, including the Federal Reserve’s assessment of the expected cost to the Federal Reserve and the U.S. taxpayer of various Federal Reserve programs implemented during the cri- sis. To provide further transparency regarding its transactions with AIG, the Federal Reserve recently indicated that it would welcome a full review by the Government Accountability Ofﬁ ce of all aspects of the Federal Reserve’s involve- ment with the extension of credit to AIG.5 4. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve System Monthly Report on Credit and Liquidity Programs and the Balance Sheet (Washington: Board of Governors). 5. Ben S. Bernanke (2010), letter to Gene L. Dodaro, January 19, www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/ﬁ les/ letter_aig_20100119.pdf. As a result of the very large volume of reserves in the banking system, the level of activity and liquidity in the federal funds market has declined considerably, raising the possibility that the federal funds rate could for a time become a less reliable indicator than usual of conditions in short-term money markets. Accordingly, the Federal Reserve is considering the utility, during the transition to a more normal policy conﬁ guration, of communicating the stance of policy in terms of another operating target, such as an alternative short-term inter- est rate. In particular, it is possible that the Federal Reserve could for a time use the interest rate paid on The Federal Reserve has also been transpar- ent about the management of its programs. Vari- ous programs employ private-sector ﬁ rms as pur- chasing and settlement agents and to perform other functions; the contracts for all of these vendor arrangements are available on the web- site of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.6 Moreover, the Federal Reserve has recently begun to publish detailed CUSIP-number-level data regarding its holdings of Treasury, agency, and agency mortgage-backed securities; these data provide the public with precise information about the maturity and asset composition of the Federal Reserve’s securities holdings.7 On Janu- ary 11, 2010, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York published a revised policy governing the designation of primary dealers.8 An important motivation in issuing revised guidance in this area was to make the process for becoming a pri- mary dealer more transparent. 6. Federal Reserve Bank of New York, “Vendor Informa- 7. Federal Reserve Bank of New York, “System Open Mar- ket Account Holdings,” webpage, www.newyorkfed.org/ markets/soma/sysopen_accholdings.html. CUSIP is the abbreviation for Committee on Uniform Secu- rities Identiﬁ cation Procedures. A CUSIP number identiﬁ es most securities, including stocks of all registered U.S. and Canadian companies and U.S. government and municipal bonds. The CUSIP system—owned by the American Bankers Association and operated by Standard & Poor’s—facilitates the clearing and settlement process of securities. 8. Federal Reserve Bank of New York (2010), “New York Fed Publishes Revised Policy for Administration of Primary Dealer Relationships,” press release, January 11, www. newyorkfed.org/newsevents/news/markets/2010/ma100111. html. reserves, in combination with targets for reserve quanti- ties, as a guide to its policy stance, while simultane- ously monitoring a range of market rates. No decision has been made on this issue, and any deliberation will be guided in part by the evolution of the federal funds market as policy accommodation is withdrawn. The Federal Reserve anticipates that it will eventually return to an operating framework with much lower reserve balances than at present and with the federal funds rate as the operating target for policy. The following material appeared as an addendum to the minutes of the January 26–27, 2010, meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee. In conjunction with the January 26–27, 2010, FOMC meeting, the members of the Board of Governors and the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks, all of whom participate in deliberations of the FOMC, sub- mitted projections for output growth, unemployment, and inﬂ ation for the years 2010 to 2012 and over the longer run. The projections were based on information available through the end of the meeting and on each participant’s assumptions about factors likely to affect economic outcomes, including his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy. “Appropriate monetary policy” is deﬁ ned as the future path of policy that the participant deems most likely to foster outcomes for economic activity and inﬂ ation that best satisfy his or her interpretation of the Federal Reserve’s dual objec- tives of maximum employment and stable prices. Longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge over time under appropriate mon- etary policy and in the absence of further shocks. FOMC participants’ forecasts for economic activ- ity and inﬂ ation were broadly similar to their previous projections, which were made in conjunction with the November 2009 FOMC meeting. As depicted in ﬁ g - ure 1, the economic recovery from the recent recession was expected to be gradual, with real gross domestic product (GDP) expanding at a rate that was only mod- erately above participants’ assessment of its longer-run sustainable growth rate and the unemployment rate declining slowly over the next few years. Most par- ticipants also anticipated that inﬂ ation would remain subdued over this period. As indicated in table 1, a few participants made modest upward revisions to their projections for real GDP growth in 2010. Beyond 2010, however, the contours of participants’ projections for economic activity and inﬂ ation were little changed, with participants continuing to expect that the pace of the economic recovery will be restrained by household and business uncertainty, only gradual improvement in labor market conditions, and slow easing of credit conditions in the banking sector. Participants generally expected that it would take some time for the economy to converge fully to its longer-run path—characterized by a sustainable rate of output growth and by rates of employment and inﬂ ation consistent with their interpre- tation of the Federal Reserve’s dual objectives—with a sizable minority of the view that the convergence process could take more than ﬁ ve to six years. As in Longer run Longer run NOTE: Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP) and in inﬂ ation are from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. PCE inﬂ ation and core PCE inﬂ ation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index for personal consumption expendi- tures (PCE) and the price index for PCE excluding food and energy. Projections for the unemployment rate are for the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. Each participant’s projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy. Longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. The November projections were made in conjunction with the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on November 3–4, 2009. 1. The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections 2. The range for a variable in a given year consists of all participants’ projec- 3. Longer-run projections for core PCE inﬂ ation are not collected. Figure 1. Central tendencies and ranges of economic projections, 2010–12 and over the longer run Longer run Longer run Longer run NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the notes to table 1. The data for the actual values of the variables are annual. The data for the change in real GDP, PCE inflation, and core PCE inflation shown for 2009 incorporate the advance estimate of GDP for the fourth quarter of 2009, which the Bureau of Economic Analysis released on January 29, 2010; this information was not available to FOMC meeting participants at the time of their meeting. November, nearly all participants judged the risks to their growth outlook as generally balanced, and most also saw roughly balanced risks surrounding their inﬂ a- tion projections. Participants continued to judge the uncertainty surrounding their projections for economic activity and inﬂ ation as unusually high relative to his- torical norms. Participants’ projections for real GDP growth in 2010 had a central tendency of 2.8 to 3.5 percent, a somewhat narrower interval than in November. Recent readings on consumer spending, industrial production, and business outlays on equipment and software were seen as broad- ly consistent with the view that economic recovery was under way, albeit at a moderate pace. Businesses had apparently made progress in bringing their inven- tory stocks into closer alignment with sales and hence would be likely to raise production as spending gained further momentum. Participants pointed to a number of factors that would support the continued expansion of economic activity, including accommodative mon- etary policy, ongoing improvements in the conditions of ﬁ nancial markets and institutions, and a pickup in global economic growth, especially in emerging market economies. Several participants also noted that ﬁ scal policy was currently providing substantial support to real activity, but said that they expected less impetus to GDP growth from this factor later in the year. Many participants indicated that the expansion was likely to be restrained not only by ﬁ rms’ caution in hiring and spending in light of the considerable uncertainty regard- ing the economic outlook and general business condi- tions, but also by limited access to credit by small busi- nesses and consumers dependent on bank-intermediated ﬁ nance. Looking further ahead, participants’ projections were for real GDP growth to pick up in 2011 and 2012; the projections for growth in both years had a central tendency of about 3½ to 4½ percent. As in November, participants generally expected that the continued repair of household balance sheets and gradual improvements in credit availability would bolster consumer spending. Responding to an improved sales outlook and readier access to bank credit, businesses were likely to increase production to rebuild their inventory stocks and increase their outlays on equipment and software. In addition, improved foreign economic conditions were viewed as supporting robust growth in U.S. exports. However, participants also indicated that elevated uncertainty on the part of households and businesses and the very slow recovery of labor markets would like- ly restrain the pace of expansion. Moreover, although conditions in the banking system appeared to have stabilized, distress in commercial real estate markets was expected to pose risks to the balance sheets of banking institutions for some time, thereby contrib- uting to only gradual easing of credit conditions for many households and smaller ﬁ rms. In the absence of further shocks, participants generally anticipated that real GDP growth would converge over time to an annual rate of 2.5 to 2.8 percent, the longer-run pace that appeared to be sustainable in view of expect- ed demographic trends and improvements in labor productivity. Participants anticipated that labor market conditions would improve only slowly over the next several years. Their projections for the average unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of 2010 had a central tendency of 9.5 to 9.7 percent, only a little below the levels of about 10 percent that prevailed late last year. Consistent with their outlook for moderate output growth, participants generally expected that the unemployment rate would decline only about 2½ percentage points by the end of 2012 and would still be well above its longer-run sustainable rate. Some participants also noted that con- siderable uncertainty surrounded their estimates of the productive potential of the economy and the sustainable rate of employment, owing partly to substantial ongo- ing structural adjustments in product and labor markets. Nonetheless, participants’ longer-run unemployment projections had a central tendency of 5.0 to 5.2 percent, the same as in November. Most participants anticipated that inﬂ ation would remain subdued over the next several years. The central tendency of their projections for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inﬂ ation was 1.4 to 1.7 percent for 2010, 1.1 to 2.0 percent for 2011, and 1.3 to 2.0 percent for 2012. Many participants anticipated that global economic growth would spur increases in energy prices, and hence that headline PCE inﬂ a- tion would run slightly above core PCE inﬂ ation over the next year or two. Most expected that substantial resource slack would continue to restrain cost pressures, but that inﬂ ation would rise gradually toward their individual assessments of the measured rate of inﬂ ation judged to be most consistent with the Federal Reserve’s dual mandate. As in November, the central tendency of projections of the longer-run inﬂ ation rate was 1.7 to 2.0 percent. A majority of participants anticipated that inﬂ ation in 2012 would still be below their assess- ments of the mandate-consistent inﬂ ation rate, while the remainder expected that inﬂ ation would be at or slightly above its longer-run value by that time. Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges Percentage points Nearly all participants shared the judgment that their projections of future economic activity and unemploy- ment continued to be subject to greater-than-average uncertainty.19 Participants generally saw the risks to these projections as roughly balanced, although a few indicated that the risks to the unemployment outlook remained tilted to the upside. As in November, many participants highlighted the difﬁ culties inherent in predicting macroeconomic outcomes in the wake of a ﬁ nancial crisis and a severe recession. In addition, some pointed to uncertainties regarding the extent to which the recent run-up in labor productivity would prove to be persistent, while others noted the risk that the dete- riorating performance of commercial real estate could adversely affect the still-fragile state of the banking sys- tem and restrain the growth of output and employment over coming quarters. As in November, most participants continued to see the uncertainty surrounding their inﬂ ation projections as higher than historical norms. However, a few judged that uncertainty in the outlook for inﬂ ation was about in line with typical levels, and one viewed the uncertainty surrounding the inﬂ ation outlook as lower than average. Nearly all participants judged the risks to the inﬂ ation outlook as roughly balanced; however, two saw these risks as tilted to the upside, while one regarded the risks as weighted to the downside. Some participants noted that inﬂ ation expectations could drift downward in response to persistently low inﬂ ation and continued slack in resource utilization. Others pointed to the possibility of an upward shift in expected and actual inﬂ ation, especially if extraordinarily accommoda- tive monetary policy measures were not unwound in a timely fashion. Participants also noted that an accelera- tion in global economic activity could induce a surge in the prices of energy and other commodities that would place upward pressure on overall inﬂ ation. Figures 2.A and 2.B provide further details on the diversity of participants’ views regarding the likely outcomes for real GDP growth and the unemployment 19. Table 2 provides estimates of forecast uncertainty for the change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, and total consumer price inﬂ ation over the period from 1989 to 2008. At the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty” discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty in economic forecasts and explains the approach used to assess the uncertainty and risk attending partici- pants’ projections. NOTE: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root mean squared error of projections for 1989 through 2008 that were released in the winter by various private and government forecasters. As described in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain assumptions, there is about a 70 percent probability that actual outcomes for real GDP, unemployment, and consumer prices will be in ranges implied by the average size of projection errors made in the past. Fur- ther information is in David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip (2007), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook from Historical Forecasting Errors,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2007-60 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November). 1. For deﬁ nitions, refer to general note in table 1. 2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure that has been most widely used in government and private economic forecasts. Projection is percent change, fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. rate in 2010, 2011, 2012, and over the longer run. The distribution of participants’ projections for real GDP growth this year was slightly narrower than the dis- tribution of their projections last November, but the distributions of the projections for real GDP growth in 2011 and in 2012 were little changed. The dispersion in participants’ output growth projections reﬂ ected, among other factors, the diversity of their assessments regarding the current degree of underlying momentum in economic activity, the evolution of consumer and business sentiment, and the likely pace of easing of bank lending standards and terms. Regarding partici- pants’ unemployment rate projections, the distribution for 2010 narrowed slightly, but the distributions of their unemployment rate projections for 2011 and 2012 did not change appreciably. The distributions of partici- pants’ estimates of the longer-run sustainable rates of output growth and unemployment were essentially the same as in November. Figures 2.C and 2.D provide corresponding informa- tion about the diversity of participants’ views regard- ing the inﬂ ation outlook. For overall and core PCE inﬂ ation, the distributions of participants’ projections for 2010 were nearly the same as in November. The distributions of overall and core inﬂ ation for 2011 and 2012, however, were noticeably more tightly con- centrated than in November, reﬂ ecting the absence of forecasts of especially low inﬂ ation. The dispersion in participants’ projections over the next few years was mainly due to differences in their judgments regarding the determinants of inﬂ ation, including their estimates of prevailing resource slack and their assessments of the extent to which such slack affects actual and expected inﬂ ation. In contrast, the relatively tight distribution of participants’ projections for longer-run inﬂ ation illus- trates their substantial agreement about the measured rate of inﬂ ation that is most consistent with the Federal Reserve’s dual objectives of maximum employment and stable prices. Figure 2.A. Distribution of participants’ projections for the change in real GDP, 2010–12 and over the longer run Longer run NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. Figure 2.B. Distribution of participants’ projections for the unemployment rate, 2010–12 and over the longer run Longer run NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. Figure 2.C. Distribution of participants’ projections for PCE inflation, 2010–12 and over the longer run Longer run NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. The economic projections provided by the members of the Board of Governors and the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks inform discussions of monetary policy among policy- makers and can aid public understanding of the basis for policy actions. Considerable uncer- tainty attends these projections, however. The economic and statistical models and relation- ships used to help produce economic forecasts are necessarily imperfect descriptions of the real world. And the future path of the economy can be affected by myriad unforeseen develop- ments and events. Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, participants consider not only what appears to be the most likely economic outcome as embodied in their projections, but also the range of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of their occurring, and the potential costs to the economy should they occur. Table 2 summarizes the average historical accuracy of a range of forecasts, including those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports and those prepared by Federal Reserve Board staff in advance of meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee. The projection error ranges shown in the table illustrate the considerable uncertainty associated with economic forecasts. For example, suppose a participant projects that real gross domestic product (GDP) and total consumer prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty attending those projections is simi- lar to that experienced in the past and the risks around the projections are broadly balanced, the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a probability of about 70 percent that actual GDP would expand within a range of 1.7 to 4.3 per- cent in the current year, 1.5 to 4.5 percent in the second year, and 1.4 to 4.6 percent in the third year. The corresponding 70 percent conﬁ dence intervals for overall inﬂ ation would be 1.1 to 2.9 percent in the current year and 1.0 to 3.0 percent in the second and third years. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over history, participants provide judgments as to whether the uncertainty attached to their projections of each variable is greater than, smaller than, or broadly similar to typical levels of forecast uncer- tainty in the past as shown in table 2. Participants also provide judgments as to whether the risks to their projections are weighted to the upside, are weighted to the downside, or are broadly bal- anced. That is, participants judge whether each variable is more likely to be above or below their projections of the most likely outcome. These judgments about the uncertainty and the risks attending each participant’s projections are distinct from the diversity of participants’ views about the most likely outcomes. Forecast uncer- tainty is concerned with the risks associated with a particular projection rather than with divergences across a number of different projections. London interbank offered rate limited liability company 